#+title: Lect 1 3


%%% part 3

Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: No, that was another thing. That was for, fight for the right cause. Not for... It may be politically like that, but the division was there, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. And the last, Kṛṣṇa's compromising plan was that "After all, they are kṣatriyas, these five brothers. They cannot take the business of a vaiśya or brāhmaṇa. So give them five villages so that they may be satisfied, ruling over these..." "No, not even land holding the upper portion of the needle." Then there was fight. Then there was fight.



So as far as possible... Of course, our, this movement is creating brāhmaṇas. People now require a brāhmaṇa, the head. Of course, we are not manufacturing anything. Everything is there. Everything is there in the śāstra. We do not invent anything. Yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ [Bg. 16.23]. The, we, are trying to follow as far as possible, and we are teaching that, that whatever is there...

Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: You are coming from Burdow?(?)



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Near Lucknow?



Indian: No.



Indian: Bareilly.



Prabhupāda: Bareilly. Oh.



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Oh. (end)





740804SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.23

-

Vṛndāvana, August 4, 1974



Pradyumna: "In the last millennium I was born as the son of a certain maidservant engaged in the service of brāhmaṇas, who were following the principles of Vedānta. When they were living together during the four months of the rainy season, I was engaged in their personal service."



Prabhupāda:



ahaṁ purātīta-bhave 'bhavaṁ mune

dāsyās tu kasyāścana veda-vādinām

nirūpito bālaka eva yogināṁ

śuśrūṣaṇe prāvṛṣi nirvivikṣatām

[SB 1.5.23]



So this is the previous life history of Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni is explaining about his previous life to Vyāsadeva. What was the previous life? The son of a maidservant. Maidservant means śūdrāṇī, not born of a brāhmaṇa family. Low class, maidservant. So from this position, Nārada Muni became the greatest muni. He is describing his own life.



This is most important point, that even... First of all, he was a boy, three-, four-or five-years-old boy, no knowledge. And second point is that he was not born in a very high-grade family, aristocratic family, rich family. No. Maidservant's son. He did not give any information of his father also. Dāsyāḥ. Dāsyāḥ means there is no certainty who is father. Dāsī. Dāsī-putra. The... Formerly, big, big men, especially kṣatriyas... Just like when Vasudeva was married with Devakī, so with Devakī many hundreds maidservants were given, with Vasudeva. That is the system, especially among the kṣatriyas. When a kṣatriya king is married, then along with the queen, many girlfriends of the queen, they are also taken away. This is also nice solution of social problem. Yes. Because female population is always greater than the male population. And... Therefore, the royal order, they would accept all these girls as associates. And sometimes they would be pregnant, and there will be son. They were called dāsī-putra. They were not neglected. They were equally taken care of. But they were not heir to the throne. Only the married wife's son... Just like Vidura. Vidura's birth was like that. Vidura was not born of the queen, but maidservant. And Dhṛtarāṣṭra, he took him as his brother. There was no discrimination, because one is born of the maidservant... No. Equal treatment. Only the restriction was that he would not inherit the throne. That was the system.

So here... Of course, it appears that Nārada Muni was not of that kind of dāsī-putra. Ordinary dāsī-putra. Because the such dāsī, or the maidservant, they do not come out for common service. They remain within the palace. So the point is that Nārada Muni in his previous life was not very recognized family, neither brāhmaṇa nor nothing of the sort. Still, he became next life the Nārada Muni. And what is the cause? What... The cause is, nirūpito bālaka eva yoginām: "I was appointed a boy servant of the devotees." The importance is that devotee is so important that if anyone renders a little service, then he becomes elevated to the spiritual life. What bālaka... Bālaka means there was a boy. "You, boy, bring me this," or "Do this. Just wash my cloth," or "Just set up my bedding." Like that. This much servant. Or "Wash this dish." So the devotional service is so powerful, by doing this... This will be described later on, that simply by doing this little service to the yoginām, he was so blessed that next life he became Nārada. This point is very important point. That is being explained.

Another point is that when one is situated... Nārada, after this life, he became situated in his spiritual life. In the spiritual life, therefore, he was able to go anywhere. Nārada is traveling all over the universe. Not only within this material world, in the spiritual world also. He goes to see Nārāyaṇa in the spiritual world. (aside:) This boy is sleeping. You can... You go back side. Those who will sleep can go back side. So this is one point, that in spiritual life one is free to move. There is no requisition of this airplane or... Even in this material world, those who are very highly elevated... That is called... They live in the Siddhaloka. There is a... That is described in the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Siddhaloka.

Now, Siddhaloka, the inhabitants of the Siddhaloka, they don't require any plane. They can go... Because siddha means the inhabitants in that planet, they are all perfect in aṣṭa-siddhi-yoga. By yogic perfection, one can travel in the space. Just like Durvāsā Muni. He traveled in the space. When there was chasing by the Sudarśana-cakra, he, by yogic power, he fled from one place to another, one place... He even entered the spiritual nature and saw Viṣṇu personally. Still he was condemned. The Sudarśana-cakra was after him, chasing. He tried to insult Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, Vaiṣṇava. So... He wanted to kill. Not only insult, but he wanted to kill him. A demon was immediately produced by his hair. The yogis can do that. Aṇimā... Aṇimā, laghimā, prāpti-siddhi... Whatever they like... Immediately he brought one demon. So...

But Vaiṣṇava, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, he was neither yogi, nor he could display any yogic perfection. But he was protected by Kṛṣṇa, by the Sudarśana-cakra. This is Vaiṣṇava's... Vaiṣṇavas do not require to practice any yogic power to become materially powerful. He doesn't require. Simply his surrender to Kṛṣṇa makes him all-powerful. This is the position of Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇavas, they do not care for all these yogic powers. They depend on Kṛṣṇa. And who can be... Kṛṣṇa is the yogeśvara, all, master of... Yatra kṛṣṇo... yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bg. 18.78]. So if one takes shelter of the Yogeśvara, the master of all mystic power, why he should bother about this yogic power? A poor man may try to earn money by hard labor, but one who is a very, very rich man's son, why should he labor? The father's money is sufficient. Similarly, a devotee, a sincere devotee, he is under the protection of Kṛṣṇa. And under the protection of Kṛṣṇa means under the protection of all six kinds of opulences: riches, then strength, then reputation, wisdom, renunciation, beauty-the six kinds of opulence. Kṛṣṇa, under... Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. This is stated here.

Because if you get somehow or other Kṛṣṇa's favor, then there is no question of any more profit. Sufficient profit. You have got everything. Simply be sincere to the service of Kṛṣṇa. Then you have got everything. There is no need of trying for this or that. Yasmin sthito guruṇāpi duḥkhena na vicālyate [Bg. 6.20-23]. If one is situated under the shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, then guruṇāpi duḥkhena na vicālyate. If there is dangerous type of inconvenience, then he's not disturbed. He knows... Just like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, Prahlāda Mahārāja... There are many instances. His father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, was giving him trouble, chastising. He was patient, not disturbed. So be sure that if you are, if you have actually taken shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, there is no question of danger. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. And Kṛṣṇa confirms it: "Kaunteya, My dear Arjuna, you declare to the world that My devotee will be never vanquished by any enemy." That is Kṛṣṇa's assurance. So why should we try to...

Of course, if Kṛṣṇa's order is there, that is another thing. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was ordered by Kṛṣṇa, "You fight." When Kṛṣṇa says, "You fight," you must fight. Not that Kṛṣṇa says, "You fight," and you say, "No, I have taken Your shelter. Why shall I fight?" No, that is not. That is disobedience. When Kṛṣṇa says, "You fight," you must fight. When... Our life should be that whatever Kṛṣṇa says... That is full surrender. Or His representative says, that is my life. Viśvanātha Cakravartī has explained in the Bhagavad-gītā.

vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām

[Bg. 2.41]



So our... We should be fixed up on the order of Kṛṣṇa coming through the spiritual master. Then our life is successful. This is the secret of success in spiritual life. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. This is assured. We have to please the spiritual master. And if he's pleased, then Kṛṣṇa is pleased. The argument that "We do not see Kṛṣṇa personally. How we can satisfy Him?"... You satisfy your spiritual master, then Kṛṣṇa is pleased. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādāt... **. And if you want to please directly Kṛṣṇa, and show your spiritual master plantain, then na gatiḥ kuto 'pi. It will be all useless. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi **.



So this Nārada Muni's history is very interesting, that he was not educated, a boy, and not coming from cultured family-maidservant's son. The only qualification was that nirūpito bālaka eva yoginām. He was engaged as a boy servant to the yogis. So how he got this opportunity? That is here: śuśrūṣaṇe. Śuśrūṣaṇe means in service; prāvṛṣi, during the rainy season. Because saintly persons, mendicants, sannyāsīs, their business is to travel. Travel. When, of course, something established, then a sannyāsī can rest, paramahaṁsa stage. When there are many disciples, workers, it is going on, then he can take rest. Otherwise it is the business of the sannyāsī to travel.

So these yogis, or the sannyāsīs, they were traveling all over the world or all over the country or all over the province... Their business is traveling. But during rainy season, because it is very difficult... Formerly, there was no airplane. Or might be, but they were not traveling, walking. So for these four months, rainy season, they used to take shelter at a nice place in a pilgrimage and wait. Until the rainy season is finished, they would not go out. That is called cāturmāsya. This is the meaning of cāturmāsya. So Nārada Muni got this opportunity. Now, you can calculate. This is knowledge. Then he had the opportunity to serve these yogis for four months only. Not more than that. And he became Nārada. Just understand how much powerful is service to the Vaiṣṇavas, devotees. And that is also confirmed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ

[SB 2.4.18]



Yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ means if anyone takes the shelter of the devotee, apāśrayāśrayāḥ... A devotee takes the shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, and if somebody else takes the shelter of the lotus feet of the devotee, śudhyanti, becomes purified. This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. And who becomes purified? Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā ya...



All the people who are less than the śūdras. They are called pañcamas, fifth grade. First grade, brāhmaṇa, second grade, kṣatriya, third grade, vaiśya, fourth grade, śūdra, and all others-fifth grade. They are called caṇḍālas. The caṇḍālas... The sweeper, the cobbler, and the... Low grade. Still, in India, these fifth-grade persons only, they eat meat, pigs, and sometimes cows. Fifth grade. Now it has become a practice. And he's a first-grade man. So just see. What was the business of the fifth-grade men, that has become the business of the so-called politicians. You see. So if you are ruled by the fifth-grade men, then how you can be happy? That is not possible. How there can be any social tranquillity? That is not possible. But even the fifth-grade man, he can be purified by Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Therefore there is great need of this movement. Because at the present moment there is no first-class men, no first-grade men, no second-grade men. Maybe third grade, fourth grade, fifth grade, sixth grade, like that. But they can be purified. That is... The only process is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Anyone can be purified. Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. They are called pāpa-yoni, born in low-grade, sinful family. Pāpa-yoni. Kṛṣṇa says, ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ. Never mind what kind of pāpa-yoni. Māṁ hi pārtha vyapā... "If he takes shelter of Me, then..." That shelter can be taken because Kṛṣṇa's representative is canvassing.

So there is no scarcity. Simply one has to take shelter of him. That's all. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission is to create this canvasser. "Go everywhere." Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. "Go." He used to send Nityānanda Prabhu, Haridāsa Ṭhākura and, to canvass, "Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Please surrender to Kṛṣṇa." Also there was a crowd on the street. Nityānanda Prabhu and Haridāsa Ṭhākura saw, and they asked, "What is this crowd?" "No, there are two brothers, Jagāi and Mādhāi, very troublesome. They are drunkards, woman-hunters and meat-eaters, and they are, create always trouble." So Nityānanda Prabhu immediately decided, "Why not deliver these persons first? Then My Lord's name will be glorified. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's name will be glorified."

This is the business of the disciple, how to glorify the spiritual master, paramparā. I glorify my spiritual master, you glorify your spiritual master. If we simply do that, glorify, then Kṛṣṇa is glorified. That was the decision of Nityānanda Prabhu, that "Why not deliver these fallen souls first?" Because Caitanya Mahāprabhu's incarnation is to deliver the fallen souls. And in... And there is no scarcity of fallen souls in this age.

patita-pāvana-hetu tava avatāra,

mo sama patita prabhu nā pāibe āra



Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is placing himself to the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "My dear Lord, Your incarnation is to reclaim all these fallen souls. But I am the lowest of the fallen souls. So my claim is first. Kindly deliver me." Mo sama patita prabhu nā pāibe āra. "You are, Your determination is to deliver the fallen. So I am the first-class fallen. Please accept me."



So Kali-yuga, people are suffering. They're all fallens, all meat-eaters, all drunkards, all fifth-grade, sixth-grade men. They are puffed-up, but actually they are fifth-, sixth-and tenth-grade men, not even gentlemen. Therefore my Guru Mahārāja used to say that "No gentleman can live here. The society is so polluted." And... But the, there is opportunity of serving Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because the society is so fallen, therefore there is good opportunity to serve Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's incarnation is to reclaim these fallen souls. So you have got the opportunity to serve Śrī Caitan..., to please Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu because He wanted the fallen souls to be delivered. Kṛṣṇa also wanted. Yadā yadā hi glānir bhavati bhārata, dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata. Kṛṣṇa comes... This is... God's business is going on like that. He's very anxious to reclaim all these rascals, rotting in this material world. Kṛṣṇa is always anxious. He comes Himself. He comes as devotee. He comes..., sends His bona fide servant, bona fide son.

So this is Kṛṣṇa's concern, to reclaim all these fallen souls. Therefore these are the opportunity. The yoginīs, the yoginaḥ, they are traveling all over the world. Only during the rainy season they were resting. Not that in other seasons eating and sleeping only. No. Because in the rainy season, to travel, there is inconvenience, therefore only four months. So during the four months, wherever they stay, simply being served by somebody as, like a boy servant, they become delivered. There was no question of preaching. Simply giving the opportunity to serve, the fallen souls become delivered. But you must be competent, not to take service for nothing. Then you'll go to hell. If you are actually in spiritual position, then by giving others little opportunity to serve you, he'll be delivered. No question of understanding the philosophy. A devotee must be so perfect. The system is, therefore, as soon as one sees a devotee, he falls down and takes the..., touches the feet. This is the system. Because by touching the feet... Mahat-pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam. If one is actually elevated to the spiritual life and he is, mean, takes, the people takes the opportunity of touching his lotus feet, then he becomes devotee. This is the process.

So here, how he became Nārada Muni will be described. But here it is said... One thing is that when you are liberated... Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. You become an associate of Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu. Then you can remember your past lives. Remember your past lives. Just like you can remember your dreams, "I was dreaming like that." So this is all dream. Our, this life, at the present moment, because this body is false, so whatever we are acting, it is just like dream. Just like in dream at night we also work. So this is gross dream and that is subtle dream. But real life is spiritual life. But we foolish people, we are taking this life as permanent life, permanent settlement. It is not permanent settlement. Here is..., Nārada Muni's saying, ahaṁ purā atīta-bhave abhavam. Atīta-bhave. This nature... Just like everything material... Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It appears for some time like bubbles in the ocean, few seconds. Again finished. The whole cosmic manifestation in which we are millions and millions of years, it is just like a bubble in the ocean. It is just like a bubble. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā.

So Nārada Muni confirms that "Formerly, in the millennium..." That is Brahmā's night. When Brahmā's night comes, everything becomes devastated in water. Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. First of all sahasra-yuga. One yuga means forty-three hundred thousands of years. Multiply it by one thousand. That is the period of manifestation. Now, what is the period? Forty-three lakhs of years, and multiply it by a thousand. How many years?

Devotee: Four billion.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Four point three billions.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Four point three billions.



Prabhupāda: Four point three billions of years this thing will go on. And then again, for... This is kṣaṇa-pralaya. (?) Kṣaṇa-pralaya means when Brahmā's day and night. But there is mahā-pralaya. That will stay we do not know how many millions of years. So this is called millennium. So Nārada Muni remembers this. Therefore he says, ahaṁ purā atīta-bhave. This is called bhava, bhava. Bhava means to come into existence and again finish. Just like this bhava-saṁsāra. It is called bhava-saṁsāra. Bhava-saṁsāra means I have got this body, and it will be finished. Again I shall get another body. Again it will be finished. So where is the science to understand these things? Who can explain? Where is the scientist? Purā atīta-bhave? Is there any scientist? Is there? So what is their knowledge? Very meager knowledge. Two plus two. That's all. (laughs) And they're very much proud. Who can explain this? Purā atīta-bhave. They do not know purā, they do not know atīta, bhave. And abhavam. And "I existed. And I can remember." Is that perfection possible? But this is a fact. It is a fact. One may believe or not believe. They are making research institute, big, big... Yesterday Bon Mahārāja was speaking... What is this research? Research here. And Nārada Muni says that "In my previous life I was like this." Where is, where is the research?



So comparing this or comparing that, real research is here. If actually one is research scholar, "Now, what does this Bhāgavata says? Purā atīta-bhave. What is this?" Go on researching. That is required. That is real research work. So purā atīta-bhave abhavaṁ mune. Mune. He's addressing Vyāsadeva, mune. "So I was the son of a maidservant, and I was engaged as the boy servant of yogis, and they were taking rest for four months. So I had the opportunity of serving them four months as their boy servant. Just to take, whatever they left, prasādam, I used to take. To wash their dishes or to wash their cloth. In this way he got the opportunity of serving perfect devotees for four months," and he became Nārada. This is the importance. This is the importance, that simply by rendering... Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. He became Nārada means he was saved from the mahato bhayāt, very great, fearful, dangerous position.

What is that fearful, dangerous position? They do not care. We are so fool that we are always on the brink of dangerous position... If we don't utilize this life properly, I may fall down again to the cycle of birth and death. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. I shall get another body. There is no guarantee what kind of body I am going to get. I do not know. This foolish civilization is going. Save them by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the best welfare activity.

Thank you very much. (end)



740805SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.24

-

Vṛndāvana, August 5, 1975



Nitāi: "Although they were impartial by nature, those followers of the Vedānta blessed me with their causeless mercy. As far as I was concerned, I was self-controlled and had no attachment for sports even though I was a boy. In addition, I was not naughty and I did not speak more than required."



Prabhupāda:



te mayy apetākhila-cāpale 'rbhake

dānte 'dhṛta-krīḍanake 'nuvartini

cakruḥ kṛpāṁ yadyapi tulya-darśanāḥ

śuśrūṣamāṇe munayo 'lpa-bhāṣiṇi

[SB 1.5.24]



These are the qualifications how to receive favor of the devotee. He was, Nārada Muni, in his previous birth, a boy servant. But boys are generally restless. But Nārada Muni was not restless. Cāpale. What is given there? Proclivities. Generally, boys are attached to so many different types of playful things. This also becomes possible by association. Just like you are all young men, you have got so many desires, naturally, especially in the Western countries. But you have voluntarily given up not to go to the restaurant, not to go to the club or theater or cinema. These are good qualifications.



So he was a boy, but he gave up all these things. Arbhaka. Arbhaka means not experienced very well. Or almost foolish, ignorant, they are called arbhaka. So although he was a child, he was a boy, but by the association of exalted devotees he also became very sober. Sober. Śuśrūṣamāṇe munayaḥ alpa-bhāṣiṇi. And he was not talking very much. Too much talking unnecessarily is against spiritual advancement of life. Therefore, sometimes those who are very, very talkative, they are ordered by their spiritual master that "You keep silence." Maunī. Maunī-bābā. Somebody, they practice to become always silent. You'll find some of the sādhus, the mendicants, they also keep silence. But they sometimes make this, that, this... And way (?) "onnnnh." That is not good. Silence means don't talk nonsense. Whenever you speak, you speak about Kṛṣṇa. That is real silence. The... "Make a vow that 'I shall not speak anything except topics of Kṛṣṇa.' " That is real silence. Not that to become silent. To become silent... Mind will work. Better chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and hear. There is no question of becoming silent.

There is a verse about Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. Manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. If you fix up your mind on Kṛṣṇa, naturally these things will be controlled. First of all our mind must be fixed up on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and... Chant and hear. Naturally, with the chanting of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, you will memorize the form of Kṛṣṇa, the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. In this way if we fix our mind always on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, naturally these good qualities will come. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. Bhakti. Unless you have got bhakti... Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Who can fix up his mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa unless he's a bhakta? Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ.

So these are the primary qualification. And alpa-bhāṣiṇi. Alpa-bhāṣiṇi. Munayaḥ alpa-bhāṣiṇi śuśrūṣamāṇe. At the same time, service must be there. And simply, "I'm chanting, but no, I'm not giving service..." That may be possible for Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He was simply chanting 300,000 times. That was possible by Haridāsa Ṭhākura. But if we imitate Haridāsa Ṭhākura, that "I shall chant only," that is not chanting. You'll sleep only. That's all. That is not possible. It is possible only for the liberated person. Therefore we should not imitate. Our Guru Mahārāja has condemned this. Mana tumi kisera vaiṣṇava, pratiṣṭhāra tare nirjanera ghare, tava hari-nāma kevala kaitava. In Vṛndāvana you'll find there are so many, they imitate. In a secluded place they are chanting, but they cannot give up even smoking biḍi. You see? So this kind of imitation has no value. Therefore śuśrūṣamāṇe. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. You must give service to the spiritual master. Spiritual master does not accept any service for his personal benefit, but for Kṛṣṇa's benefit. So this is required, śuśrūṣamāṇe. Dānte 'dhṛta-krīḍanake anuvartini. Following the principles. Whatever the sages order, "Boy...," immediately. Śuśrūṣamāṇe. Immediately he carried out. Anuvartini. These are the qualifications.

Cakruḥ kṛpām. Then... Cakruḥ means "did," kṛpām, "mercy." Naturally... If anyone follows without any hesitation whatever the spiritual master says, naturally he becomes kind. Anyone will become kind. Why the spiritual master? Spiritual master is pledged to become kind, but anyone, if you follow, if you obey, then he becomes merciful: "This boy is very nice. He obeys orders. He serves very nicely." That is required. Cakruḥ kṛpāṁ yadyapi tulya-darśanāḥ. Tulya-darśanāḥ. Because saintly persons, they have no discrimination that "This man should be shown special favor." They have no such discrimination. They are merciful to everyone. Sama-darśinaḥ. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. So... But still, although they are equal to everyone, still, one who is very much inclined to render service, especially inclined. Therefore it is said, yadyapi tulya-darśanāḥ. It is not that saintly person is partial, showing somebody special favor and somebody no favor. No. They are open to everyone. Just like Kṛṣṇa, He's open to everyone. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. It is not it is meant for only Arjuna. He's open to everyone. Just like sunlight. Sunlight is open to everyone. Everyone can enjoy sunlight. But if you keep your doors closed voluntarily, then what sun will do? Sun is tulya-darśanaḥ.

There is a verse of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, na hi harate jyotsnaṁ candraś caṇḍāla-veśmani. Caṇḍāla. Caṇḍāla means the low caste, lower than the śūdras. The meat-eaters. Meat-eaters, in India they are called caṇḍāla. So especially pig, pig-eater. Still you'll find in villages, the sweeper class, they capture one pig. They maintain the pigs. They sell as well as they eat. So the living pig they burn into fire. Still, publicly. And it cries like anything, but they are allowed. Publicly they do that. So caṇḍāla-veśmani. That is very polluted, sinful place, but that does not mean that the moonlight is refused there. Moonlight is not refused. Because it is the house of a caṇḍāla, therefore moon does not consider that he should be refused, or sunlight is refused there. No. Sunlight is equally distributed. Na hi harate jyotsnaṁ candraś caṇḍāla-veśmani. Candra means the moon. Similarly, all devotees, or Kṛṣṇa, He's not reluctant. Either devotee, Kṛṣṇa's devotee, or Kṛṣṇa is reluctant to bestow the mercy to anyone. Tulya... That is called tulya-darśanāḥ. The mercy is open for everyone.

But still, if one is inclined to give service, śuśrūṣamāṇe, special... That is not, I mean to say, partiality. That is natural. Just like one man has got his own son and there are others' sons, others' children also, playing together. If there is danger the man goes first of all to save his own son. You cannot say, "Oh, you are so partial." No, that is not partial. That is natural. That is natural. Nobody will criticize, that "You did not save others' son; you simply took care of your own son." That is natural. Kṛṣṇa also says, samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29]. That's a fact. How Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be enemy of somebody and friend of somebody? That is not possible. Na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ. "Nobody is My especially favorite, and nobody is My enemy." But, ye tu bhajanti māṁ prītyā: "But a person who has taken devotional service and with love and faith is engaged in devotional service, I am especially inclined to him."

Just like government. Government is not anyone's enemy or anyone's friend, but if anyone gives special service to the government, he is recognized. He is given the title "Sir" or C.I.E.,(?) or something like that. These things are natural. This is not partiality. It is not that if government offers anyone special recognition for his service, that is not partiality. Similarly, when Nārada Muni in his previous birth was very sincerely, obediently engaged in the service of the saintly persons, they cakruḥ kṛpām, special favor. Unless there was special favor, how immediately after that birth he could become Nārada Muni? Special favor. Everyone is engaged, but this is the special favor. There are many instances like that. But that we should not take, that this special favor is partiality. No. Therefore this word is used, tulya-darśanāḥ.

So if we acquire these qualities... Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. The main basic principle is śuśrūṣamāṇe, śuśrūṣa, service. So service is very important thing. So śuśrūṣamāṇe munayo 'lpa-bhāṣiṇi, very grave. One should be very grave and refrain from unnecessary engagement. These things are possible when we detach ourself from the so-called material engagements. That is illicit sex, meat-eating, and intoxication, and gambling. These are unnecessary things. There is no need of these things, but we are accustomed. We have become accustomed to, on account of bad association. So we should refrain from all these things. This is called dānte. What is the meaning of dānte? Given here?

Devotee: "Having controlled the senses."



Prabhupāda: Having controlled the senses. This is dānte. We have to control these things, then the special favor will be there. (reading purport) "In the Bhagavad-gītā the Lord says 'All the Vedas are searching after Me.' Lord Śrī Caitanya says that in the Vedas the subject matters are only three, namely to establish the relation of the living entities with the Personality of Godhead, perform the relative duties in devotional service, and thus achieve the ultimate goal, back to Godhead. As such, vedānta-vādīs..." They have been described veda-vādin, veda-vādinī, in the previous verse. "Vedānta-vādīs, or the followers of the Vedānta, indicates the pure devotees of the Personality of Godhead." That is vedānta-vādī, veda-vādī. Veda-vādī means actually one who knows what is the objective of Vedas, they take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And when Caitanya Mahāprabhu discussed Vedānta philosophy with Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, he said that in the Vedānta or Vedas there are three things only: sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana. He de... All śāstras. In the Bhagavad-gītā also the same three things are there: sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana.



Sambandha means "First of all, what is my relationship with God." That is called sambandha. Just like first of all a boy or a girl is to be married. So... That is the Vedic system. The father, mother, selects. That is called sambandha. When they fixed up that "This boy will be married with that girl," that is called sambandha. So relationship. Then when the sambandha is established by marriage, when the boy or girl is married, then the sambandha is done. "Now... Now the boy and the girl may remain separately in their respective homes." No. That is abhidheya. Abhidheya. When they are united by the marriage there must be dealings between them. That is called abhidheya. Abhidheya. Abhidheya means not that "Our now marriage ceremony, relationship is established. Now you Mr. such and such, you go home, I go home." No. There must be actual activities. The wife should take care of serving the husband, and the husband should take care of the wife. Then the relationship... Why this relationship? Why these are activities? Now, there is prayojana.

What is that prayojana? To get son. Marriage means to get son. That is prayojana. Putrāyate kriyate bhāryāḥ. Bhāryā means wife. One has to accept a bhāryā, a wife, why? Putrāyate. For the matter of getting a son. Why? Why there is necessity of getting a son? Putra-piṇḍa-prayojanam. This is Vedic civilization. Putra. Putra means Pun-nāmno narakād yasmāt trāyate iti putra. Pu-tra. Pu means pun-nāmno narakāt. There is a hell which is called put. So from that hellish condition, one who delivers, trāyate iti tra, therefore he is called putra. This is... Every Sanskrit word has got meaning, root meaning. Putra. Putra-piṇḍa-prayojanam. Putra is required. Why? After death, if by chance the father does not get ordinary life or goes to the hellish condition of life, the son will deliver. Therefore śrāddha ceremony. There is śrāddha... What is that śrāddha ceremony? Śrāddha ceremony means to offer foodstuff to Viṣṇu, and with the prasādam, to the forefathers or father it is offered so that by eating prasādam, if he is in ghost life or in hellish life, he'll be delivered. This is called śrāddha.

So it is the duty of the son, śrāddha ceremony. And Advaita, Advaitācārya, He was also performing the śrāddha ceremony, and He offered the prasādam, the remnants of foodstuff, to Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was in Śāntipura, and he was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra day and night, and when he was to take some prasādam he used to come to Advaitācārya's place and take prasādam there. So one day Haridāsa Ṭhākura asked Advaitācārya that "Why You are giving me prasādam?" Means he presented himself that "I am coming from Muhammadan family, but why You take so much care upon me? You are giving me prasādam, You are taking so much care, You are making a cottage for me. Why? You are one of the leaders of the brāhmaṇas in Śāntipura, all very exalted learned brāhmaṇas, and if You are taking so much care upon me, then they may criticize You, blaspheme You. So I think You should not do this. I don't want that You may be criticized, or I may be criticized."

So Advaitācārya said, "No, no, no. I'm not doing anything against the śāstras, so nobody can criticize. I'm doing nothing against the śāstra." So in the śāstras... Jīva Gosvāmī also has given quotation from the śāstra that it doesn't matter from which family a person is coming, but if he's a pure devotee, he should be taken all care, and he should be offered charity, he should be offered prasādam. All care should be taken for him. There is śāstra indication. So Advaitācārya said that "I am doing the right thing. And by feeding you I am feeding daily many millions of brāhmaṇas by feeding you. By feeding you." These are statement in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. So this offering prasādam, the putra, a right putra is meant for offering prasādam to Viṣṇu so that his forefather and father may be delivered. That is the system of putra.

So (reading), "Such vedānta-vādīs or the bhaktivedāntas are impartial in distributing..." This Bhaktivedanta title was given on this vedānta-vādī because in our society there was no Vedānta. So some of the Vaiṣṇavas selected me to get this title Bhaktivedanta. Vedānta means bhakti, understanding bhakti. Because vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. So who can understand Kṛṣṇa unless he has bhakti? So this is the bhaktivedānta. So (reading) "Vedānta-vādī or the bhaktivedāntas are impartial in distributing the transcendental knowledge or devotional service. To them no one is enemy or friend, no one is educated or uneducated, no one is specially favorable, and no one is unfavorable. The bhaktivedāntas see the people in general are wasting time in false sensuous things. Their business is to get the ignorant mass of people to reestablish the lost relationship with the prayojana, lost relationship with the Personality of Godhead. By such endeavor even the most forgotten soul is roused up to the sense of spiritual life, and thus being initiated by the bhaktivedāntas the people in general gradually progress on the path of transcendental realization. So the vedānta-vādīs initiated the boy even before he became self-controlled and was detached from the childish sporting, etc. But before the initiation, he (the boy) became more and more advanced in discipline, which is very essential for one who wishes to make progress in the line. In the system of varṇāśrama-dharma, which is the beginning of actual life, small boys, five years of age, are sent to become brahmacārī at the guru's āśrama just to learn discipline."

So unless one is disciplined... This is the only qualification, that Nārada Muni was disciplined. So much disciplined that he's a small boy, still, he would not talk anything nonsense. He was so disciplined. So the more we become disciplined... As it is stated in the śāstras, utsāhād dhairyāt niścayāt tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt. These are disciplines. The more we become advanced... And naturally we get the mercy of the spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa. Through the mercy of spiritual... Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpā. There must be mercy both of them, guru and Kṛṣṇa. Without guru's kṛpā, one cannot reach Kṛṣṇa, and without Kṛṣṇa's kṛpā, one cannot get a bona fide spiritual master. This is correlative terms. So we should follow the disciplinary methods sincerely under the guidance of spiritual master. Then it will be very, very easy to go back to home, back to Godhead. Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni, next life became... Nārada means he went back to home, back to Godhead. He was promoted in the Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Then in the next creation, to distribute this bhakti-mārga, he took birth as the son of Brahmājī, and his business was to convert only all others to devotional life. You'll find Nārada Muni's name in connection with Vālmīki, in connection with Prahlāda Mahārāja. Long, long ago. And still, we are also following Nārada Muni's path, Nārada-pañcarātra. Our method is Nārada-pañcarātra.

So Nārada Muni is the original spiritual master of Vyāsadeva, and from Vyāsadeva our disciplic succession is coming. Therefore guru is representative of Vyāsadeva. On his birthday the ceremony is offered as Vyāsa-pūjā. This is the disciplic succession. So we should try to follow Nārada Muni. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. There are twelve mahājanas, great authorities, of whom, out of the twelve, Nārada Muni is one of them. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ [SB 6.3.20]. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ, yes. Is not that the verse? Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kapilaḥ kumāro manuḥ. So Nārada's name is there, the, one of the mahājanas. So Nārada Muni is mahājana, and he became mahājana on account of his austerity and following the principles. So anyone who follows Nārada, he also becomes mahājana. This is the disciplic succession.

Thank you very much. (end)



740806SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.25

-

Vṛndāvana, August 6, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of their food, and by so doing, all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being engaged, I became purified in heart, and at that time the very nature of the transcendentalist became attractive to me."



Prabhupāda:



ucchiṣṭa-lepān anumodito dvijaiḥ

sakṛt sma bhuñje tad-apāsta-kilbiṣaḥ

evaṁ pravṛttasya viśuddha-cetasas

tad-dharma evātma-ruciḥ prajāyate

[SB 1.5.25]



Very simple process of awakening Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This ātma-ruciḥ... Ātma-ruciḥ means attraction for the self, or soul. There are ātmā. Ātmā means sometimes this body. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Gross materialists, they think that "I am this body." That is also ātma-ruciḥ. They are busy to maintain this body, to decorate this body, to feed this body, to satisfy the senses of the body. This is also ātma-ruciḥ, because the body is also called ātmā. So this is another ātma-ruciḥ, materialist. Then ātmā means mind also, mental speculation, very much busy in mental speculation. That is also ātma-ruciḥ. And the, the topmost ātma-ruciḥ, topmost means that is real ātma-ruciḥ, to be attracted by the self or Superself. That is ātma-ruciḥ.



So our business is to awaken that Supreme ātma-ruciḥ. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Supreme ātma-ruciḥ, supreme ātmā. Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. You can take in different platform different kinds of attraction, but when our attraction is in Kṛṣṇa, that is supreme. So... Just like for bodily comforts, there are so many scientists, physiologists, biologists. They are trying to understand the constitution of the body. They are busy. And similarly, mental speculators, philosophers, they are also busy. Similarly, the ultimate ātma-ruciḥ if we want to know, then we should be busy with such persons who are engaged in that type of ātma-ruciḥ. That is called sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. As you associate, so your desires become, I mean to say, attached.

So here it is said that dvijaiḥ..., ucchiṣṭa-lepān anumodito dvijaiḥ. Dvijaiḥ, the brāhmaṇa... And the supreme brāhmaṇa is the devotee, kṛṣṇaika-śaraṇa. So Nārada Muni, in his previous birth, he was engaged in washing the dishes, eating the foodstuffs left by the dvijaiḥ, by the brāhmaṇas. In this way he infected their disease. As in ordinary material sense if you eat the remnants of foodstuff of a diseased fellow, then you infect that disease. Therefore sometimes when there is a patient suffering from tuberculosis, it is strictly separated from the family to another room or another house so that... It is very infectious. Cholera is very infectious. Smallpox is very much infectious. There are many infectious disease. So as you infect this material disease by eating the foodstuff left by a diseased fellow, similarly, if you eat the remnants of foodstuff left by a Vaiṣṇava you become Vaiṣṇava. This is infection. So we should voluntarily accept this infection. The other infection we should avoid, but this infection we shall welcome. But the process is the same. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. You can refrain from the lower class of infection simply by infecting yourself with the higher class, or transcendental class of infection.

So Nārada Muni, he was a small boy. It was not possible for him to study Vedānta or philosophy. He was not even educated. But still, simply by eating the remnants of foodstuff left by the devotees, dvijaiḥ, he became so exalted. The explanation is given there that evaṁ pravṛttasya viśuddha-cetasaḥ. "Because I was engaged in this service, gradually my heart became cleansed." Viśuddha-cetasaḥ. Cetasaḥ means heart. So actually, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there. As it is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa... Just like father and son. However there may be misunderstanding, but if the father and son come together and their affectionate dealing is begun, immediately original relationship is revived. It does not take much time. Similarly, we are already related with Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ: [Bg. 15.7] "All living entities, they are My part and parcel." Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā: [Bg. 14.4] "I am the seed-giving father." So how this relation can be broken? That is not possible. That is already there eternally.

Therefore it is said in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Nitya-siddha means eternally perfect. It is not that we are artificially acquiring this kṛṣṇa-bhakti. No, it is not artificial. It is natural. This is actual fact. So we are simply... Because our present, in the present material condition, our heart is covered with so much garbage of different types of body... Just like all of a sudden something comes to your mind. It has no connection. Just like a bubble, comes out. Because so many dirty things are reserved on account of our material conditional life for millions and millions of years. Anādi karama-phale paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale. Anādi, we cannot... Anādi means... Ādi means the creation. So before this creation. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. We are in this material contamination not that in this millennium-before that. Just like millennium after millennium. Nārada Muni was speaking his life before this millennium. So anādi. Anādi means creation. But not only one creation, several creations, we are forgotten, or we are in this material world. Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā... We are searching after material comfort, material comfort, sense gratification, in so many ways. So anādi karama-phale paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale, taribāre nā dekhi upāya. In this way we are going.

So consciousness is there, but the dirty things contaminated life after life, that is accumulated. We have to cleanse this. That is called viśuddha-cetasaḥ. Viśuddha-cetasaḥ. Just like infection of disease can be also disinfected by injection, by vaccine, similarly if you take this vaccine, or antiseptic... What is that called? Countering? Counteracting?

Devotee: Inoculation? Inoculation or...



Prabhupāda: So many. There are different terms. So this is the process. We are eternally related with Kṛṣṇa, nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti, and we're eternally very affectionate and obedient servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is our position. Somehow or other, it is covered. So that garbage that's covering has to be moved. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. This is the process of cleansing the mirror of the heart. Mirror, when it is covered by dust you cannot see your face nicely. But as soon as it is nicely brushed and cleansed, you see exactly what you are. Similarly, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means cleansing the heart of all the dirty things that is accumulated life after life. It is not an artificial thing, we are learning to become devotee of Kṛṣṇa. We are already devotee of Kṛṣṇa, but we have forgotten, or the consciousness is covered. Now, by this process, devotional process, especially by kīrtana, by chanting, glorifying the holy name of the Lord, the cleansing process is accelerated. Very soon it takes place.



Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. This is the facility of this age, Kali-yuga. This is the only facility. In Kali-yuga you cannot perform meditation or perform big, big sacrifices, as they are mentioned in the Vedas. Or you cannot perform even Deity worship very nicely. There are so many flaws. Everything is very difficult. And charity... And there are so many. Śamena damena dānena tyāgena. So where is the money I shall...? There is no money even to feed me. I am eating... This morning I do not know what shall I eat in the evening. This is the position at the present moment. Prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ, kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ. The life is also very short duration, and so many disturbances. Not only disturbance of the Kali-yuga, but the disturbance by the government also, by the demigods. There is scorching heat, there is severe cold. And ati-vṛṣṭi, sometimes more than we want, there is rainfall. Sometimes there is no rainfall. And in this way there is scarcity of foodstuff. Anāvṛṣṭyā durbhikṣa, and taxation. These are the disturbances. So many. One side, taxation by the government, another side, by nature there is scarcity of food and there is scarcity of rain.

So these are stated in the Bhāgavatam. Durbhikṣa, anāvṛṣṭyā durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ [SB 12.2.9]. People will be so much disturbed. It is already disturbed. Gacchanti giri-kānanam. They'll leave their home, their family, and go to the forest, go to the hills, disgusted. So this is the Kali-yuga symptoms. So how one will clean the heart? He cannot sit even peacefully for a moment. Disturbed always. Disturbed in the mind, anxiety, full of anxiety. How it will be possible to meditate? This is all nonsense. This is not possible. In Kali-yuga meditation is not possible. The so-called meditation is a farce. Those who are trying to meditate... Therefore you don't see any improvement in their life. They're making a formal meditation, but they remain what they are. Don't improve anything. That is not possible.

So therefore in this age it is recommended that

kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ

tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ

kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt

[SB 12.3.52]



Simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is the only way. There is no other method. There are methods, but you cannot perform it. You are so condemned. "You" means we also, everyone. We are so condemned and the age is so condemned that it is very, very difficult. It is not possible. And another process is this, as Nārada Muni says, ucchiṣṭa-lepān anumodito dvijaiḥ. To serve the devotees, a pure devotee. If you serve some way or other, you contaminate his quality. Tad-dharma. Sakṛt bhuñje. One side is apāsta-kilbiṣaḥ. Kilbiṣaḥ means the sinful reaction of life. To reduce the reaction of sinful life. Because unless we are sinful, we cannot remain within this... A prisoner means a criminal. As soon as you find a person in the prisonhouse you should understand that he's a criminal. That criminality may be of different degrees, that is another thing, but he's a criminal. Similarly, anyone, beginning from Brahmā down to the germ in the stool, they're all sinful. All sinful. People will be surprised that "Brahmā is also sinful?" Yes. Brahmā has also desired that "I shall be the supreme creature within this brahmāṇḍa, whole universe." A little or more.



So anyone who has got this desire that "I shall enjoy in this material world," he's a sinful man. That is sinful. Because suppose something your, something belongs to you, and if I desire, "How I shall take this, possession of this thing?" is not that criminal? Something belongs to somebody, and if you make a plan to possess that thing, is it not criminal? So actually, Kṛṣṇa is the bhoktā. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. He is the proprietor, sarva-loka. Not a single plot of land belongs to you. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Actually Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor of everything, He is the enjoyer of everything. Then why I shall desire to enjoy and own the property? This is criminal. This is criminal. That may be in small portion. That is going on. The ant is also struggling for existence to possess a grain of sugar, and somebody is trying to possess some state, and somebody is trying to possess the whole universe. But the status of mentality is the same. So this mentality means criminality. This mentality: "How I shall become enjoyer? How I shall possess this?" Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. He forgets. When one forgets that Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer, Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor, as soon as he forgets and tries to become himself the enjoyer or himself the proprietor, immediately māyā captures.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



"Yes, come one. Now come under my jurisdiction. Not there, here." This is the position.



Therefore we living entities, we are described, taṭastha. Taṭastha means marginal. Actually, we are spirit soul, our position in the spiritual world, but we are sometimes fallen down in this material world on account of our desire to enjoy. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy, not His manufactured philosophy... This is the actual position. He, when He instructed Sanātana Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī put before Him the question that "I was a minister and I am a brāhmaṇa, I'm very learned. They say, of course, that I am paṇḍitajī. But actually I do not know what is my position. Actually I am fool number one. I do not know what is my position. These innocent people, they call me I am paṇḍitajī, I am minister, I am this, I am that, and I accept that I am that. But actually I do not know what I am." That is the position everywhere. You ask any prime minister that "You are prime minister, but actually what you are? Will you remain prime minister forever?" He or she cannot answer this question. Or they evade this question. But this is really the question, athāto brahma jijñāsā. One should try to understand "What I am?" but they do not rea... They do not inquire, neither they are interested. So foolish persons, they may be prime minister in this life, next life a dog. They don't care. But this is not life. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. One should inquire and purify himself.

So this purificatory process, here it is very simple. Try to take shelter of mahat-pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam. Vinā mahat-pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam. It is stated by Prahlāda Mahārāja, naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghrim [SB 7.5.32]. Urukrama. Urukrama means Kṛṣṇa, whose activities are very, very great. Just like Kṛṣṇa lifts the mountain. It is called urukrama. Urukrama means his power is very, very great. Foolish persons accept a rascal as Bhagavān, but we are not so rascal. We accept Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān, Urukrama. He can lift when... He can pick up the mountain, and immediately, He can keep on His finger. We want this kind of God. Not making like this and a grain of gold. (laughter) We are not so fool. We want this kind of God, Kṛṣṇa, Urukrama. So how this Urukrama, one can surrender? Naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukrama aṅghrim. Aṅghrim means this leg. How one can be attached? Now, what is the use of taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet? Because these misgivings, this garbage of different types of desires, will be finished. So how it is possible? Niṣkiñcanānāṁ mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam. So long one does not take the dust of the lotus feet of a devotee who is niṣkiñcana, who has nothing to do with this material world... But he's exalted in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unless you do that, there is no possibility. Mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam.

So here Nārada Muni is doing that. Mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam. Therefore by eating the remnants of foodstuff left by them, by washing their dishes, by washing their feet... Everyone can do. Therefore this association is required. If one associates with devotee, pure devotee, and somehow or other gives service, one another, to the spiritual master, to the Vaiṣṇava, automatically he becomes purified. Automatically. Without any study of Vedānta, without any... Simply by sincere service to the devotee. Evaṁ pravṛttasya. If one is engaged in this way, viśuddha-cetasaḥ, he becomes gradually cleansed of the dirty things accumulated in the heart. And tad-dharma evātma-ruciḥ. And the saintly person and devotees, what is their business? The business is ātma-ruciḥ, taste for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Prajāyate. Automatically he will develop.

Therefore every one of us, the members of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, should remain purified always by the regulative principles given and chanting so that everyone is Vaiṣṇava and everyone is serving everyone. In this way the association will purify the whole stock of their (indistinct). This is the process.

Thank you very much. (end)



740809SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.28

-

Vṛndāvana, August 9, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "Thus during two seasons, the rainy season and autumn, I had the opportunity to hear these great-souled sages constantly chant the unadulterated glories of the Lord Hari. As my devotional service began, the coverings of the modes of passion and ignorance vanished."



Prabhupāda:



itthaṁ śarat-prāvṛṣikāv ṛtū harer

viśṛṇvato me 'nusavaṁ yaśo 'malam

saṅkīrtyamānaṁ munibhir mahātmabhir

bhaktiḥ pravṛttātma-rajas-tamopahā

[SB 1.5.28]



Ātma-rajas-tamopahā. This is the perfection of life. We are now covered by the modes of material nature, tri-guṇamayī, three guṇas: sattva, rajas, tamas. So mukti means to get out of this entanglement of three guṇas. That is called mukti. We are suffering different modes of material nature. We have several times explained, kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. There are different types of bodies. From specie point of view, there are 8,400,000 forms. And they are due to these material modes of nature. I have several times explained. There are three modes of material nature, and if you mix, three into three, it becomes nine, and nine into nine equal to eighty-one. So little more or less, there are 8,400,000 species of life. So in order to get out of this repetition of birth and death, we require to be freed from the influence of the modes of material nature. That is the perfection of life.



So here Nārada Muni says that "During the four months..." In India there are six seasons. There is summer season, and there is spring. There is autumn. Then there is winter, there is fall. In this way, there are six seasons. So the saintly persons, in the, during the autumn and rainy season, they keep together; they do not move. Because saintly persons, sannyāsīs, their business is to move... Gṛhiṇāṁ dīna-cetasām, mahad-vicalanam. Mahad-vicalanam. Mahat means mahātmā, great souls. Great soul means not crippled souls, those who are anxious to meet the great, or the Supreme Brahman, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are crippled souls, they are entangled with the limited circle of material enjoyment. But mahātmā... Mahātmā is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ [Bg. 9.13]. Mahātmās are not interested within this material world. They are not under the influence of the external energy. Of course, nowadays it is... Sometimes politicians are called "mahātmā." But that is not the purpose of mahātmā. Mahātmā is not interested with politics or sociology or... They are all material things. Or philanthropy. They are interested with the Supreme: Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. They're interested. Especially mahātmā is he who is interested with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.

Every kṛṣṇa-bhakta, Kṛṣṇa conscious person, is mahātmā, real mahātmā. How it is? Kṛṣṇa says, mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. That is mahātmā. Mahātmā does not mean that if you dress yourself with a certain colored cloth and have some big hairs and beards, then you become mahātmā, no. The mahātmā is he... Who? Daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ: "He is not under the influence of this external energy." Daivī-prakṛti means... There are two prakṛtis, two natures: internal and external. Internal energy is spiritual energy, and external energy is material energy. So mahātmās, they are not under material energy.

One who is under the material energy, they are entangled with these three guṇas: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. The lowest is the tamo-guṇa, and via media is the rajo-guṇa, and the topmost, goodness, is sattva-guṇa. So even in sattva-guṇa, that is also entanglement. Rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa is certainly entanglement, but even rajo-guṇa, even one is situated in the sattva-guṇa... Sattva-guṇa means perfect brāhmaṇa. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. Even if you become a perfect brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇa, with qualities, still, it is bondage. In bondage because, in this way, that even if you become a brāhmaṇa you'll think yourself, "Now I have got so much knowledge, Vedic knowledge. I speak truth, satya. I can control my senses. Satyaṁ śamo damaḥ. I can control my mind. I have got knowledge. I can tolerate." So all these qualities, one becomes bound up. But Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches, nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patiḥ, that "Even... I am not even a brāhmaṇa. I am not a kṣatriya. I am not a vaiśya. I am not a śūdra." He says. This is called sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Even if you become a brāhmaṇa, still, that is upādhi, designation.

So although there is bondage in the sattva-guṇa,... Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. You can be promoted to the higher planetary systems, but that is also bondage. Kṛṣṇa says, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. If you remain within this material world, even if you are promoted to the highest planetary system, Brahmaloka, Satyaloka, still, you have to accept the material bondage, means janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. Brahmā, he also dies. Although he has got very, very long duration of life, he also dies. So Kṛṣṇa therefore recommends, yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama: [Bg. 15.6] "If you come to My place, then you are no more under the laws of birth, death, old age, and disease." Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. That should be the aim of life. Those... There are others who are aspiring to go to the heavenly planet or Satyaloka or Brahmaloka, but Kṛṣṇa says, mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ, mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām [Bg. 9.25]. Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that "Why we should go to the heavenly planet or Brahmaloka or any other material planet? We shall go directly to the abode of Kṛṣṇa, Goloka Vṛndāvana." That is the aim of the devotees.

So that aim you can fulfill by practicing bhakti-yoga. That is mentioned here, bhaktiḥ pravṛttā ātma-rajas-tamopahā. So rajas-tamas. So long one is situated in the modes of passion and ignorance, there is no hope. There is no hope. But when one comes to the platform of sattva-guṇa, there is little hope of transcending. So bhakti-yoga is above sattva-guṇa. In the sattva-guṇa, in the modes of goodness, you can become a nice brāhmaṇa, but simply by becoming a nice brāhmaṇa you, your, you are not free from the material bondage. When you become a pure Vaiṣṇava, then you are free from the bondage of the material world. And to become Vaiṣṇava, you require this devotion, bhakti. Bhakti. Immediately, beginning of bhakti means rajas-tamopahā, upahā. One who is situated even beginning, he is above the rajas-tamo-guṇa. He's situated... Tadā kāma-lobha...

There is a... There is a verse. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Here the same thing is described, that saṅkīrtyamānaṁ munibhir mahātmabhiḥ. Saṅkīrtyamānam. We have to hear the saṅkīrtana not from professional men. That will not be... If you hear saṅkīrtana from the professional men... Professional men: who makes saṅkīrtana as the means of livelihood. Just like people do some business or work to get some money to maintain the life, similarly, if somebody takes the saṅkīrtana as the means of livelihood, that will not help you. You can go on hearing saṅkīrtana from such professional men for millions of years; still, you will remain where you are, not rajas-tamopahā. You cannot get out of the bondage of... Therefore you have to hear from the saṅkīrtyamānaṁ munibhir mahātmabhiḥ. Mahātmā. Mahātmā means mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. Mahātmā means those who have finished this material business. Simply they're interested with Kṛṣṇa and... Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura or followers, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's followers. If you hear... Just like Nārada Muni. In his previous birth he heard from these mahātmās, great devotees, only for four months. It is stated here. The time is... śarat prāvṛṣa, prāvṛṣa, prāvṛṣikāv ṛtū. Śarat and autumn, two ṛtūs, he heard. The association was there. And the result was: viśṛṇvato me 'nusavaṁ yaśo 'malam. Kṛṣṇa's glorification, amalam, without any spot, without any... Kṛṣṇa's glories, that is real nirguṇa. Nirguṇa does not mean to become impersonal. Nirguṇa means without any material attributes. So when Kṛṣṇa's glories are chanted, that is not anything of this material world.

Just like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. This hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, that is not any vibration of this material world. That is spiritual. Golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmilo kene tāy. Saṁsāra-viṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale, viṣaya-viṣānale. Viṣānale and dāvānale, these things are described about this material world. Just like in... You sung, immediately, saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam **. So the saṁsāra, this material world, is just like blazing fire, dāvānala, and forest fire. Forest fire means nobody goes to set fire in the forest. It takes automatically. Similarly, we want to live very peacefully in this material world, but that is not possible. There will be fire. And viṣaya-viṣānale. Viṣaya means things which is required for sense enjoyment, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunam. So either you say viṣaya-viṣānale or saṁsāra-dāvānale, the matter is the same. So Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, therefore, viṣaya-viṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale, juṛāite nā koinu upāy. If you want to get out of this viṣānala, the blazing fire of poison or forest fire, then we have to take shelter of this hari-saṅkīrtana. Golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmilo kene tāy, saṁsāra-dāvānale viṣaya-viṣānale dibā-niśi hiyā jvale juṛāite nā koinu upāy.

So in order to get out of this blazing fire of material existence, which is a combination of rajas-tamaḥ-sattva-guṇa, one has to take to this devotional service, and that can be achieved only by hearing from munibhir mahātmabhiḥ, those who are munis. Munis means they are silent about material affairs. They are simply interested with spiritual advancement of life. To give up something and to accept something... To give up something is negative, but if you do not accept something positive, this give up something will not stay. Simply to become renounced of the material world will not help. Big, big sannyāsīs, they gave up this material world-brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā-but they, because they did not engage themselves in devotional service, they again come back to this material world for philanthropic work, for altruistic work, for charity, for opening schools... So simply negative will not help us. We have to accept positive.

So if we accept the positive, the negative will automatically result. Just like here it is said, bhakti-pravṛttā. As soon as bhakti is accepted, then ātma-rajas-tamopahā. You immediately become free. Your soul becomes free from the influence of rajas-tamas. Rajas-tamas means lust and desire. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. If you are entangled in rajas-tamas, then you'll be influenced by lusty desires, kāma and lobha. The lusty desires will never be satisfied. You'll want more, more, more. That is called greedy, lobha, lusty desires and greediness. You'll never be free if you remain in the kāma, in the rajas-tamas.

tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



Here the two modes of nature is explained, kāma and lobha, er, rajas tamas. So if we are entangled with rajas-tamas, then our perpetual desire for lusty sense enjoyment and greediness will not stop. It will drag me more and more, more and more, and entangle me. But sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. But if we give up these two qualities, the remainder quality means goodness, that sattve, you will get, you will give, you will get, at least, peace of mind. Sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. Evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ. When you are in, in the platform of satisfaction, sattva-guṇa... Just like the brahminical qualification. They are satisfied with anything. A brāhmaṇa is not supposed to improve his economic condition. He's not interested. He's simply satisfied: "By the grace of God, whatever I have got, that is sufficient." God is supplying everyone, even birds and beasts and cats and dogs. Eko yo bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. He is giving food to everyone. So sattva-guṇa means to remain satisfied whatever is obtained by, from God, by His free will. That's all. They are not after economic development.



So Vaiṣṇava, being inherently a brāhmaṇa, he should be satisfied: "Whatever Kṛṣṇa has given, that's all right. My business is how to make advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. That is the Vaiṣṇava's business, that simply how to make perfection of life in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Vaiṣṇava's demand, not for any other improvement, economic development or this improvement. No. Because economic... It is... It is a false idea that one will be satisfied or be happy simply by economic development. No, that is not possible, practically. In your country, America, there is immense economic development, but you could not get any happiness. That is not possible. Happiness will be possible when, first of all, you are situated in the brahminical position, sattva-guṇa, and to come to that brahminical position, you have to give up the activities of rajas-tamo-guṇa. The rajas-tamo-guṇa is that illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. That's all. So if you voluntarily give up, and be situated in the sattva-guṇa, then you'll be happy. Evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ.

And that happiness can be obtained, as it is stated here, bhakti, by devotional service. Bhakti-pravṛttā. As soon as you begin devotional service... Yayātmā suprasīdati. There are many references.

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

[SB 1.2.6]



So by bhakti-yoga, you'll be happy, and as soon as you become happy, then your Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very easily advanced. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavat, mukta-saṅgasya jāyate. Bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-saṅgasya jāyate. In this way we shall understand bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam, and that is the perfection of life.



So Nārada Muni admits that "Simply by hearing from the realized souls, munibhir mahātmabhiḥ, for four months during their stay in the cāturmāsya period, gradually I developed my Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and then I began devotional service." This is the process.

Thank you very much. (end)



740810SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.29

-

Vṛndāvana, August 10, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "I was very much attached to those sages. I was gentle in behavior, and all my sins were eradicated in their service. In my heart I had strong faith in them. I had subjugated the senses, and I was strictly following them with body and mind."



Prabhupāda:



tasyaivaṁ me 'nuraktasya

praśritasya hatainasaḥ

śraddadhānasya bālasya

dāntasyānucarasya ca

[SB 1.5.29]



So the, the one side, the guru. Saṅkīrtyamānaṁ munibhir mahātmabhiḥ. The... This is a relationship between disciple and guru. What are the qualifications of guru? And what are the qualifications of the disciple? If both of them are qualified, then immediately the result is there. Just like husband and wife. Both of them, if they are healthy, by sex there will be pregnancy. Similarly, if the guru and the disciple, both of them are qualified, then immediately Kṛṣṇa consciousness will be there.



So the qualification of the guru is described in the previous verse.

viśṛṇvato me 'nusavaṁ yaśo 'malaṁ

saṅkīrtyamānaṁ munibhir mahātmabhiḥ



The guru must be mahātmā and muni. Muni means thoughtful, philosopher. Not foolish rascal, manufacturing some philosophy. And mahātmabhiḥ. Not only self-realized, but by his character, by his behavior, by his understanding, he must be a mahātmā. What is that mahātmā? There are so many mahātmās, simply by changing the dress. No. Not that kind of mahātmā. Our Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung a song, eita eka kalir celā: "Here is a disciple of Kali." What is that? Nāke tilaka galai mālā. "He has got tilaka..." Nata nara nāke tilaka galai mālā. He sings that, sahaja bhajana kache namu saṅge laiyā pare dala. (?) Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings that "He's dressed like a bābājī. He has shaven his head, and has got tilaka and kaṇṭhi. But he has got at least half a dozen women, and that is his bhajana." So not that... That is not mahātmā. That is durātmā, a cheating... Of course, in this Kali-yuga... Therefore Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, eita eka kalir celā. Kalir celā means the disciple of Kali. Dressed like a sādhu, or Vaiṣṇava, but within, all rubbish things. That will not help us. He must be mahātmā, real mahātmā. We want guru like that. Then it will be a... We must be also qualified, and guru also qualified. Therefore it is said in the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa that one year should be taken to study one another, the guru and the disciple. The guru also will see whether the person is fit to become a disciple, and the disciple also will see "Whether this gentleman can become my guru."



So the qualification of guru is, he should be mahātmā, and muni. Muni means philosopher, and mahātmā means God-realized. Really, mahātmā means God-realized. He knows. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



One who knows Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes. Vāsudeva. Vāsudeva means Kṛṣṇa. Sarvam iti. Vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ, vāsudeva-parāḥ... There is... Everything to satisfy Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. Either you perform sacrifices or you work piously, the aim should be how to satisfy Vāsudeva. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. Just like if you want to keep your body fit and healthy, you must satisfy the stomach. If you satis..., if your stomach is all right and if you supply proper food to the stomach, then whole body will be energized without fail. Similarly, the mahātmā means whose business is to satisfy Vāsudeva. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19].



Kṛṣṇa says, vāsudeva... When Kṛṣṇa is in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, He's Vāsudeva. Kṛṣṇa does not go away from Vṛndāvana. But when He has got other business to do, He does it as Vāsudeva. Vāsudeva is in Mathurā. Vāsudeva is in Dvārakā. But original Kṛṣṇa is in Vṛndāvana. But that does not mean that this Vāsudeva is different from Kṛṣṇa. The foolish person, who cannot study, who does not know what is Vāsudeva, what is Aniruddha, what is Pradyumna, the, the Saṅkarṣaṇa... These are all expansions of Kṛṣṇa. They are not different from Kṛṣṇa. But still, They are not original Kṛṣṇa. There is no... It is not that Vāsudeva has got less power than Kṛṣṇa. They are equally powerful. Advaitam acyutam... Advaita. They are not different. Acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. But the difference is that the... Several times I explained that one candle, you lit up another candle, you lit up another candle, you lit up another, another, millions... So all the candles are of the same power, so far candle power is concerned, but still, you have to say, "This is the first candle, this is the second candle, this is the third candle, this is the fourth candle," like that. Not that because the second candle is lit up from the first candle, therefore second candle is less powerful than the first candle. No, that is not. That is called advaya-jñāna.

Advaitam acyutam. Advaitam acyutam ananta-rūpam. Kṛṣṇa's ananta-rūpam does not make any difference. There is no difference between Rāmacandra and Kṛṣṇa. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan [Bs. 5.39]. Kṛṣṇa is always... When we say "Kṛṣṇa"-Kṛṣṇa with all His expansions, Viṣṇu expansions. So either you worship Rāma or Kṛṣṇa, it is the same. Or Viṣṇu. There is no difference. Therefore advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyam [Bs. 5.33]. But still, Kṛṣṇa is the ādyam, original. Ādyam purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca. Although He is ādyam, purāṇa-puruṣam, the oldest personality, still, nava-yauvanaṁ ca, always young. You have never seen Kṛṣṇa's photograph as old man. No. When He was charioteer of Arjuna, He was great-grandfather at that time. His grandson had sons. He's old man. But you see, just a young man of twenty years old. That is Kṛṣṇa. Nava-yauvanaṁ ca. Ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33]. And these rascals, they try to understand Kṛṣṇa...

Kṛṣṇa personally says that,

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



Out of many millions of persons, one is perfect, and out of many millions of perfect persons, one can hardly understand what is Kṛṣṇa. And these rascals understand Kṛṣṇa. They remark that "Kṛṣṇa is like this. Kṛṣṇa is like this." How much rascaldom it is. This is the... Kṛṣṇa says personally, and Lord Brahmā says, vedeṣu durlabham. Vedeṣu durlabham. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa simply by studying Vedic literature. It is not possible. Then? How we shall understand Kṛṣṇa? Adurlabham ātma-bhaktau. If you want to understand Kṛṣṇa, then go to His devotee. He'll make known Kṛṣṇa. That is mahātmā. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa personally by your so-called speculation, neither you can understand Kṛṣṇa simply by studying Vedas as a scholar. There are many Vedantist scholars. They cannot understand. So many Vedantists there are in India, but they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am not exposed to everyone." That is Kṛṣṇa.



So therefore, how to understand Kṛṣṇa? That is stated by Kṛṣṇa Himself:. after many, many births struggling to understand Kṛṣṇa. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān [Bg. 7.19]. Not foolish person. Foolish person cannot understand. But even jñānavān, who is wise, perfectly wise, learned scholar, such person, even after many, many births struggling to understand Kṛṣṇa... So that is mahātmā, one who has understood Kṛṣṇa. He is mahātmā. One who does not understand Kṛṣṇa or verifies himself as Kṛṣṇa, he's durātmā. He's not mahātmā. He's a rascal. Mahātmā is that person who has understood Kṛṣṇa, that vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti: [Bg. 7.19] "Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, is the cause of all causes." Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. One who has understood this perfectly, that the Supreme Controller, Īśvara... Īśvara means controller. And not only controller, but Supreme Controller. Controller, we are; every one of us are controller. Just like I am also controlling a few of my disciples-or hundred or thousand. But Kṛṣṇa is controller of millions, millions upon millions and millions upon... All universes. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Simply to become controller does not become... Yes, that is also īśvara. You can say. But there is parameśvara.

These words are used in the Vedic language: Īśvara, parameśvara, ātmā, paramātmā. So there is one Paramātmā. That Paramātmā is Kṛṣṇa. Ātmā, we are also ātmā, living being, and Kṛṣṇa is also living being. But not, we are not equal to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the chief living being. Just like I am also living being; you are also living being. But you accept me as the chief of this institution. There must be one chief. Otherwise there will be no management. It will be chaotic. So we are ātmā, and Kṛṣṇa is also ātmā. But He is Paramātmā. We are īśvara. Kṛṣṇa is also īśvara. But He's Parameśvara. Therefore we have named "Godhead" purposefully, not "God." We don't say "Back to God." We say, "Back to Godhead.""Head" means the chief. Everyone can claim that "I am God," because everyone has got some power, little power. But not the supreme power. That is Kṛṣṇa.

So when one understands Kṛṣṇa perfectly, he becomes mahātmā. Just try to understand. Not a politician. Not by changing dress, saffron-color cloth. No, that is not mahātmā. One who understands Kṛṣṇa perfectly well, he is mahātmā. Therefore here it is said, munibhir mahātmabhiḥ. The instruction was received from persons, munibhiḥ, great philosophers. Not only philosophers, but mahātmā. Because one who has understood Kṛṣṇa perfectly... This is the qualification of guru. So that qualification, to attain, is not very difficult. But because we are rascals, we do not try to take the qualification. That qualification is very simple. One... Who can understand Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is not so cheap thing. He has said already that yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ [Bg. 7.3]. So it not very easy. But it is very easy if you take the process, easiest process. What is that easiest process? That easiest process: you don't talk nonsense; you simply talk what Kṛṣṇa has said. That's all. And many times they give me very great credit that I have done wonderful. Yes, I have done wonderful. But what is the reason? Because I am not a rascal. I speak what Kṛṣṇa has spoken. That's all. Very easy. Everyone can do that. Not only I. Any of you, you can do this. Simply speak what is..., what Kṛṣṇa has said. That's all. Don't make addition, alteration. Then you become rascal. Immediately you become rascal.

So you don't want to..., if you don't want to become a rascal, if you want to become a mahātmā, then you accept what Kṛṣṇa says and preach that. Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more superior authority than Me." You say that. You say, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. "Here is... Kṛṣṇa is the cause." You understand or don't understand, if you simply pick up the words of Kṛṣṇa and talk like that, then you become mahātmā. There is no difficulty to become mahātmā. But these durātmās, the rascals, they talk differently from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore they are not mahātmās. They are all durātmā. Therefore the process is that if you want to make progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you have to find out a guru who is mahātmā. Ādau gurvāśrayam. That is the first business. Ādau, in the beginning, gurvāśrayam, to take shelter of a bona fide mahātmā guru. That is the Vedic instruction. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. "Must," abhigacchet. This verb is used-"must." It is not, "Oh, I can do without guru." No, that is not possible. That is not possible. If you want to understand the transcendental science, spiritual science, you must approach. Gacchet. This, this form of verb used when there is the meaning "must." Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet, samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham. And guru's qualification is brahma-niṣṭham. Brahma... And again this word. Brahma, and Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahman. Again this param. That Parabrahman has been said by Arjuna to Kṛṣṇa, bhavān. Bhavān: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are Parabrahman." Pavitraṁ bhavān. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12].

So the process is that if you want to make any progress... Just like Nārada Muni. He made immediately progress simply by associating with the mahātmās only for four months. Why? That is explained in the next verse. What is that? Tasyaivaṁ me anuraktasya. "I became attached to them. I became a lover of the mahātmās." Anuraktasya praśritasya. "I became obedient." Not disobedient. Guror avajñāḥ, that is great offense. If you become disobedient to guru, then your business is finished. These are the qualifications. Me anuraktasya praśritasya... And hatainasaḥ. Hata enasaḥ. Means "All my sinful activities stopped." Nobody can understand the bona fide guru or Kṛṣṇa unless he is free from sinful life. Therefore we have to accept this principle: no illicit sex, no gambling, no, I mean to say, intoxication, no meat-eating. If you follow these four principles, then you become hatainasaḥ. Hata enasaḥ. Your sinful life stopped. So hatainasaḥ śraddadhānasya. Śraddadhāna means with faith and obedience. Not that blindly. Śraddadhānasya bālasya. And although he was a boy, but he got this qualification. Bālasya dānta, silent, no more playing. Anucarasya. Anucara means following. These are the qualifications. If you become qualified with these qualities... What is that? Anurakta, means attached, obedient, no sinful activities, and faithful, and not disturbing, dānta, and follower. And if the guru is mahātmā and if you are qualified with these qualifications, then the result will be there. Immediately.

But there is no difficulty. One must be serious to understand, and he must approach a qualified mahātmā guru. Then his business will be, transaction will be very nicely done. This is Vedic process. Is there any difficulty? Anyone can say? Is there any difficulty to become mahātmā and to become a qualified disciple? Is it very difficult? Say, if there is any difficulty.

Devotees: No.



Prabhupāda: See. So where is the difficulty? There is no difficulty. The difficulty is the rascals will not do it, and the so-called durātmās, they are passing on as mahātmās, and so-called disciples are passing as disciples. Therefore the transaction is imperfect. Things are not coming out. But if the transaction is perfect from both the sides, from the disciple's side and guru's side, then Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very, very easy.



Thank you very much. (end)



740811SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.30

-

Vṛndāvana, August 11, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



jñānaṁ guhyatamaṁ yat tat

sākṣād bhagavatoditam

anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ

kṛpayā dīna-vatsalāḥ

[SB 1.5.30]



Translation: "As they were leaving, those bhakti-vedāntas, who are very kind to poor-hearted souls, instructed me in that most confidential subject which is instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself."



Prabhupāda:



jñānaṁ guhyatamaṁ yat tat

sākṣād bhagavatoditam

anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ

kṛpayā dīna-vatsalāḥ



So yesterday we have been discussing the symptoms of guru and the symptoms of disciple-who is actual disciple and who is actual guru. It is stated by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,



sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam **



So guru's position is very exalted. Exal... Why exalted? Because he is the confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. One... Suppose you want to do some business and..., with some firm, and a representative comes to transact business, naturally, one tries to satisfy that representative so that the business can be done very fairly. This is natural psychology. Similarly, kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. Guru is very dear to Kṛṣṇa because his business is to serve Kṛṣṇa. His business is to execute the will of Kṛṣṇa.



Therefore here it is said, yat tat sākṣād bhagavatoditam. (aside:) Don't disturb in this way. Sākṣād bhagavatoditam. Sākṣāt means directly. What was spoken directly by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And that is jñānam, that is real knowledge. Jñānaṁ guhyatamam. Guhyatamam, most confidential. Guhya, guhyatara, and guhyatamam. What is that verse in the Eighteenth Chapter? Guhyād guhyatamaṁ pravakṣyāmi... That... The conclusion is that the most confidential knowledge is that which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly. And what it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā? Guhyād guhyatamam. Find out this verse. Could not? Before sarva-dharmān... Yes.

Nitāi:



iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ

guhyād guhyataraṁ mayā

vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa

yathecchasi tathā kuru

[Bg. 18.63]



Prabhupāda: Hm. Read the...



Nitāi: "Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge. Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do."



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa personally giving the most confidential knowledge. And here it is also mentioned that the saintly persons, the mahātmās, they simply spoke what was spoken by Kṛṣṇa Himself directly. That's all. Here it is stated, anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ, guhyatamam yat tat sākṣād bhagavato... This is very important statement. Jñānaṁ guhyatamam, the most confidential part of knowledge is that which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly. Anyone who is interested in spiritual knowledge, they will benefit simply by accepting what Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā. This is jñānam. That is also stated by Kṛṣṇa. Etaj jñānam. Etad anyathā yad ajñānam. Anything beyond this knowledge, what is spoken by Kṛṣṇa, that is ajñāna, ignorance. That is not jñāna.



Unfortunately, it has become a fashion now to interpret Bhagavad-gītā in their own foolish way and mislead the public. This I have repeatedly spoken in many places, that in the Western countries so many swamis and yogis, they went there. For the last, at least, one hundred years. One hundred years, from India many swamis and yogis had been... Still they are going. But they could not turn even a single person to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not a single person. Throughout the whole history of these hundred years of swamis going to the Western countries, but could not turn even a single soul to understand Kṛṣṇa. This is a fact. It is not that I am very proud. No. The truth must be spoken. Why they could not do so? The defect was that they did not say what Kṛṣṇa said directly. They said their own words. They manufactured their own philosophy.

Here the, I mean to..., saintly persons, the mahātmās, gamiṣyantaḥ, when they were going, they confidentially said what was spoken by Kṛṣṇa directly. This is the secret of success. Try to understand. Anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ kṛpayā dīna-vatsalāḥ. Guru, or mahātmā, they are very merciful, merciful in this way that they know how a person can be elevated to the topmost platform of knowledge, and they can give him. And this is not very difficult. It is said here that yat tat sākṣād bhagavatoditam. This is mercifulness. A guru's business is to deliver the same message as Kṛṣṇa said. Then he's dīna-vatsala. Otherwise, if he says something else, he's a cheater. He's not guru. He must be, to the suffering humanity, being kind upon them. Dīna-vatsala. Dīna means very poor, poor in knowledge. At the present moment, the... Not only at the present moment, always. Those who are in the material world, they are very, very poor. Very, very poor. Gṛhiṇāṁ dīna-cetasām. Because their mind is very crippled. They are thinking that this duration of life-say, fifty years or twenty years or utmost seventy, or hundred years-this is everything. That's all. Therefore they are very poor. Their expansion of knowledge is very, very meager. And it is the business of the saintly persons to be kind upon them, that "This is not the life. You are thinking, making adjustment to live for fifty years or hundred years very comfortably, or even next life..." Karmīs, they also take consideration of the next life, to be promoted in the heavenly planet or other higher planetary system. But still, they are poor. Poor. Because they are lacking in the knowledge of eternal life, full of knowledge and blissfulness. That they do not know. Sac-cid-ānanda life.

So it is the business of the mahātmā to enlighten them to the real platform of life. Kṛṣṇa says personally,

mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



This is real life, to go back to home, back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Mām upetya. If you go back to home, back to Godhead, that is saṁsiddhiṁ paramām. That is the highest perfection of life. But generally... Generally, almost... Why generally? Almost everyone. Ninety-nine point nine percent people, they want to become happy within this material world. Therefore they are poor, very, very poor. And the mahātmās, they give the knowledge that "This is not life. This is a temporary platform." Aśāśvatam, duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. This is confidential knowledge. You are trying to be happy... Suppose Brahmā. He lives for many millions of years. Still, it is duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. That life is also temporary. What is millions of years' duration of life in comparison to the eternal life? So beginning from Brahmā down to the small ant, whoever is within this material world, it is to be understood their understanding is very poor. And the mahātmā, being kind upon these poor souls, they deliver the same knowledge as Kṛṣṇa gives. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam.. [Bg. 18.66]. This is guru's business. Do not manufacture anything. There is no question of... There is no need of manufacturing anything. Simply you speak to the suffering humanity the same thing which Kṛṣṇa says. Sākṣād bhagavatā uditam. This is the business of guru. It is clearly said.



Now he'll explain further, in the next verses, how he became advanced. This verse is very important, that jñānaṁ guhyatamaṁ yat tat. Actually, perfect knowledge you can get from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and in paramparā system you get that knowledge. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Paramparā means they do not change the word of Kṛṣṇa. That is paramparā. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], and the paramparā system says the same thing. No change. They never said that "I have now become Kṛṣṇa and you surrender unto me, think of me." There are many so-called incarnations who are preaching like that: "You think of me." Same, repeating the same words in his own favor, not in Kṛṣṇa's favor. That is not mahātmā. That is durātmā. Mahātmā means who always speaks in Kṛṣṇa's favor. That is mahātmā. This is the purport of this verse. Jñānaṁ guhyatamaṁ yat tat sākṣād bhagava... Bhagavān says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66].

So our business should be to repeat the same thing, that "You give up all nonsense engagement. Simply surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Simply you think of Kṛṣṇa. Simply become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Simply offer obeisances to Kṛṣṇa. That will make your life successful." This is mahātmā's business. Sākṣād... Not indirectly. Directly. Directly... Here Kṛṣṇa says, guhyād guhyatamam. Read that verse again.

Nitāi:



iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ

guhyād guhyataraṁ mayā

vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa

yathecchasi tathā kuru

[Bg. 18.63]



Prabhupāda: Yathecchasi tathā... The word is used there, yathecchasi tathā kuru. We have got the little independence. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. But why people are not doing that? Because they have got little independence. Every living entity is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has got the quality of full independence. Naturally, the part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, it has also independence. But that is not absolute independence. Just like independent country. America, independent country. We are also now independent country. But the citizens, they have independence dependent on the state independence. Not absolute independence. Similarly, we have got independence. We living entities, we have got independence-but dependent on the independence of Kṛṣṇa. Not absolute independence. So... Therefore we become entangled in our own karma. Kṛṣṇa does not give anyone a position or karma. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, that He does not give anyone a better position or anyone an inferior position. Everyone creates his own position. Kṛṣṇa simply orders that "This is your position. Now you enjoy or suffer." We create our own position.



Therefore the most confidential part of knowledge is... Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is the guhyatamam. Jñānaṁ guhyatamam. The same thing, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā is the preliminary study of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. One who has understood Bhagavad-gītā properly, he can understand what is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Where Bhagavad-gītā ends? Bhagavad-gītā, teachings of Bhagavad-gītā ends at the point when Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], to surrender. And the Bhāgavata begins from that point. Janmādy asya yataḥ... [SB 1.1.1], satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi. Satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi. Surrender. Otherwise, in the next paragraph of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the beginning, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] "Except surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, there cannot be any religious system." The real religious system... Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is religion, to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, as it is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. All cheating type of religious system is kicked out from Bhagavad, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Kicked out, projjhita. To merge into the Supreme, to become God, to become incarnation of God-these kind of religious systems is very rigidly kicked out from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Because they are not religion. Real religion is to surrender to Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore it is said, yat tat sākṣād bhagavatā uditam. If you want to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then you must abide by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But they have no idea who is Supreme Personality of Godhead, what is His order, what is our relationship with Him. These things are unknown. It is simply known to the, I mean to say, devotees. Why it is monopolized by the devotees? That is also answered in the Bhagavad-gītā: bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa, then you have to go through this bhakti-mārga, or devotional... There is no other way. Kṛṣṇa never says that He can be known through speculation or cultivation of so-called speculative knowledge. No. Then He would have said "Through jñāna one can understand Me." No. Neither karma one can understand. Neither yoga. This is explained in many, various places of the śāstra. Only bhakti. Only bhakti. And it is the duty of the spiritual master, or mahātmā, to spread bhakti cult. That is the most confidential... That is the most merciful humanitarian activity.

Because people are suffering for want of this knowledge. Therefore our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the only movement-I can declare very proudly-which can actually do some benefit to the human society. It is the only movement. All other, bogus movements, I declare. Let them come and study the śāstras and decide for themselves. They're all cheating. Only this bhagavad-bhakti. Because you cannot understand Bhagavān without undergoing the process of devotional service. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know in truth, tattvataḥ... Kṛṣṇa wants that one should understand Him tattvataḥ. Not that superficially to take Kṛṣṇa, that "He was very fond of the gopīs, and let us hear the līlā of Kṛṣṇa." Why Kṛṣṇa's gopīs' līlā? Why not Kṛṣṇa's līlā killing the demons? That, the people are not interested, to hear about Kṛṣṇa's killing the demons. Because the gopīs' līlā, it appears to be the transaction between young woman and man, it very quickly appeals. But Kṛṣṇa's other business is there. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. That is also Kṛṣṇa's līlā. That is Kṛṣṇa's līlā. Just like Lord Rāmacandra is killing the Rāvaṇa. That is also Kṛṣṇa's līlā. Lord Rāmacandra's līlā and Kṛṣṇa's līlā, there is...

So we should take any līlā of Kṛṣṇa as Supreme. Not that simply the most confidential... The vṛndāvana-līlā, Kṛṣṇa's līlā with the gopīs, is the most confidential līlā. We should not entertain this confidential līlā unless we are liberated. It is very difficult subject. And because they cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa's līlā, they imitate, they fall down. There are so many things. We do not wish to discuss. But we should be... If we are actually serious about advancing in kṛṣṇa-līlā, then we must know first of all what is Kṛṣṇa, what He desires, and how we shall act. Then we can enter into the confidential part of Kṛṣṇa's līlā. Otherwise we shall misunderstand and fall down.

So the... Here it is said that sākṣād bhagavatoditam, uditam. That... What is Bhāgavata, Bhāgavata? Kṛṣṇa never says that "First of all you hear My līlā with the gopīs." He never says that. He first of all says that "You surrender unto Me." First of all learn how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. First of all learn how to love Kṛṣṇa. Then you can taste what is Kṛṣṇa's līlā with the gopīs. It is just like mukhāravinda. Just like... Kṛṣṇa's līlā in the Daśama-skandha with the gopīs is compared with Kṛṣṇa's face, smiling face. But we have to worship Kṛṣṇa beginning with the feet. Not immediately we shall look to the face of Kṛṣṇa. We shall misunderstand. First of all try to be Kṛṣṇa's devotee by offering your worshipable things at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. The First Canto or Second Canto of Bhagavad-gītā are the two lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. So from the very beginning we should hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Gradually, we shall come to the face. That is real understanding of Kṛṣṇa. And without understanding of the other nine cantos of Bhagavad-gītā, er, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, if we simply jump over the Tenth Canto, and especially to the Thirty-fifth Chapter, the five chapters, Rāsa-pañcādhyāya, this is not very favorable. Of course, it is favorable. Kṛṣṇa's līlā, you hear any way, this way or that way... But if we misunderstand Kṛṣṇa, then there is fall down. That is instructed by Śrī..., Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, that don't try to understand Kṛṣṇa's līlā all of a sudden without understanding Kṛṣṇa. Tattvataḥ. So regulative principle-to serve, as it is stated in the śāstras or as it is enjoined by the spiritual master.

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā

tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

[Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]



So dīna-vatsalāḥ. The mahātmās who instructed Nārada Muni that "Here is the confidential knowledge: Please fully surrender unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa." So Nārada Muni admits here, anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ. Gamiṣyantaḥ means the mahātmās were going. He served for four months. So they became very happy, they became very pleased. This is the business, how to make the mahātmā pleased. Yasya, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. If you try to please mahātmā, the spiritual master, then bhagavat-prasādaḥ will automatically come. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. So here it is said, anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ kṛpayā. Kṛpayā dīna-vatsalāḥ. Actually, Vaiṣṇava is dīna-vatsala. They are very unhappy. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja was unhappy seeing the people, degenerated people, suffering in this material world. Prahlāda Mahārāja said to Nṛsiṁhadeva, "My dear Sir, I have no problem. I am happy anywhere by chanting Your holy..., by glorifying Your activities. But I am simply morose seeing the fallen-down condition..." Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. "I am simply thinking of these rascals, whose, who, for flickering happiness, engage themselves in so many material activities, forgetting your relationship."



So dīna-vatsalāḥ, the sādhus, they should be very much compassionate to the suffering humanity and give them the message which is spoken directly by Kṛṣṇa, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam... [Bg. 18.66]. This is the mission of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



740812SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.31

-

Vṛndāvana, August 12, 1974



Prabhupāda: ...of this Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Simply they're searching after. They never say he rādhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ. "Oh, where is Rādhārāṇī? Where You are? Where are Your friends, Lalitā and Viśākhā? Where is Nanda, son of Mahārāja Nanda, Kṛṣṇa?" Śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ. "Where are You? Are You near the Govardhana Hill or in the forest on the bank of the Yamunā?" Ghoṣantāv iti khedair mahā-vihvalau. They are crying, "Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Rādhārāṇī? Where is...?" They're crying ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau. Mad... Mad after... Vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau. This is the process of kṛṣṇa-bhajana. Not that "I've seen just last night Kṛṣṇa dancing with the gopīs." It is not so easy.



Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved... [Brs. 1.2.234]. So long we are materialistic, it is impossible to see what is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we have to follow the path chalked out by Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His immediate disciples, the six Gosvāmīs. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was mad. In Jagannātha Purī at night He become mad, "Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?" He'd go on the seaside and drown Himself in the sea. And Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī could not see where is Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Sometimes He was stopped by the fisherman and He became exhaus..., all night chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Simply by touching Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very scientific, based on the philosophy given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and expanded by the Sanātana Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī and other assistants.

kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī

dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau pūjitau

śrī-caitanya-kṛpā...



The six Gosvāmīs directly got the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Therefore we have to understand this Vṛndāvana-dhāma through the Gosvāmīs. It is not that... Sometimes they say that we do not accept the Gosvām... (indistinct) We accept actually the Gosvāmīs. But following the footprints of Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, what kind of... Ei chay gosāi jāṅr mui tāṅr dās. One who is accepting the path of the six Gosvāmīs, we are servant of the servant of such persons [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. Ei chay gosāi jāṅr mui tāṅr dās. Rūpa-raghunātha-pade hoibe ākuti kabe hāma bujhabo se jugala-pīriti. Jugala-pirīti, the love affairs of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī. This is not ordinary thing. It is completely spiritual. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau, caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptam [Cc. Ādi 1.5]. Vande... That verse I am forgetting. This is the process. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtiḥ, it is not the affair of one young boy and young man. It is not that. It is the exhibition of the pleasure potency of Kṛṣṇa. Hlādinī śaktir asmāt, so it is completely spiritual. Do not try to understand Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa playing immediately. "Oh, because I have come to Vṛndāvana, let me understand immediately Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā." It is not so easy. You have to undergo severe penances. Not severe. It is very easy. But we do not like to take.



But the best thing is as Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, that

viṣaya chāṛiyā kabe śuddha ha'be mana

kabe hāma herabo śrī-bṛndābana



Viṣaya chāṛiyā, "so long I have got the propensity for sense gratification there is no possibility for understanding Vṛndāvana. There is no possibility." It is the statement of Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. He says viṣaya chāṛiyā kabe śuddha. Viṣaya means this āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunam. If you are still inclined for eating, sleeping and sex life, there is no possibility of understanding what is Vṛndāvana.



So these are the instructions. These are the confidential message given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His followers. That is yena. If you follow this yena gacchanti tat-padam, then you are sure going back to home, back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. And that is the highest perfection of life.

Thank you very much. (end)



740813SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.32

-

Vṛndāvana, August 13, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "O Brāhmaṇa Vyāsadeva, it is decided by the learned that the best remedial measure for removing all troubles and miseries is to dedicate one's activities to the service of the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]."



Prabhupāda:



etat saṁsūcitaṁ brahmaṁs

tāpa-traya-cikitsitam

yad īśvare bhagavati

karma brahmaṇi bhāvitam

[SB 1.5.32]



Now, in the last verse Nārada Muni says, yena gacchanti tat-padam: "by which one can go back to home, back to Godhead, tat-padam." Padam means abode or position. Position. That is, after liberation, one can get the spiritual position.



Sāyujya, sārūpya, sālokya, sārṣṭi, sāmīpya. There are different types of position, although they are all spiritual. The one is the sāyujya-mukti, or to become one with the Supreme, merge into the Supreme. This is one position. Another position: sārūpya, the same feature of the body. Just like Nārāyaṇa, four-handed. In the Vaikuṇṭha planets, the inhabitants, the citizens, they have got four hands. When Ajāmila was delivered by the Viṣṇudūtas, they appeared exactly looking like Viṣṇu. That is described. That is called sārūpya. Sārūpya, sārṣṭi [Cc. Madhya 6.266], same opulence. Or sāmīpya, always near, associate. There are five kinds of... Gacchanti tat-padam. But out of the five, the first one, namely to merge into the existence of the Supreme, that is very dangerous, not safe.

Therefore Vaiṣṇava never accepts sāyujya-mukti, to become one with the Supreme. Because Vaiṣṇava knows that impersonal advancement is risky. They know it perfectly. Therefore a Vaiṣṇava never... Vaiṣṇava is not anxious for any kind of mukti. Dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti. They don't want... Especially Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, they don't want mukti. They are happy wherever they are existing. If they get the chance of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, that is perfection of life. They don't want anything more. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. We should not imitate, but the position is like that. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. He was not at all afraid of this material world. He was very cautious. A spiritualist, a devotee, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, should be very cautious. But not afraid to meet any dangerous position. But must be cautious. Cautious in this way, that he may not fall down again under the clutches of māyā. This should be, care should be taken.

If we fix up our mind... Mām eva ye prapadyante. If we fix up our śaraṇāgati, surrender to the Supreme, then there is no question of falling down. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura was tested once by Māyā, and in another time he was tested by a prostitute to allure him... He was young man. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was very beautiful young man. So under diplomacy of Rāmacandra Khān he was to be entrapped. You know the story. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. But Haridāsa Ṭhākura was not entrapped, because he was strong, strong enough. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti. Māyā could not do anything. Although Māyā came there at dead of night, very beautiful, attractive dress, attractive feature, attractive words-this is māyā-so he was not allured. The... Rather, the veśyā, or the prostitute, became converted into a Vaiṣṇavī.

That is the resultant action. If one is polluted, if he comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa's pure devotee, he or she will be purified. Kṛṣṇa is never allured, neither Kṛṣṇa is become a victim of anything material. Kṛṣṇa's position is different. That is stated in the Īśopaniṣad. Apāpa-viddham. Kṛṣṇa is never afflicted by any kind of contamination. He is pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-muktaḥ. Similarly, those who are advanced devotees, they are not allured. But the result is that one who comes to allure a devotee or one who comes to allure Kṛṣṇa, he or she becomes purified. He or she. Kamāt krodhād bhayāt. Some way or other, if one comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa, then he becomes purified. Tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya [SB 10.33.29]. Apparently, it appears that Kṛṣṇa is dancing with the young girls at dead of night. But it is not that Kṛṣṇa is contaminated. They become purified. On the... Actually, they are eternal associates of Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs. They are not ordinary women. There are all description in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. They were dancing in their spiritual body, not in the material body. They were dancing in their spiritual body. Their material body was lying down with their husband. These are, these descriptions are there in the Bhāgavatam. So gopīs' līlā is not material. So there was no question of contamination. But materially this kind of activities, to dance at dead of night with young girl, that is not permitted. With other's wife. You can dance with your own wife, but you cannot do that. That is sinful.

So the real business is, as Nārada Muni says, māyānubhāvam, anubhāvam avidam. One should know what is māyā. Yena, after complete knowledge of māyā and Kṛṣṇa, yena gacchanti tat-padam, then one is promoted to the spiritual world. But the promotion... I have already described, there are five kinds of promotion, elevation. Out of that, the one promotion, namely to merge into the existence of the Supreme, that is very dangerous. Dangerous means that is risk of falling down. Because it is not possible to merge into the personal body of Kṛṣṇa. Or you can take the bodily effulgence or the rays of the body. Everything is absolute. (aside:) Who is talking? So merge into the Brahman effulgence, that is also Kṛṣṇa's bodily rays. Yasya prabhā [Bs. 5.40]. So we are a small particle. So we, we merge into the Brahman effulgence. Brahman effulgence means collection of so many Brahmans together. That is Brahman effulgence. Unlimited number. Anantyāya kalpate. We are a small particle. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca [Cc. Madhya 19.140]. One ten-thousandth part, a small particle. Just like the sunshine, it is a combination of bright molecules of sunshine. Is not that?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes, they are called photons.



Prabhupāda: Protons?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: No, photons.



Prabhupāda: Photons. We have got name. But this is al... We know. Kaṇa, kaṇa, a small particle. So when they are put together, it appears homogeneous. But they are not homogeneous. They keep their individuality. They keep their individuality.



So that is eternal. That's a fact. But we are not only eternal... Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and His bodily effulgence, that is only eternal part. Sat means eternal, cit means knowledge, and ānanda. So these three things are required. Simply eternity is not good. There must be knowledge and ānanda. So this monist theory, Advaitavāda, eternity, that may be achieved. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa, by severe penances and austerities, they can be attained. But patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. That is the statement of Bhāgavata. They again fall down. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. They could not get the information of the shelter of Kṛṣṇa, lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Without taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa, they fall down again. Patanty adhaḥ. Again.

We have explained many times. There are many Māyāvādīs, they merge, they give up this world, but again fall down, in so many ways. We have several times explained. So that is not very safe. (howling sound in background) What is that?

Devotee: Some dog.



Prabhupāda: Dog friend? Hm. So Nārada Muni, by the grace of the mahātmās, he could understand that this material position is very dangerous, and... Dangerous means duḥkhālayam, always miserable condition. But one cannot understand. Unless he's Kṛṣṇa conscious, he cannot understand what is the miserable condition of this material world. He cannot understand. This is māyā. He's suffering, but he's thinking, "I am happy." This is called māyā.



So when one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious by the grace of the Supreme Personality, guru-kṛṣṇa, by the grace of guru and Kṛṣṇa, then he understands that this place, this material world, is full of miseries. Then brahma-jijñāsā. But foolishly people do not understand that it is a miserable condition. Sanātana Gosvāmī, he was minister. By contact with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu he could understand that "Although I am minister, although I am holding very high, exalted position, I am learned scholar in Sanskrit, Urdu, Parsi, but I am not happy." Therefore he approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa... He understands that "I am in the suffering." Suffering, everyone can understand. Why you are moving the fan? I am in suffering. But foolish people cannot understand. They think that I am enjoying. (laughter) Just see the example. Why I am moving the fan? Because I am suffering. Every step. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. Every step danger, every step suffering.

But on being illusioned, moha... It is called moha. Janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. "I am this. I am brāhmaṇa." "I am kṣatriya. I am American." Aham. False identification. "I am very strong, beautiful." "I am very ugly." "I am poor." "I am rich." Janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. But you are none of these. You are simply servant of Kṛṣṇa. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. This is happiness. Otherwise, in whichever way you identify... When they fail to identify with all this nonsense, then "I am God. I am Nārāyaṇa." This will not help. When one will understand that "I am servant, eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa..." This question was put by Sanātana Gosvāmī: ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya.

But foolish people, they do not understand what is tāpa-traya, although we are suffering, everyone. This is tāpa-traya. Just like we are feeling very warm. This is one of the traya. It is called adhidaivika. You cannot check it. Similarly, when you will feel severe cold, you will wrap, you'll go to the fireplace. That is another suffering. So either in warmth or in, I mean to say, winter, you are suffering. Everyone is suffering. Suffering is there. Even when we are within the womb of the mother there is suffering. For ten months, packed-up condition. That is suffering. Then come out from the womb of the mother-suffering. In the womb also there is suffering. Not only packed-up, but there are worms with the stool and urine of the mother, and they find very delicate skin. They enjoy by cutting him. The worms enjoy. Naturally, he's... He cannot move. Therefore at the seventh month, when he's little conscious, he feels, "How can I get out of...? Kṛṣṇa, save me." If one is little pious, he prays to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, this time save me. Now I shall begin worshiping You so that get out of this entanglement of birth and death, birth and death." He becomes conscious.

But as soon as he comes out, then, māyā is there. Māyā is there, and there is father, there is mother, nice child. Now the child thinks, "I am very happy. I have got such a nice father. Nice father, nice mother. And other friends, they are taking..." This, these are described by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in a song. What is that song? Who can say? Janama haila...?

Indian devotee: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: No, no, that after...



Indian devotee: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Ah! So in this way māyā is always entrapping him. We are always suffering three kinds of suffering-adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika-and we think, "Now we are very happy. Now we have got this electric fan, or air-conditioned room. So Yamarāja will not be able to enter, and I am secure. I have got good bank balance and good wife, good children..." No, no, no. This is illusion. Na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ [SB 5.5.4]. So long you will possess this material body, so you'll have to suffer. That is described here, tāpa-traya. Tāpa means miseries, and traya means three. So cikitsitam. A sane man, when he's suffering, he goes to the doctor, physician: "Sir, I am suffering from disease. Give me some medicine." So he takes medicine. That is sane man. And insane man, he does not go to the physician for treatment. He thinks, "This is natural. What is that?" This is the difference between foolish man and sane man.



The Vedas, therefore, instruct that tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. One who is actually human being... Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sanātana Gosvāmī, even up to the position of his ministership, he was not on the standard of human being. When he approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu and submitted, "Sir, I have come to You to know what I am, why I am suffering in this threefold miserable condition of life," that is human life. That is the beginning. Before that, it is animal life. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. When one is inquisitive about himself, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "Why I am suffering?"... Ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya.

So that realization is here. Therefore Nārada Muni says, tāpa-traya-cikitsitam. Cikitsitam means treatment. By the grace of guru, he could understand that "I am in this condition, material condition, means suffering from threefold types of miseries, and I am uselessly wasting time for material comforts, for economic development." Śrama eva hi kevalam. "Even I act as a perfect brāhmaṇa or as a perfect kṣatriya or a perfect vaiśya or śūdra, still, I am wasting time. Still, I am wasting time." How? That is confirmed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



Dharma... Dharma means own dharma, brāhmaṇa's dharma, kṣatriya's dharma, vaiśya's dharma. There are different occupational duties. Do it. But side by side, you should test "Whether I am going to be perfect?" That is required.



That perfection, how it is made perfect? That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Sa... What is that? Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. What is that verse? Dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ, svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. Svanuṣṭhitasya... Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. This is the word by Śukadeva Gosvā..., Sūta Gosvāmī. "You are all learned brāhmaṇas..." Dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Dvija means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya. But śreṣṭhāḥ means brāhmaṇas. They have got... Brāhmaṇas, they are interested for spiritual advancement of life. Kṣatriyas are not so much interested, neither the vaiśyas, and what to speak of the śūdras. And in the Kali-yuga almost everyone is a śūdra. It is very difficult to find... So how they can be interested? Therefore training should be given how to become brāhmaṇa. Then he'll be interested. Otherwise, nobody is interested.

Therefore it is addressed, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ, "O the best of the dvijas, twice-born." Varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. There is division, varṇāśrama. Varṇa and āśrama. Varṇa means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and āśrama means brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So for the brāhmaṇa, one who is brāhmaṇa, for him, the four āśramas are recommended. One... First of all he must become brahmacārī, a brāhmaṇa, son of a brāhmaṇa. Then, when he's fully trained up, he should become a gṛhastha. Not should, but if he likes. Then... Otherwise, sometimes you will find naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī. Never... Just like my Guru Mahārāja was. He never married. Naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī. So brahmacārī, gṛhastha, then not to stuck up with the family affairs up to the end of death. No. At a certain stage, after fifty years, he must give up. That is called vānaprastha. And then, after being trained up in vānaprastha very nicely, he takes sannyāsa. This is brāhmaṇa's..., four āśrama. And for the kṣatriya, up to vānaprastha. Up to vānaprastha. Just like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and all the brothers, they left home, but the wife was there. That is called vānaprastha. They did not take sannyāsa. Kṣatriya. Up to vānaprastha. Vaiśyas. No vānaprastha, no sannyāsa. Up to gṛhastha. Brahmacārī... Brahmacārī is compulsory for the dvija. Because there is the training. And for the śūdra there is no brahmacārī. Only gṛhastha, married. Otherwise, life will be very irregular. So in this way varṇāśrama. So there are duties.

Therefore it is said, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. So you may be staying in any āśrama or any varṇa, it does not matter. But you should see whether your life is perfect. If you don't see... Otherwise, śrama eva hi kevalam. If you don't see, "How my life is being perfected," then... Dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ, notpādayet... [SB 1.2.8]. If he does not awaken his dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then śrama eva hi kevalam. Simply. Simply waste of time. But if he develops Kṛṣṇa consciousness and he learns how to serve Kṛṣṇa, how to please Kṛṣṇa, that is perfect. That he understood... Etat saṁsūcitaṁ brahmaṁs tāpa-traya-cikitsitam. This is the cikitsā, treatment, of tāpa... If you want to get relief from this material condition of life, then you should learn how to please Kṛṣṇa, how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is called bhakti. Without bhakti, you cannot be relieved. Jñāna, karma, yoga will not get you released from this tāpa-traya. And if you execute devotional service, then immediately, immediately you become free from this tāpa-traya.

Susukhaṁ kartum avyayam [Bg. 9.2]. Kṛṣṇa says. It is so nice. Devotional service is so nice that susukhaṁ kartum avyayam, it is very pleasing to transact. And avyayam. And whatever you do, that is your permanent asset. Susukhaṁ kartum avyayam. How it is susukham? Why we have been constructing this big temple? Just to give you happiness. What is that happiness? You take prasādam, nice prasādam. Don't take more, otherwise you'll sleep more. But as much as you require. Yāvat artha, prayojanam. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and go to, back to home, back to Godhead. Is it not susukham? Otherwise you'll have to work like an ass day and night simply for sex life. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. So sex life we also allow, but not illegitimate, not illicit. But that is not required. As you advance, you'll give it up. But so long you are not advanced, oh, there is... [break] ...according to regulation, even your gṛhastha does not have. But this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, taking prasādam and work for Kṛṣṇa... That is recommended here: karma brahmaṇi bhāvitam. Brahmaṇi bhāvitam. Only for satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, you work, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, take prasādam. So bhakti-yoga... You un... Try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Then? What will be the result? Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Immediately.

So everyone should be alert to treat this miserable condition of material life, tāpa-traya. Tāpa-traya unmūlanam. One has to uproot this tree of tāpa-traya. That is perfection of life. Here Nārada Muni realizing that tāpa-traya-cikitsitam. Not unmūlanam. Unmūlanam means when we are liberated. That is unmūlanam. But why... So long we are not liberated, the cikitsā. The cikitsā. In another place Parīkṣit Mahārāja says, bhavauṣadhi. Bhavauṣadhi, the medicine for this disease of repetition of birth and death. So this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is the bhavauṣadhi. Some way or other you have got it, and you are chanting. Go on, continuously. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. This is the easiest process of tāpa-trayonmūlanam or tāpa-traya-cikitsitam, and that is required in human life. Don't forget this principle. Continue this principle. And even there is little inconvenience, don't give up the association of devotees. Because... Rūpa Gosvāmī says... What is that?

utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt

tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ

ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati

[Upadeśāmṛta 3]



Sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Don't give up the company of devotees. Then it will be lost. We are opening so many centers because to cooperate between devotees and devotees. Even there is inconvenience, don't give up the company of the devotees. Even I am not devotee, with the company of the devotees, working with devotees, I become devotee. Association has got such power.



So our business is how to get out of this tāpa-traya. That is first-class civilization. Otherwise hackneyed. Again and again, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. That is not. Now, those who are thinking of worshiping other demigods, that is not recommended. That is not recommended because Kṛṣṇa clearly says, kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Even there are some inconveniences, Kṛṣṇa is completely able to remove your inconvenience. Kṛṣṇa assures, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. So we should stick to the position of devotional service, execute regularly the orders of the spiritual master and the śāstra, and try to understand Kṛṣṇa. And you can understand Kṛṣṇa only by service. There is no other way. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. If you want to see Kṛṣṇa or want to understand Kṛṣṇa, then it can be possible only by your service, nothing else.

So the best service, as recommended by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is this preaching work. Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-kathā, kṛṣṇa-kathā. Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. That's all. This is preaching. Doesn't require any good academic qualification. You have got your tongue. You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and whomever you meet, you ask him, "You become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa." That's all. In this way preach and live very nicely by eating kṛṣṇa-prasāda, chanting, dancing, and then get a life like Nārada Muni. This is the formula.

Thank you very much. (end)



740814SB.VRN



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.33

-

Vṛndāvana, August 14, 1974



Prabhupāda:



āmayo yaś ca bhūtānāṁ

jāyate yena suvrata

tad eva hy āmayaṁ dravyaṁ

na punāti cikitsitam

[SB 1.5.33]



Is very important verse. Actually, this is the essence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. What is that? People become diseased by sense gratification. Everyone knows. Too much sense gratification means creating disease. For example, some nice eatable. But if you, because it is very nice rasagullā, therefore I shall devour one dozen, that's not very good. That will create indigestion immediately. So in this material world, people are so much enthusiastic in the matter of sense gratification. Whole world. Not only now, this is the place for competition of sense gratification. Advancement of civilization means, the so-called civilization, material civ..., means how much you are able to gratify your senses. That is civilization. How much you are given facilities to gratify your senses. This is the modern idea, hedonism. More eat, more drink-eat, drink, be merry, and enjoy. Sense gratification.

This is not only new. Formerly the Carvaka Muni, he also advocated, ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet. In India, they want to eat very nice foodstuff prepared from ghee. So he advised that ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet: if you have no money, then beg, borrow, or steal, get ghee and eat very nice. Ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā, the word is... Suppose one has no money, then how to get money? Either cheat somebody, beg, or beg. But begging for gṛhastha is not very good thing, but sometimes they do so. Beg, borrow, or promising, "Give me now money, I shall pay you." And when credit is lost, then steal, pickpocket. This is as theory. Similarly, Carvaka Muni, ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet, never mind. "No, I will have to pay." "No, that we shall see later on, never mind." "No, I will be sinful, I will have to pay next life." This is within the blood of every Indian that if I cheat you or if I take some money from you without your benefit, without repayment, then I will have to suffer. Still in India they believe this. There are some incidences that a man, father took some loan from some gentleman and his father died, and his son came to pay the money to the creditor: "Sir, my father took so much money from you. Now my father died without payment. So I have got money, you kindly take it." He says, "Let me see my book whether your father took it." So he said, "All right, consult." So after consulting the books, he said, "I don't find any item that I gave loan to your father." "No, sir, I know, my father said at the time of death that 'I owe so much money to that gentleman, I could not pay; you pay it.'" So the trouble was the man says "I don't find any debit to your father's name. How can I take your money?" And he is insisting, "Yes, my father took money from you, kindly take." This was India. This was India. They knew that "I cannot cheat you." Karmī, in the karma-kāṇḍa, if I cheat you, then I will have to pay you four times this life or next life. That is the law of karma. Therefore, we are collecting money, we should not cheat. Every paisa should be spent for Kṛṣṇa; otherwise we shall be liable to pay. If we use one farthing for our sense gratification, then we will have to pay for it. This is the law of karma. The charity is given, why? Why charity is given to the brāhmaṇa? Nowadays they have manufactured charity to the daridra-nārāyaṇa, poor man, gāñjā smoker, bidi smoker. But in the śāstra, it is not. Śāstra says tasmin deha, those who are devotee, those who are brāhmaṇa, they should be given, he should be given, he should accept. Why? Because if a brāhmaṇa takes some money from you, if a Vaiṣṇava takes money from you, he everything will employ in the service of the Lord. This is utilization.

So at the present moment, people are becoming more and more poor, and they are simply educated to gratify senses. So the whole world becoming chaotic, diseased condition. Even in the topmost level, the President of United States, he was also caught dealing very unfavorably, and he was forced to resign. And what to speak of others? He is not a poor man, he is not uneducated, the topmost man, elected President of USA, but there is cheating even there, just see. And what to speak of others? Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhaḥ [Bg. 3.21], in the Bhagavad-gītā it is, tat tad eva itaraḥ janaḥ, sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute lokas tad anuvartate. If a person, president, cheats his countrymen somehow or other, and why not others? They will also do that. "Oh, president does it. What I am? What can I know?" In this way, the more we are inclined to sense gratification, the more we are becoming sinful. And more we are becoming sinful, the more we must suffer. That is the law of nature. Āmayo yaś ca bhūtānāṁ jāyate yena suvrata.

So by this karma... vikarma rather. Karma means when you act according to the śāstra, that is called karma. Lawful activities. The lawful activities is very good. But unlawful activities, you are punishable. So the business of sense gratification is unlawful activities. You cannot gratify your senses more than necessity. Everywhere that is the stringent laws of nature. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. You cannot surpass it. Duratyayā. If you surpass, then you will be punished. There is simultaneous law of nature. The example is that you can eat, say, four ounce or eight ounce foodstuff. If you eat ten ounce, then there will be suffering, indigestion, you cannot eat, there will be dysentery, so many things. That is nature's law. So people are becoming entangled in karma. Yajña sa karma, one should work for Yajña, for Kṛṣṇa. But they are not doing that. They are doing for sense gratification. Ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇā. Bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpaṁ ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt [Bg. 3.13]. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. If you live only for sense gratification, then you become entangled in the law of karma.

So here it is suggested that āmayo yaś ca bhūtānāṁ. In the previous verse Nārada said, karma brahmaṇi bhāvitam. Karma, your activities, should be dovetailed in the matter of satisfying the Supreme Lord. That is the way of devotional service. But how karma can be engaged, that is prescribed in this verse, that āmayo yaś ca bhūtānāṁ jāyate yena suvrata. You get disease. Suppose you have taken too much milk and you become diseased, dysentery, could not digest; have taken too much sweet rice or rabri, so there is dysentery. That must be there. Too much eating will cause. So āmayaḥ, āmayaḥ means mucus or disease. So there is mucus, yaś ca bhūtānāṁ, due to eating too much milk preparation. Tad eva hy āmayaṁ dravyaṁ na punāti cikitsitam. So cannot be cure it even by that milk preparation. The same milk preparation which has caused your mucus, disease, it can be cured by the same milk preparation, cikitsitam, but it should be medically treated. The same milk. The milk is the cause of your dysentery, but the same milk, when it is medically treated, can cure it. This is the secret. How? One milk preparation. Milk is the origin. Rabri, you take too much and there is dysentery. And cikitsitam, the same milk converted into yogurt, add little black pepper, little salt and lime, it will cure. The origin is the milk. So one way you become diseased and the other way you become cured, but the preparation is the same-milk. Similarly, our activities in this material world with these material elements, when we violate the laws, we become entangled. But the same material activities, when it is turned into Kṛṣṇa prasādam, dovetailed with Kṛṣṇa for hearing and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, what we are doing? We are also doing the same thing. Here is the temple. What is this temple? The same ingredients, the same cement, same brick, same stone, same worker, same plan as the skyscraper. But what is the difference? Because it is cikitsitam, it is for Kṛṣṇa. You spoil your energy by the same purchase of cement, bricks, and other things for sense gratification-a theater hall, a dancing hall. The same energy spent for dancing for Kṛṣṇa, the same hall, you become liberated. By one dancing hall you go to hell, and by another dancing hall you become liberated. This is the secret.

So people have got the tendency for sense gratification. That is the material disease. So instead of satisfying your senses, try to satisfy the senses of Kṛṣṇa. Then you become liberated. This is called cikitsitam. There is sense gratification. Here when you chant and dance, this is not your sense gratification; this is Kṛṣṇa's sense gratification: "Oh, these devotees, they are glorifying Me, they are dancing. Blessed they are." Immediately you draw attention of Kṛṣṇa, because it is bhakti.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ...

[SB 7.5.23]



Bhāgavaty tan manye adhītam, this is the best thing. The Māyāvādī, they do not know this. They simply stop dancing. They do not know that this ball dancing may lead one to hell, but the chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is not like that. They do not know it. They simply take the negative side: stop dancing. We say "No. No stop it. We shall dance for Kṛṣṇa, we shall eat for Kṛṣṇa, we shall print books for Kṛṣṇa, not newspaper. We shall secure money for printing for Kṛṣṇa." The same thing, the same printing, same working, same dancing, same eating, but for Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Simply you have to change the, what is called, interest. Everyone is acting for self interest, but bhakti-mārga, devotional service of Kṛṣṇa's interest, that is real interest. Same example. If somebody is working hard securing foodstuff, for whose interest? He is walking, the leg is walking, the hand is collecting, the eyes are seeing, and so many things they are done. Now what is to be done now? Do everything, cook everything nicely, and put it into the stomach. Not that the leg will say, "I have worked so hard," the hand will say, "I shall eat." No. You cannot eat. The stomach will eat; you simply work. But if the stomach is allowed to eat, then automatically the hands and legs will be happy.

So this is cikitsitam. Don't work for sense gratification or personal interest. Real interest is how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is real interest. But they do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Everyone is, "I have got my interest." But you do not know what is your interest. Your interest is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. But the rascals, they do not know. They say, "Why Kṛṣṇa? Myself, I shall enjoy everything." This is karma and bhakti. When karma... Karmī means they are working for their so-called interest, and bhakti means they are working for Kṛṣṇa's interest. They..., superficially, the activities are the same. Same means superficially, not in essence. So our senses are so trained up that we want to satisfy the senses. Now these devotional activities means instead of satisfying my personal senses, if we want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa's senses, this method is called bhakti. So the activities of the senses should not be stopped, it should be repaired or reformed. That is cikitsitam, "properly treated." Cikitsitam, this is the word. Cikitsitam means properly treated, under the direction of physician. The physician is guru, and guru's business is to instruct the disciple, "My dear son, you do not work for your so-called sense gratification, you try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa's senses, then your life is perfect. This is the physician's duty, and this is the patient's duty. Cikitsitam. Cikitsitam is purification. You have got disease, purify yourself.

So this process, this changing of, transformation... To work for Kṛṣṇa's sense gratification and to work for one's own sense gratification, this transformation change, this changing process, is called bhakti. Process is the same, simply account should be changed. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Everyone is working, daridra-nārāyaṇa sevā or this community sevā, the country sevā, nationally sevā, this sevā, that sevā ... Nobody is for Kṛṣṇa sevā. Nobody will be happy, sir. Go on with your so-called sevā. It will never be successful. You will be more and more entangled in diseased condition. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur deha upapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. Simply by your so-called activities you will be entangled in the law of karma. And according to your karma, you will get a different type of body and you will live for some time, again you will die, again you will get body, again you will... And you do not know what kind of body you are going to get. This is the entanglement. Yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. So if we want to be free from the entanglement of this karma, then we must work for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Yajña, Yajñabhuja, Viṣṇu. Yajñārthāt karmaṇaḥ. This is the cikitsitam. The material activities you are becoming entangled, and you are becoming more and more diseased. So you should be treated. How? The same thing. Milk is... Rabri is also milk preparation and dahi is also milk preparation. So you are becoming diseased by this process. Now you take this process, you will be cured. Then you will be happy. Therefore it is said, tad eva hy āmayaṁ dravyaṁ na punāti cikitsitam. Cikitsitam. We should handle everything material properly treated, properly treated. Not to work for anyone. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us lesson that you are jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Every living entity is eternally the servant of Kṛṣṇa. So instead of becoming servant of your senses, just try to become the servant of Kṛṣṇa, then your life will be successful.

Thank you very much. (end)





740816SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.35

-

Vṛndāvana, August 16, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "Whatever work is done here in this life for the satisfaction for the mission of the Lord is called bhakti-yoga, or transcendental loving service of the Lord. And what is called knowledge becomes a concomitant factor."



Prabhupāda:



yad atra kriyate karma

bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam

jñānaṁ yat tad adhīnaṁ hi

bhakti-yoga-samanvitam

[SB 1.5.35]



A similar passage is there, saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ.



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



Similar. Bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam. Bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam or hari-toṣaṇam, the same thing.



So first of all we must know what is bhagavat, or Hari, then we may try to satisfy Him. Unfortunately, we do not know what is God. Where is the question of satisfying Him? This is the... At the present moment, vague idea, what is God; practically no idea. What is their God? "God is good." They... Sometimes they say, "God is great," but what is that God, how great He is, how He is good, nobody knows. So where is the question of hari-toṣaṇam? If I do not know... Somebody says that "You go and satisfy Mr. such and such, Mr. John." So I do not know who is Mr. John, where does he live, what does he do, then how can I satisfy him? This is the position.

So hari-toṣaṇam or bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam can be possible when we actually know what is God. Otherwise there is no question. So, so far we are concerned, Kṛṣṇa conscious devotees, we know who is God. Therefore this business is possible by us, not by others. We know what is God. We have no vague idea. We know who is God, where does He live, what does He do, His name, address, His father's name-everything we know. Therefore we can satisfy. We are competent to satisfy because we know exactly who is God. That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. How do you know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Yes, by history, by authority, by His action, everything complete. We know historical, from historical point of view, Kṛṣṇa is there in the Mahābhārata. Mahābhārata means "The history of great India." Mahā means great. So greater India. Greater India, this is history. Itihāsa. Itihāsa means history. So there is Kṛṣṇa, in the itihāsa, in the history. In the Vedas also, there is name of Kṛṣṇa. In the Yajur Veda, there is name of Kṛṣṇa and His father's name, Vasudeva. Everything is there. And besides that, Kṛṣṇa appeared as He is five thousand years ago and He acted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So where is the difficulty to understand Kṛṣṇa?

Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47)-everything complied. Kṛṣṇa, the richest personality, the most beautiful personality, the most wise. He has given the Bhagavad-gītā. Apart from other instructions, the Bhagavad-gītā is there. Who has given such wise instruction throughout the whole world, throughout the whole universe? Nobody has given. God means the wisest, the richest, the most powerful, the most beautiful. So He was so beautiful that 16,108 very, very beautiful women... And this is married. And unmarried, many millions, they were attracted by Kṛṣṇa, the most beautiful. Śyāmasundara. His name is sundara, very beautiful. Although śyāma, blackish, still He's so attractive. Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobham [Bs. 5.30]. Kandarpa-koṭi, He's so beautiful that He can surpass in His beauty the Cupids, millions and millions of Cupids. His name is Madana-mohana. Madana-mohana, Madana is Cupid. Cupid enchants everyone, but he is enchanted by Kṛṣṇa. Therefore His name is Madana-mohana.

So bhagavat-toṣaṇam, we must know first of all who is God, who is Bhagavān. So śāstra says, authority says, and history says. What more proof you want? Huh? What more proof? Is there anyone to challenge Kṛṣṇa? Everything is there. Still, why you are searching after God? This is foolishness. This is foolishness. Owls', owls' philosophy. Owls' philosophy... The owl will not open the eyes to see the sun. Just open your eyes, you see, here is sun. "No, there is no sun." This is owls' philosophy. Close the eyes, meditate. And the God is here, "No, I'll not open my eyes."

So we do not follow this philosophy, owls' philosophy. We follow real philosophy. What is that real philosophy? Śruti-pramāṇam, evidence from the Vedas, history, aitihya-pramāṇa, history. And anumāna-pramāṇa. There are many, pratyakṣa, anumāna, aitihya... So out of that, there are so many evidential processes, but according to followers of the Vedic principle, their process is śruti-pramāṇam. Śruti-pramāṇam means if it is mentioned in the Vedas, Upaniṣad, then it is pramāṇam. Śruti-pramāṇam. So Vedas, there are four Vedas and 108 Upaniṣads, and then eighteen Purāṇas, then this Mahābhārata. So all these are Vedic literatures. Śrīmad Madhvācārya describes them, these are Vedic literatures. Not only the four Vedas-Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg, Atharva-but expansion of Vedas. Purāṇas, they are also Vedas. So in the Purāṇa, in the history, in the Vedas, by the authorities.

Just like Brahmā, the best authority because he is the first living being created within the universe. Ādi-puruṣa. Not ādi-puruṣa; ādi-kavi. Ādi-puruṣa is Kṛṣṇa. Brahmā is ādi-kavi, the original learned scholar. So our theory of creation means first of all Brahmā is created. So Brahmā is called ādi-kavi. Tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. Ādi-kavaye means Brahmā. So Brahmā's knowledge, what does he say? Brahmā says govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Brahmā says Govinda, Kṛṣṇa. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. He's giving description about Kṛṣṇa in the Brahma-saṁhitā. And the description of Kṛṣṇa's abode. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. Everything is there. This is authority, śruti. Kṛṣṇa is very much fond of tending cows. Surabhīr abhipālayantam. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu. He has got His abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana, where the residential houses are made of cintāmaṇi, touchstone. Touchstone, we have heard the description. Touchstone means the stone which you touch to the iron and the iron becomes gold. So such touchstone, they're used as brick. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu [Bs. 5.29].

And kalpa-vṛkṣa. This is Kṛṣṇa's abode. They are not like this. They are all spiritual. Here it is, everything is material, but there is spiritual touch. That spiritual touch we are describing in the Bhagavad-gītā, bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg 7.10]. Without spiritual touch, there is no question of material manifestation. That is not possible. This body, your body, my body, this is material-everyone knows. It is made of earth, air, water, fire, like that. But how it is manifested? How the beautiful body is manifested? Because there is spiritual touch. The spirit soul is there. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā tathā... [Bg. 2.13]. This external body is changing, but it is forming on account of that spiritual touch. That spiritual touch means Kṛṣṇa. Bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām. So therefore the origin of everything is Kṛṣṇa. Just like the origin of a big tree is the root. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the ādi-puruṣam. Govindam ādi-puruṣam, sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]. Just like in the tree there are trunk, branches, twigs, sub-branches, leaves, flowers, so many things. But the cause is the root.

So here it is said that hari-toṣaṇam. Bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam. The root must be satisfied. If you want to maintain the tree, then the root or the original cause of the tree should be satisfied. Then everything is satisfied. So here in this material world they are trying to be happy, but they do not know how to become happy. They are put into the ocean of nescience. May be very expert swimmer, but simply swimming will not save you. You must know how to save. So here it is said, yad atra kriyate karma. Everyone is doing something. Vaidikī laukikī vā. There are two kinds of karmas. Vaidikī means according to the Vedic rituals. Performance of big, big sacrifices and so many other, that is called vaidikī. And laukikī... Just like we have got good experience nowadays. There are so many activities, factories, mills, and scientific research work, so many. This is laukikī. So Kṛṣṇa does not say... Yes. The Sūta Gosvāmī does not say that simply by vaidikī activities, big, big ritualistic ceremonies, you can be happy. You can be happy even by laukikī. Laukikī mean these material activities. Generally, people understand, big, big factories nowadays, or agriculture or anything, there are laukikī. Laukikī means for maintenance of the body. So Nārada Muni recommends that yad atra, anything you are doing, kriyate. Atra means in this material world, atra. Yad atra kriyate karma bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam. It doesn't matter that you do not understand these Vedic rituals, but you want to develop the economic position of your country by industrial enterprises. Yes, that is also good. That is also good. How? Bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam. If it is conducted for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, then it is good.

So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement does not say you stop anything. No. Whatever you have got liking, you can do, but bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam. By your work you try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. This is our proposal. We do not say the negative, stop. No. And it is confirmed in the śāstras, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ... Generally, according to Vedic principle, there are four division of karma. Not four; eight division. According to varṇa and āśrama. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. The division of work must be there; otherwise the society cannot go on very nicely. If everyone is brāhmaṇa, not interested in anything material or simply... Because it is, after all, material world, if everyone becomes brāhmaṇa, now it will not go. There must be others. Kṣatriyas means the statesman, protector, politician, diplomat, kṣatriyas. And there must be vaiśyas also, productive class of men. They must produce. Economic development, that is also required. Otherwise, how human society will go on? Not only intelligent class of men-the protector class of men, the productive class of men, and the worker class of men. Suppose you are constructing this temple. If we devotees remain Hare Kṛṣṇa, then who will construct this temple? Everything is required. We do not say that "Stop this" or "Stop that." No.

So that division, different division, is scientifically made in the Vedic conception of life, varṇāśrama. Four varṇas and four āśramas. Āśrama for spiritual advancement and varṇas for material advancement. So we want both of them because our life is combination of spirit and matter. So it is not that... To make the best use of a bad bargain. Suppose you have got a car. It is not very good car. It's not American car, but Ambassador. (laughter) Thrice breaks. But you have to utilize it. Bad bargain. Similarly, some way or other, we have got this material body, we cannot neglect it. We don't say that "Neglect it. Don't care for the body." No. Why?

That is the instruction of the Gosvāmīs. Anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. Don't be attached to the bodily demands. Bodily demands means eating, sleeping, sex life, and defending. These are bodily demands. So if we say that "I am not this body, so I don't care for this eating, sleeping..." No. That is not. It is not vairāgya. This kind of renunciation is not recommended by our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, the Gosvāmīs recommend anāsaktasya viṣayān. You do not be attached to the demands of the body, but you utilize it for advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Eating is required. If you don't eat nicely, then body cannot be maintained. But anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham. Eating is required, but not eating too much. Not eating to the taste of the tongue, unnecessarily eating meat, fish, eggs. Why? You are human being. For you Kṛṣṇa has given so much varieties of food stuff. Fruits, vegetables, nice rice, ḍāl, milk, ghee. Why should you go to the meat-eating? This is required. You eat like human being, not like cats and dogs. But eating is not prohibited. That is not our philosophy. Don't eat like cats and dogs, but eat like human being.

Similarly, sleeping also. Sleep, you require some rest, but don't sleep twenty-six hours. Not like that. Utmost six hours to eight hours, sufficient for any healthy man. Even the doctor says, if anyone sleeps more than eight hours, he is diseased. He must be weak. Healthy man sleeps at a stretch six hours. That is sufficient. That's all. And those who are tapasvīs, they should reduce sleeping also. Just like the Gosvāmīs did. Only one and a half hour or utmost two hours. That also sometimes not. Actually, we should reduce this. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **. This is gosvāmī. Gosvāmīs does not mean go-dāsa. Go means senses and dāsa means servant. If we keep the title gosvāmī and become servant of the senses, it is cheating. You must be gosvāmī, means you must be master of the senses. Self-control. So what the Gosvāmīs did? Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau. Very humble and... Nidrā means sleeping, āhāra means eating, and vihāra means sense enjoyment, vijitau, they conquered over.

So our process is to follow the Gosvāmīs. Ei chay gosāi yāṅr tāṅr mui dās. So we should try to follow the Gosvāmīs. We should keep in view what they did. They used to, I mean to say, pass their time in kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau. Dhīrādhīra. There are two classes of men in the world, dhīra and adhīra. Dhīra means saintly persons, sober, those who have controlled their senses, gosvāmīs. And adhīra: just the opposite. So these Gosvāmīs, six Gosvāmīs, they were popular to the both classes of men, dhīra and adhīra. Their character was so sublime, nice, that even in this Vṛndāvana when Sanātana Gosvāmī was there, the village men, they would accept Sanātana Gosvāmī as the leader of the village. Actually, they were leader. But to pose himself as leader, but cannot control others, (Bengali) gaya mane mora āpni moro(?). Not like that. He must able be to lead them. So although Sanātana Gosvāmī was interested kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau, he was not disinterested with others who were not devotees. They were also interested. Not interested, but sympathetic. They were not interested with the materialists, but the ordinary householders, they would fight, husband and wife, and come to Sanātana Gosvāmī for settlement. And whatever Sanātana Gosvāmī would give judgment, they will accept. They will accept. He was, they were very popular, (the) Gosvāmīs. And they were staying sometimes here, sometimes there, sometimes Rādhā-kuṇḍa, sometimes... They were not staying in one place.

So our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, it's only aim is how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Method, that is intelligence: What method we should accept so that our, this process of, or the propaganda of Kṛṣṇa consciousness may go on very nicely. The process should be only to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, hari-toṣaṇam. That is the recommended Vedic process.

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



Saṁsiddhi means perfection. So perfection, if we want perfection of our activities, then we shall try to satisfy by our activities the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You may say that "I do not see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. How I shall be able to know that I am satisfying or dissatisfying Him?" That you can know through your spiritual master. It is not very difficult. If your spiritual master is satisfied, then you should know that Kṛṣṇa is satisfied. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. There is no difficulty. Yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi. You cannot satisfy Kṛṣṇa by dissatisfying your spiritual master. That is not possible. That is not possible. You must satisfy. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. You do not take the excuse that "I do not know God, I do not meet Him. How I shall know that I have satisfied Him or dissatisfied Him?" No, śāstra says, "Yes..." It doesn't matter. Therefore it is called paramparā. Paramparā. As you receive the knowledge from Kṛṣṇa, from Arjuna, and from Nārada, from Brahmā, like that, come down to your spiritual master, similarly, as you receive the knowledge step by step, one after another, similarly, you satisfy also the Supreme Personality of Godhead from this step, this step, this step, this step. This is the process. Just like you come down step by step by step by step, similarly you go up step by step by step by step.



So this is the process, bhagavat-toṣaṇam or hari-toṣaṇam. Also this way. And to receive the knowledge from Bhagavān, that is also paramparā system. The paramparā system must be maintained, and if it is done nicely, then as it is stated here, yad atra kriyate, whatever you do, that is for your perfection. If you keep this paramparā system and if you try to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then whatever you do, that is perfection. It doesn't matter. The test is whether Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, whether your spiritual master is satisfied. Then you are perfect.

Thank you very much. (end)



740817SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.36

-

Vṛndāvana, August 17, 1974



Prabhupāda: So many ways we can remember Kṛṣṇa always. That... [break] ...somebody is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, that is all right, but why the necessity of initiation? Initiation means the disciples agree to accept the instruction of the spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa accepts the disciple immediately to give him a spiritual body. This is the process. Otherwise, there is no need of initiation. One is chanting, one can chant... [break] ...it is the factual connection. And this connection means he gets immediately a spiritual body. In this body, his spiritual... His material body is transformed into... [break] But if there is any reservation... [break] ...it will take time. [break] ...our spiritual body. [break] ...means existence.



So the process is how to purify this existence. [break] ...defect of this existence... (faulty recording) ...bhagavat-śikṣayā... [break] ...or asakṛt. [break] ...means constantly, and sakṛt means once. [break] By once chanting "Kṛṣṇa" without any offense, one can get freed from many, many thousand times of sinful activities. So much so that he is unable... Pāpī haya tata pāpa kare nāhi(?). Although he's a sinful, he cannot execute so much sinful activities. [break]

Last night... [break] I described about the ten offenses... [break] Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu [SB 1.2.18]. Completely to become offenseless chanter of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra means, like Caitanya Mahāprabhu became mad in ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa. Completely, if we can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without any offense, then there is premodaya. That is the result. And almost offenselessly, not completely, then you become mukta, liberated. Mukta. That is stated in another place of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu means almost finished. Not completely finished. It is very difficult to finish the dirty things which have accumulated within our heart birth after birth. It is being accumulated. So many things, so many impression. All of a sudden you remember, which has no connection with your present activities, but all of a sudden you remember something which was in context with, say, many, many years ago. That means the dirty things are stocked within our heart. Just like in the water, in a pond sometimes you will find all of a sudden one bubble comes from within. Phat! That means the dirty things are within, stocked. [break] ...all of a sudden it comes. [break]

Kṛṣṇasya... Mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet. [break] This is the advantage of this age, Kali-yuga. We have got many disadvantages. [break] People are implicated in sinful activities, more and more trouble. And it will be exhibited, there will be no food grains, no milk, no sugar. These things will be completely absent. Now you are getting. In the later age it will be not possible to get them. And there will be scarcity of food, scarcity of rain. Anāvṛṣṭi durbhikṣa. And other side, taxation, heavy taxation. So we should be very alert in the matter of preparing ourself back to home, back to Godhead. Otherwise, if we take birth again and again, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19], then we have to suffer some.

This material body means suffering. We have repeatedly said. People do not understand it. And there are different kinds of suffering, different types of body. But if we follow this process as it is stated, kṛṣṇasya anusmaranti. Kṛṣṇa. While acting, doing something, at the same time, we can remember Kṛṣṇa. Anusmaranti. Anusmaranti. Anu means follow. You cannot remember, memorize Kṛṣṇa, by your whims. No. Therefore this word is used, anusmaranti. Anusmaranti bhagavac-chikṣayā. As Kṛṣṇa has personally taught you. Just like Kṛṣṇa says that... What is that? Ap... The water, taste? Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ [Bg. 7.8]. So Kṛṣṇa is teaching that "You try to understand Me in this way." Not whimsically, "I am meditating something." No. You meditate, but according to the will of Kṛṣṇa, bhagavac-chikṣayā, as He has taught. He says that you can meditate. This is very good subject matter of meditation. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya. Very easy. Everyone is drinking water, and as soon as you get water and drink, if you meditate little what Kṛṣṇa has said, raso 'ham apsu kaunteya, "I am the taste of the water," where is the difficulty? Bhagavac-chikṣayā. Prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ. As soon as you see light, sunlight, moonlight, immediately you can remember Kṛṣṇa: "This light is Kṛṣṇa."

So you can utter "Kṛṣṇa," and you can remember Kṛṣṇa. And as soon as you remember Kṛṣṇa, then you become the topmost yogi. As soon as you remember Kṛṣṇa within your heart, you become the topmost yogi, immediately. Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā śraddhāvān... [Bg. 6.47]. [break] This practice is required. [break] You work... Because without working you can not live. This is the work. Śarīra-yātrāpi ca te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ. Śarīra-yātrā, we have to keep this body fit; therefore we have to work. Kṛṣṇa does not say, never said to Arjuna, that "I am your friend, Kṛṣṇa. I'll do everything. You can sleep. You don't require to fight." Kṛṣṇa never said. "You have to fight. But you have to fight, at the same time, yudhyasva mām anusmara [Bg. 8.7]."

This is our duty. We have to, for existence, struggle for existence... There is, according to cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ... [Bg. 4.13]. There is prescription of duties according to guṇa we have acquired, and let us work, but at the same time... Kurvāṇā yatra karmāṇi, bhagavat, bhagavac-chikṣayā. Or by the will of Kṛṣṇa we are put under certain condition of life. Never mind. Kṛṣṇa has made me, say, a śūdra, not a brāhmaṇa. A śūdra also has got work to do. Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. So if we simply remember that "Kṛṣṇa has put me in this condition of life, I am a śūdra," that is very nice. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam [SB 10.14.8]. A devotee is satisfied always. He does not grudge, that "I am put into this condition. Why I'm not put into the condition of a king or a learned brāhmaṇa?" No. "Whatever condition Kṛṣṇa has given me, that is all right." Tat te anukampām, it is His grace. "By His grace I have got this position."

Because my only business is to remember Kṛṣṇa. That we can do any stage of life. It does not require that you have to become a brāhmaṇa, an Indian, and so on, so on, great learned scholar in Vedic scripture. No. You may be in the far away country, in Europe, America, or you may not be in brāhmaṇa family. It doesn't matter. But you can remember Kṛṣṇa. We are teaching this art through Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that you may remain in whichever position Kṛṣṇa has put you. It doesn't matter. But try to understand Kṛṣṇa. "How can I understand?" Well, you are drinking water. You can understand Kṛṣṇa. Where is the difficulty? Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya [Bg. 7.8]. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the taste of water." Then where there is a person who does not drink water? Is there any land where people do not drink water? Is there any land?

So where is the difficulty of Kṛṣṇa consciousness? If you simply drink water... [break] And it is stated that bhagavac-chikṣayā. [break] Kṛṣṇa teaches that raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ... [break] Is there any land within this universe where there is no sunshine, moonshine? Everywhere. So where is the difficulty to become Kṛṣṇa conscious? You are practicing meditation. Why not this simple meditation? "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Here is light, here is Kṛṣṇa. Oh, here is Vedic study. Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam." Or oṁkāra. Oṁkāra sarva-vedeṣu. [break] If you, as soon as you get a nice flower, you smell it, Kṛṣṇa says, "That fragrance I am." You can remember Kṛṣṇa. So any part of the world, anywhere. You may be whatever you are.

Another point is as soon as you try to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then your purification begins immediately. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If you simply remember or say that "I have heard it from my spiritual master or from a saintly person, that while drinking water, that taste is Kṛṣṇa. So you accept it," this is preaching. This is preaching. You are preaching. Or one who hears from you, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ, if you simply carry this work. Just try to understand the importance of preaching. Sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ, you are remembering and you are preaching. So you are preaching means somebody else is hearing you. So he is also being purified. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Even he does not know what is Kṛṣṇa, but he simply hears from you, then he becomes purified.

Actually, we are experiencing how in European and American countries, our boys going in buses, village to village, and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and they are collecting devotees. [break] How many devotees collected you told me, France? Ten. Where? You sent your saṅkīrtana party there? It is happening. Our saṅkīrtana movement is increasing in every country. Europe, America, even in Africa, Canada, everywhere. Why? Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was traveling in South India, He was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. So somebody heard Him chanting this mantra, he became purified, and he went back to his village, he also began to chant. So another person who heard him, he became purified. It is such a nice thing. [break]

The process is there, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. Not others. [break] ...the whole world can be purified. But the secret is that one who is chanting, he must be very pure. [break] They have got so many hodgepodge ideas, that they are not pure. It is very difficult. [break] I say that "Here is Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa." They accept it. [break] Here... If I say, "Here is Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa," he'll bring dozens of other Bhagavāns. Or more than that-hundreds. "Why Kṛṣṇa is God?" [break] They are being deviated. So many... Therefore we are student of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In the beginning it is said that dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. All types of cheating religious system is thrown away from this. And Śrīdhara Svāmī gives his comments on this, that kevala bhagavad-upāsanā. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ vāstavaṁ vastu vedyam atra [SB 1.1.2]. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, kiṁ vā paraiḥ. Mahā-muni-kṛte. Mahāmuni Vyāsadeva has given us. What is the use of studying any other book? Śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. It is the spotless Purāṇa. Spotless Purāṇa means that which gives you spiritual knowledge without any adulteration. Simple. Without any adulteration. As Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is without any adulteration.

So when one understands what is dharma without any adulteration, then he becomes fit candidate for studying Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. [break] Kṛṣṇa-bhakta niṣkāma ataeva śānta [Cc. Madhya 19.149]. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta, he doesn't require for bhukti, mukti, siddhi. They simply want... Just like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, kīṭa-janma hao yathā tuwā dāsa, bahirmukha brahma-janme nāhi mora āśa. He is desiring, "My Lord, let me..." Janmāobi yadi... "If I have to get birth again, my Lord, this is my prayer, that let me have my next birth in the house of a devotee, even as a small worm." To take birth in the house of a devotee is not so easy thing. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. It is not so easy thing. But Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, "I am not fit. But if you kindly give me a birth of an ant in the house of a devotee, I shall prefer that more than to become Brahmā and forget You." Brahma-janme nāhi mora āśa. These are the process.

So we have to work according to our capacity, at the same time chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Kṛṣṇa has given you the tongue, and there is no difficulty. Kurvāṇā yatra karmāṇi. And always think of Kṛṣṇa, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. "How I can think of Kṛṣṇa constantly? It becomes hackneyed." No, the varieties. Kṛṣṇa says that you think of Kṛṣṇa while drinking water, you think of Kṛṣṇa when you see the sunshine, think of Kṛṣṇa when you see the moonshine, day and night. So at daytime there is sunshine, at night there is moonshine. So day and night you can think of Kṛṣṇa. So, so many ways... Kṛṣṇa-śikṣayā, bhagavac-chikṣayā, as He has taught in the Bhagavad-gītā, you think of always Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. "How I can think of Kṛṣṇa constantly? It becomes hackneyed." No, the varieties. Kṛṣṇa says that you think of Kṛṣṇa while drinking water, you think of Kṛṣṇa when you see the sunshine, think of Kṛṣṇa when you see the moonshine, day and night. So at daytime there is sunshine, at night there is moonshine. So day and night you can think of Kṛṣṇa. So, so many ways... Kṛṣṇa-śikṣayā, bhagavac-chikṣayā, as He has taught in the Bhagavad-gītā, you think of always Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65].

So therefore bhakti-yoga means vairāgya-vidyā. You have to stop thinking of this material bhukti, mukti, siddhi. Simply you have to think of Kṛṣṇa. That is spiritual platform. That is instructed here. Try to follow and your life will be successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.7: Lectures





751014SB.JOH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.2-4

-

Durban, October 14, 1975



Prabhupāda: So I shall try to speak some of the preliminary important ślokas from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, how Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was compiled by Vyāsadeva under the instruction of Śrī Nārada Muni.



So the description was given by Sūta Gosvāmī in a very big meeting at Naimiṣāraṇya, thousands of years ago, and the Sūta Gosvāmī is describing how Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was compiled.

śrī sūta uvāca

brahma-nadyāṁ sarasvatyām

āśramaḥ paścime taṭe

śamyāprāsa iti prokta

ṛṣīṇāṁ satra-vardhanaḥ

[SB 1.7.2]



There is a place, Śamyāprāsa, above Haridvāra, there Vyāsadeva's āśrama was situated on the river Brahmanadī, Sarasvatī, on the western side, paścime taṭe. Ṛṣīṇāṁ satra-vardhanaḥ, there all the great sages and saintly persons used to perform sacrifice. Tasmin āśrame, tasmin sva āśrame vyāso badarī-ṣaṇḍa-maṇḍite [SB 1.7.3], the āśrama was surrounded by berry trees, badarī-ṣaṇḍa. Ṣaṇḍa means trees. Āsīno 'pa upaspṛśya praṇidadhyau manaḥ svayam. So in that āśrama... Formerly, big, big saintly persons, they used to live in forest āśrama. Now they have to come far away from āśrama to South Africa because people have forgotten. Formerly, big, big persons, they used to visit the āśrama, but nowadays people are not interested. Anartha. They are captivated by the material, external energy. It is said that... Not only now, formerly also, but formerly the number of people who were not interested were very, very small. At the present moment, the number of interested people are very, very small. That is the difference. Kali-yuga. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He inaugurated this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that people in this age are no more interested in their value of life. They are in darkness. Therefore Vaiṣṇava, under the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, should go door to door, country to country, town to town, and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness for their benefit.



He said:

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma



Caitanya Mahāprabhu desired that on the surface of the globe, as many towns and villages are there, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should be spread. And everyone, Indians especially, was advised to take up this mission and preach. He said:



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



Para-upakāra means to do well to others. This is India's mission. India's mission is to elevate outside Indians. Because outside India, people are interested only how to make money and live materially comfortably. They do not know anything more than that. This is anartha. This is anartha. People have become interested only in bodily comforts. They do not know that we are not this body, we are spirit soul, and we have got different interest of the spirit soul than the bodily interest. The bodily interest is there, even in cats and dogs. They also take care of the body, as much as possible by them. Similarly, if we simply take care of the body and do not take care of my self-what I am, what is my necessity-then it is suicidal. That is going on all over the world. People are interested only in bodily comforts. They do not know that within this body there is spirit soul, and he has got a different type of business or mission. That we have forgotten.



Therefore Vyāsadeva has given us this literature. The history of this literature is being described,

tasmin sva āśrame vyāso

badarī-ṣaṇḍa-maṇḍite

āsīno 'pa upaspṛśya

praṇidadhyau manaḥ svayam

[SB 1.7.3]



Now Nārada Muni instructed him... Nārada Muni is Vyāsadeva's guru. So Vyāsadeva presented before Nārada Muni that "I have written so many books, Mahābhārata, Purāṇas, Vedānta-sūtra, and Upaniṣads, and so many things, but I am not feeling very much happy." So Nārada Muni instructed him that "You have done so many things-that is all right-but you have not described very elaborately about the activities of the Supreme Lord. Therefore you are unhappy. So I advise you that you take up this business in writing. Then you will feel happy." So under his instruction he sat for meditation. He says-it is there-āsīnaḥ apaḥ upaspṛśya. Before meditation, this is the process, you take water, ācamana,



oṁ apavitraḥ pavitro vā

sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā

yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ

sa bāhyābhyantara-śuciḥ

śrī viṣṇu śrī viṣṇu śrī viṣṇu



Three times you have to take water and taste it. That is called upaspṛśya. So he did it. Āsīnaḥ apaḥ upaspṛśya praṇidadhyau manaḥ: then he began to concentrate his mind, meditation.



So that is called yoga. This meditation means bhakti-yoga. Meditation, that is the real meaning. Nowadays meditation has become a fashion, but meditation is described in the Vedic literature, dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. The yogis, they meditate, dhyānāvasthita. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā, the mind becomes fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, tad-gatena. Tat means transcendental Absolute Truth, oṁ tat sat. So tad-gatena manasā, mind being... Our mind is very restless, so it is very difficult. Five thousand years ago, when Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna to concentrate his mind, meditate, or meditate upon Supersoul, so Arjuna frankly admitted that it was not possible for him. He said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are advising. That is nice. But it is not possible for me." Cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa pramāthi balavad dṛḍham [Bg. 6.34]. "Mind is so restless, just like wind blowing. So to capture the mind, to make him pacified, it is very difficult job. I don't think I shall be able to do it." Arjuna refused. But Arjuna was a great devotee; therefore Kṛṣṇa encouraged him. Arjuna did not know anything except Kṛṣṇa, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Then He encouraged him, that "My dear Arjuna, for you, you are the best yogi." Why? He described:

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



He is first-class yogi. Who? Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gata, simply thinking of Kṛṣṇa, mad-gata. Antar-ātmanā, within the core of heart, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā, śraddhāvān bhajate yo mām.



So we are teaching this. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means we are teaching our disciples how to think of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And the simple method is to chant,

Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare



So our, this is the process, we have got this bead bag, and within this bag there is bead, and we chant each... We capture each bead and chant,



Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare



One bead equals sixteen times, so the whole bead chain there is hundred and eight. So one round means about seventeen hundred. In this way, our disciples are advised to chant at least sixteen rounds. This is our daily duty. It takes about two hours, and after that we are engaging so many other businesses. Somebody is typing or printing books, somebody is going to sell books, somebody is collecting subscription, somebody is cooking for the temple Deity, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. So in this way, our inmates or our members are always engaged. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31], this is recommendation of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Somehow or other, be engaged twenty-four hours in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then your life will be successful.



So Kṛṣṇa advised, yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā [Bg. 6.47]. So here Vyāsadeva sat in his āśrama, and began to meditate means he was thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Here it is said, bhakti-yogena.

bhakti-yogena manasi

samyak praṇihite 'male

apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ

māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam

[SB 1.7.4]



So if we meditate in bhakti-yoga, that is bhakti-yoga, as Kṛṣṇa advises that yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā, śraddhāvān... Śraddhāvān, with faith and love, if one thinks of Kṛṣṇa, bhakti-yogena, then everything is revealed to him, revealed to him. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā,



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



Kṛṣṇa says, "Anyone who is engaged satatam." Satatam means twenty-four hours. He has no other thinking except Kṛṣṇa. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. This is spoken about Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. He was the emperor of the whole world, he was doing his duty as a responsible king, but still sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ: he fixed his mind at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane: and when he used to speak, he used to speak about Kṛṣṇa. Vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. When he was to walk, he used to go to the temple. When he was to hear something, he was hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. When he was to smell something, he was smelling the flowers offered at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. When he was eating, he was tasting the kṛṣṇa-prasādam, the foodstuff first offered to Kṛṣṇa. So we can engage our senses in that way, set by such example by Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, how to utilize our senses for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is bhakti-yoga. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Bhakti means when you engage your senses for the service of the Lord. Just like example set by Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. His example is there, because who can be more busy than a responsible king? He has to do so many political affairs, and still, his mind was fixed up, sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18], in Kṛṣṇa perfectly. This is the perfect.



So here also, Vyāsadeva, he applied meditation in bhakti-yoga. Yoga means bhakti-yoga. There are different yogas-haṭha-yoga, jñāna-yoga, tapa-yoga, many-but the ultimate goal of these yo... Yoga means connect, connection, connection with the Lord. So ultimately you have to come to the stage of bhakti-yoga. So here Vyāsadeva, bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite 'male [SB 1.7.4]. The mind became completely purified, amale. Mala means dirty things, and amala means no dirty things. A means "not." So mind became completely purified by bhakti-yoga. By bhakti-yoga meditation, the mind became cleansed. That is required. Our mission of human life is to, how to cleanse the mind. Mind is not clean. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi [SB 1.2.17]. Abhadrāṇi, inauspicious things. Abhadrāṇi. Bhadra means very good, auspicious, and abhadra means inauspicious. So in our conditioned staṭe of life, our mind is full with inauspicious things. This is due to rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. So if we think of Kṛṣṇa, meditation, then this rajas-tamo-guṇa becomes cleansed. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu [SB 1.2.18]. Abhadra, this rajas-tamo-guṇa. So if we think of Kṛṣṇa, then gradually, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], the mirror of our heart becomes cleansed. The rajas..., rajas means dust, and tamas means darkness. Due to dark dust... Suppose you have to see one mirror. If it is covered with dust, you cannot see. So rajas means the dust, and cannot see, it is darkness, that is tamas. So bhakti-yoga, you can see within the mind clearly everything.

So here, bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite amale [SB 1.7.4]. Amale means we can completely clean. So our... What did he see? When if the mind becomes cleansed, apaśyat, he could see. Apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam. Puruṣaṁ pūrṇam, puruṣam person, and pūrṇam, complete. We are also person, every individual being, but we are not pūrṇam. We are apūrṇam. The pūrṇam is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, complete. Complete with everything, that is pūrṇam. We are trying to be pūrṇam, but it is not possible. We can be purified, but because we are very small particle, mamaivāṁśa... Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, that we living entities, we are small particles. Just like the fire and the spark. The spark is also fire, but very small particle. Similarly, we are, although fire, when as good as God in quality, just like the spark and the big fire, but the spark is very small. It can burn a small portion. Suppose a spark falls on your floor, a spot can burn. But big fire can burn. That is the distinction between God and ourselves. We are also God, but we are not pūrṇam God. That is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28].

So Vyāsadeva, he is also living entity, although he is empowered, so apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam, he saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam, and the back side is māyā. Māyā means the external energy. Just like if you stand facing the sun, the back side of your, there is a big shadow, that is māyā. So both things are there, the puruṣam, the Kṛṣṇa, and the māyā also. Both things he saw. But He is not affected by māyā. This is the special significance of Kṛṣṇa. Although māyā is there, he says, māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam. Māyā is there, but Kṛṣṇa is not influenced by māyā, but He is controller of māyā. Therefore He is described, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Īśvara means controller. We are controlled by māyā, but Kṛṣṇa is the controller of māyā. That is the difference. We are not controller; we are controlled. In the next verse, it is described, therefore, yayā sammohito jīva [SB 1.7.5]. This māyā is illusion, is illusion to the jīva, to the living entities, not to Kṛṣṇa. One who thinks Kṛṣṇa as like us, they are mistaken. Mūḍha. They have been described in the Bhagavad-gītā, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] "Because I am come just like a human being, these rascals, mūḍhas, asses..." Mūḍha means asses. The example of mūḍha, just like in our vernacular language, we condemn some person who is useless, gādhā. So gādhā, that is mūḍha. Gādhā, why he is condemned? Because he does not know his interest. He works under one washerman and loads tons of cloth on the back, and the washerman gives a morsel of grass. And he stands the whole day, again carrying back the big tons of cloth. But why he is gādhā? This grass can be had anywhere, but he is thinking, "The washerman is supplying me grass; therefore I must carry his burden." Therefore he is gādhā, ass. (laughs) He can get grasses anywhere, but he is thinking that "This Mr. Washerman is so kind that he is giving me grass, so I have to bear his cloth." So the karmīs, they are like that. They are thinking that "Unless we work, we cannot get our grass." Therefore they have been described in the śāstra as asses, mūḍha. Mūḍha. Mūḍho 'yaṁ nābhijānāti [Bg. 7.25].

So these mūḍhas, these asses, they consider Kṛṣṇa as one of us. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam, paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ [Bg. 9.11]. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ, they do not know what is the value of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is there to teach people to understand properly Kṛṣṇa. And what will be the result? The result will be, janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. If anyone simply understands Kṛṣṇa, why He comes here, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. So this is divyam, this is not ordinary birth. Ordinary birth, then why, not only in India and other parts of the world, the Kṛṣṇa's birthday is celebrated very pompously? If He would have been an ordinary man, then why people are interested? No. Therefore janma, His janma is divyam. That is transcendental, that is not ordinary birth. Therefore you worship the birthday of Kṛṣṇa, everyone, every Hindu, every Indian. Even Muhammadans, they also observe. In India, there are many Muhammadans, they also observe Kṛṣṇa's birthday.

So apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam, Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa-puruṣa. There is no lack of everything. Ṣaḍ-aiśvaryaṁ pūrṇam, six kinds of opulences: riches, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge, and renunciation. He is full. That is called pūrṇam, apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam. And māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam. This māyā also there, but Kṛṣṇa is not affected by māyā. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. It is duratyayā for the living entities, not for Kṛṣṇa, because Kṛṣṇa is the controller and we are controlled. Therefore in the next verse it is said, yayā sammohito jīva [SB 1.7.5]. Jīva, we living entities, we are being controlled by this māyā, sammohita. Sammohita means illusion. Mohita means captivated, and sammohita, sam means sam, fully, fully. We are... You see all these conditioned souls, they are captivated by this material energy. Just like you all Indian, you have come here so far. Many people go, I have also come. But the some of us we have come, being allured by māyā, and some may have come for other purposes. So generally, these jīvas, the living entities, they are allured by this māyā. The Vyāsadeva saw two things: Kṛṣṇa, the puruṣaṁ pūrṇam; and His illusory energy. So this illusory energy is not controller of Kṛṣṇa. Just like darkness. Darkness, you have got experience. Here at night we are experiencing darkness, but there is no darkness in the sun. The sun is there in the sky. Because the sun is not here, therefore it is darkness. But as soon the sun will appear in the morning, there will be no more darkness.

kṛṣṇa-sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra



You haven't got to drive away darkness by some separate endeavor. You simply get the Kṛṣṇa sun (to) rise up, then your darkness will go out. This māyā will go. If you remain without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then it is said, yayā sammohito jīva. You will be revealed that illusion. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. Ātmānam. We ourself, the spirit soul, we are covered by this body, tri-guṇātmakam. This body means it is created by the material nature. In somebody the quality of goodness is prominent, somebody the quality of passion is prominent, and in somebody the quality of ignorance is prominent. So according to this prominence of the particular modes of nature, quality, there is division: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Where there is prominence of the quality of goodness, that is brāhmaṇa. When there is prominence of the quality of passion, that is kṣatriya. When there is prominence of the quality of mixture-there is mixture also-that is vaiśya. And when there is quality of the prominence of ignorance, that is śūdra.



So everything is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. If you read carefully then you'll understand things as they are. That is our mission. We have published all these authentic books, Bhagavad-gītā As It Is, and you can read them. The human life is meant for that, that here māyā is deluding us, yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. Ātmānam, I am self. I am spirit soul, part and parcel of God. I am eternal. I am ever illuminated. But I am thinking, "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian," "I am man," "I am woman," "I am this and that," so on-designations. So bhakti means we have to become free from all these designations. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], this is called upādhi. Upādhi means designation. So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means how to become free from these designations. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The whole trouble in the world is due to these designations. We are part and parcel of God. We're very much intimately related with God. But, on account of this designation, we are each other's enemies. Even in faraway countries the Europeans are there, the Indians are there, the Africans are there. But, on account of this bodily designation, separated-European quarter, Indian quarter, this quarter, that quarter, this designation.

So this is here, yayā sammohito jīva, by these designations. All these living entities, they are captivated by these designations. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. He is thinking that the spirit soul has become Indian, American, African, or bird, beast. No, tri-guṇa. Paro 'pi, although he is transcendental to all these designations, manute anartham. Unnecessarily we are creating separative confusion. Manute anartham, tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate. And by that designation, he is thinking, "I am Indian, I must act as Indian," "I am European, I must act as European." Tat-kṛtaṁ ca abhipadyate. This is called anartha: unnecessarily. The spirit soul is originally part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. He should develop his Kṛṣṇa consciousness and go back to home, back to Godhead. That is his real business. But on account of this anartha, created designation, he is suffering. And he is trying to adjust things materially. That will never be possible. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. You go on trying to adjust things on the material platform, it will never be done. Durāśayā. This has been described, durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. This is durāśayā. This hope will never be fulfilled. One must know it certain. If you want to be happy, if you want to be peaceful, if you want to be elevated again to your original, constitutional position, then you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and be happy.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (applause)



Devotee: Anyone have any questions?



Guest (1): (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Karma is the result of your associating with the guṇas. Just like disease, a particular type of disease is a result of your contaminating the germ of the disease. The disease is secondary; the first-your contamination. There are three guṇas. That is material nature. You can contaminate the tamo-guṇa, then you'll get the body of tamo-guṇa. If you contaminate rajo-guṇa, then you'll get the body of rajo-guṇa. And if you contaminate or associate with sattva-guṇa, then you'll get the body like that. And if you become transcendental above the all these guṇas, then you'll become situated in your original, spiritual position. This is the way. Therefore our duty is how to avoid the base contamination. Just like you try to avoid disease-you take vaccine. Similarly, if you try to associate with the best quality modes of material nature-goodness-that is safe for your liberation. And if you contaminate the other two qualities, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, then you'll be more and more entangled. Now I may have this nice human body, but if I contaminate tamo-guṇa, the next body may be dog's body. Tamo-guṇa, the animal body, then trees body... There are so many, 8,400,000's of body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. So in the human form of life we should be conscious of what kind of association we shall accept. Therefore we are trying to give association of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you take this association, then you remain uncontaminated by the material qualities-Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then your original, spiritual constitutional position is revived and you'll go back to home, back to Godhead.



Guest (2): With due respect to His Holiness A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda, may I know why it is the living entity (indistinct) the separation from the supreme power, Lord Kṛṣṇa? Thank you.



Prabhupāda: That is not very difficult to understand. Just like in your Johannesburg there are so many people. Why not all of them come here? Some of them might have gone to the liquor shop; some of them might have gone to the hotels. So it is your option. The three qualities are there. Now it is up to you where to go. But if you know that by associating with the Kṛṣṇa conscious people you'll be benefited, get knowledge-then come here. And if you do not know-in ignorance-then go liquor shop, hotel, restaurant. So after all, we are part and parcel of God. God is fully independent, and we are minute part. The same example, that the spark is minute portion of the fire. It has got the burning capacity-not exactly like God, but it has got the godly power. There are so many examples. This morning I was discussing that you are living entity, part and parcel of God. You have created one aeroplane, 747, with five hundred passengers and many tons of loads of things, it is flying. So that is your creation. And God's creation is this planet. This is also running one thousand miles per hour, and so many big, big ocean, Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and so many big, big mountains, it is also carrying. It is also floating in the air, and the 747 is also floating. That is your creation and this is God's creation. That is the difference. [break] ...quality but not full, not pūrṇa. Therefore puruṣaṁ pūrṇam. God has got the full qual..., not only this one planet-there are millions of planets floating in the air. You can see the sun planet. It is 1,400,000 bigger than this planet. That is also lying in the one corner. So that is God's creation. You can create a teeny 747, that's all. Therefore your power is there, the similarly, but very, very small quantity. So we have to take care of our teeny power. Just like the spark. The spark, put, put... But if it somehow or other falls down from the fire it is extinguished. It is extinguished. Similarly, we are part and parcel of God, the spark. If we remain with the fire, it is beautiful. And if, by chance, we fall down, then you are extinguished. Your brilliancy, the fiery quality, becomes extinguished. So our present position is like that. We have forgotten or fallen from God, so our that little burning power, that is also extinguished. Now we have to revive it, back to home, back to Godhead. Then you'll become happy.



Devotee: Any more questions?



Guest (3): What I would like to ask the Swami a question on... Western world (indistinct) utopia (indistinct) economics or politics. What I would like to understand (indistinct) especially India is the best (indistinct) utopia...



Prabhupāda: Why you are bringing in India? Kṛṣṇa is speaking not for India-for everyone. What is his question?



Devotee: What is the Eastern or Indian understanding of utopia?



Prabhupāda: Utopia?



Devotee: Perfect society.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Perfect society is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you accept Kṛṣṇa as the center... Just like in a family if you accept the head of the family, your father, as the guiding principle, the family's happy. And if you disrupt with the opinion of the father, somebody goes away, somebody's not happy, the family is disturbed. Similarly, if you agree with the instruction of Kṛṣṇa and God, the whole human society will be peace and prosperity. If you don't agree, disagree, don't agree, disagree, then it is disruption. The instruction is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. You take it, you agree to it, and you become happy in this world and next world. (end)





760904SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.5

-

Vṛndāvana, September 4, 1976



Prabhupāda:



yayā sammohito jīva

ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam

paro 'pi manute 'narthaṁ

tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate

[SB 1.7.5]



Vyāsadeva saw three things: the jīvātmā, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and māyā. Māyā means what is not. Mā-yā. So that māyā begins from what is not. I am not this body, but I am thinking I am this body. This is māyā. I am not this body. That's a fact. But I am thinking, "I am this body." This is māyā. This is the beginning of māyā. This is the conception of the animals, less than human beings. Nowadays even a human being, he's also thinking like that. This is anartha. That is the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā lesson, to impress, "Arjuna, you are not this body." Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. So many ways. So this is anartha. To accept this body and in bodily relationship everything, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], this is māyā. So this is anartha. Anartha means meaningless. No artha. Artha means meaning.



So if we want to stop this anartha, misconception of life, then we have to take to bhakti-yoga. It is explained in the next verse. But for the time being we are misled. The māyā, or the material nature, is misleading us. We are trying to adjust things according to the dictation of māyā, that we shall be able to stop our struggle for existence in this way and that way. That is not possible. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. If you make some plan... You can make plan, but that plan will never be successful. This is the... By false understanding we may make hundreds and thousands of plan to be happy in this material world. That is not possible. This is therefore called sammohito, bewildered. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. Ātmānam, himself, he is thinking that he is a material product. Tri-guṇa. Sattva, rajas, tamo-guṇa. Somebody is thinking, "I am very good man. I am very honest man. I am very qualified man." That is also false identification. And somebody is thinking, "I can do this. I can do that. I am so powerful. Who is equal to me?" Passion. That is also māyā's dictation. And somebody is lazy, sleeping, does not understand anything-tamo-guṇa. That is also tri-guṇātmakam, within this tri-dhāma. So within this material world, either the good man or the passionate man or the ignorant man, there may be some differences, guṇogata(?), but actually every one of them is entangled by māyā.

So to come to the spiritual platform, as it is said in the next verse, anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6], then you have to take bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means directly contact the Supreme Lord, adhokṣaja. And that has been described in many places, the process how to be in contact with the Adhokṣaja. That is called dharma. In every country, in every human society there is a conception of dharma, or religion. So what is the purpose? The purpose is to contact the supreme authority, Adhokṣaja. We cannot see Adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja means beyond our sense perception. Akṣaja. Akṣa means eyes, and akṣa means atukya(?). So our knowledge, our experience, experimental knowledge, everything will fail to understand the supreme controller. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. Still you have to understand that. So that is recommended here:

anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



People do not know it, how to become transcendental to this material conception of life and how to contact the supreme controller, Adhokṣaja. That is the only way. It is recommended... Not recommended; it is the fact. Bhakti-yoga, only by bhakti-yoga. There is no other way. So in the Bhagavad-gītā also it is stated, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know Adhokṣaja, that is the real purpose of religion. Religion is not a type of ritualistic ceremonies. That is external. Real fact is how to contact the adhokṣaja who is beyond our material conception. But bhakti-yoga, if you take to bhakti-yoga, then it is possible. Anarthopaśamam. Then anartha will be cleansed-things which are not wanted.



Our life is meant for understanding God. This is human life: athāto brahma jijñāsā. Human life is meant for this purpose. The animals, they are jijñāsā. Their jijñāsā, inquiry, there are many, many inquiries. And answers also. Just like we see in the newspaper so many news, unlimited number of news. But there is no news of how to understand God. There is no news. This is anartha. So lokasyājānata, they have no information. Because they are animals... The animal has no information, neither he has got capacity to understand what he is, what is his relationship with God, what he has to do. Sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana. The whole Vedic principles are based on these three principles. Sambandha. Sambandha means relationship. Everyone says there is God, but what is God and what is our relationship with God, that is to be understood. Sambandha. Then as soon as relationship is understood, then our real activity begins. That real activities is called bhakti, and the material activities, which is not bhakti, that is māyā. Therefore in the Bhāgavata it is said,

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



You may be a very religious person, executing the ritualistic ceremonies very nicely, very expertly, but if you do not know Adhokṣaja, Viṣvaksena... Viṣvaksena is another name of Kṛṣṇa. If you do not become anxious to understand, athāto brahma jijñāsā, then all these ritualistic ceremony of religion, of different types of religion, śrama eva hi kevalam. Simply waste of time. The jñānīs, they are simply trying to understand. No. You can go on understanding, but if you do not come to the understanding abhidheya... No. Abhidheya is acting actually. Sambandha is understanding. So if you do not come to the platform of acting, abhidheya, then simply understanding will not help you. And acting also with the aim to achieve.



So that has been explained by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, what is that aim: premā pum-artho mahān. That is wanted. That is wanted. You have to develop your natural love for God, Kṛṣṇa. Then it is perfect. That, therefore, anarthopaśamam. As soon as we come to the stage how to love Kṛṣṇa, then our all anarthas, misgivings, are finished. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6]. So the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, lokasya. They are rascals, fools, ajānata. They do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Everyone is trying to adjust things materially, but that is not possible. Materially, whatever you do, māyā is so strong that it will break everything.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



He does not know. Ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā. Those who are carried by the material egotism, they cannot understand. They are thinking that by material adjustment everything will be done nicely. No. That is not possible. Therefore lokasya ajānata. These foolish persons, they do not know it. Therefore vidvān. Vidvān. Vyāsadeva is the most vidvān. He is giving vid. Vetti veda vida jñāne. Vid means knowledge. Vān means one possessing. Vidvān. That is Vyāsadeva. He knows actual knowledge. So lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. Saṁhitām means Vedic knowledge, and sātvata means eternal or for the devotees.



So this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is meant for persons who want to finish this life of anartha, meaningless life. For them is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Vyāsadeva has given us. We should study very carefully, and we have tried to give each and every word's meaning and the translation and the purport consulting all the big, big ācāryas. Ācāryavān puruṣo veda. One who is following the footsteps of the ācārya, he knows. He knows everything. So that is explained everywhere. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam [Bg. 4.2], by the ācāryas. We don't create any meaning. Ācāryavān. One has to accept a bona fide spiritual master and take knowledge from him. Vidvān. Vidvān means who is following vidvān. I have given this example many times, that I may be a fool, but if I have learned from a person that this is called microphone... So a child, if he says, "This is microphone," that is correct. Because the child is fool, when he says "This is microphone," that is not foolish, because he has heard it from the authorities, from his father or from his teacher, that "This is called microphone." And if he says correctly that "This is microphone," that statement is correct, although he may be a child, a fool. Similarly, ācāryavān puruṣo veda. Anyone who is following ācārya, whatever he says it is correct. Because he does not manufacture. He says what he has heard from the ācāryas exactly like the child, what he has heard from his father, from the superior, he speaks.

So that is the position of guru. Guru is respected as good as God. Why? Only for this qualification, that he does not speak anything nonsense. He speaks only what he has heard from the ācārya. Ācāryavān puruṣo veda. Ācāryopāsanam. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said ācāryopāsanam. So Vyāsadeva is our ācārya, therefore we offer vyāsa-pūjā. On the birthday of guru we offer vyāsa-pūjā. Actually, it is not directly Vyāsa, but because the bona fide guru represents Vyāsadeva, his pūjā is also vyāsa-pūjā. Mad-bhakta-pūjā abhyadhikā. To worship Vyāsadeva, worship the bona fide spiritual master and worship the Lord, they are the same. Rather, Kṛṣṇa says that if you worship His bona fide representative, that worship is better than directly worshiping. Directly it is not possible to worship the Supreme Lord. One has to go through the ācāryas. Therefore Vyāsadeva is the original ācārya. Lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata... He's vidvān. So we have explained many times how to become vidvān. Vidvān does not mean one has to become a big grammarian, logician. No. Vidvān means one who follows the previous ācārya who is representative of Kṛṣṇa. He is vidvān.

Thank you very much. (end)



751015SB.JOH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.5-6

-

Johannesburg, October 15, 1975



Prabhupāda:



yayā sammohito jīva

ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam

paro 'pi manute 'narthaṁ

tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate

[SB 1.7.5]



So our present position is like this, that sammohita, bewildered, puzzled by māyā. We are eternal part and parcel of God, but on account of being enchanted by this material energy, or external energy of God, we have forgotten ourself, and we are now entangled. We have forgotten our goal of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. The conditioned soul... Conditioned soul means the living being, the spirit soul who is conditioned by these laws of material nature. The laws of material nature is that you have to accept a certain type of body according to your propensity. We create propensity. And Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He gives you the facility: "All right." Just like the tiger. He wants to suck blood. Or any man, if he wants to suck blood, then he will be given the facility of a tiger's body. If a person has no discrimination in eating-whatever available, he can eat-then he will be given facility of become a pig. Up to stool, he can eat.



So this is stated very clearly in the Bhagavad-gītā.

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



This is very significant. Yantrārūḍhāni māyayā. We are riding on a machine. This body is a machine, but we are accepting machine as myself. This is called sammohita, bewildered. If you are running on a car, if you think, "I am the car," as it is foolishness, similarly, I have got this yantra, machine, body, and it is running on on account of my presence, or I am driving, or Kṛṣṇa is giving me intelligence how to drive, but if I identify myself with this body, exactly like a foolish man-he is driving the car, and if he identifies himself with the car, he is a foolish man-so this is called sammohita. Yayā sammohito jīva. Therefore the example, as I was citing last night, that we do not see the driver, and when the driver goes away, then we see that the car is not moving, and then I can understand, "Oh, the driver, my father, or my son, has gone away." We sometimes cry, "My father has gone away," or "My son has gone away," but because we are sammohita, we actually never saw the father or the son. We accepted this coat-pant body as father and son. This is called sammoha, bewildered.



Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānam: the spirit soul, ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam... This body is tri-guṇātmakam. The body is made according to the modes of material nature: kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. Everything is very clearly explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. This is further development. Bhagavad-gītā... If you understand Bhagavad-gītā, and if you actually surrender to Kṛṣṇa... The last word of Kṛṣṇa is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. If you actually understand Bhagavad-gītā, this will be the result. And in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ [SB 1.5.17]. Sva-dharma. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya. So that means every one of us... Dharma means occupational duty. That is dh arma, characteristic. So Kṛṣṇa orders, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. If we accept it, even by sentiment... That is confirmed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ patet tato yadi, bhajann apakvo 'tha. Nārada Muni says that "If somebody, even by sentiment-'All right, Kṛṣṇa says sarva-dharmān parityajya. Let us stop any other business, become Kṛṣṇa conscious'-even one accepts by sentiment, not thoroughly understanding, he is also fortunate." He also fortunate because he accepts the real thing. Therefore Nārada Muni said that "Even one accepting by sentiment, and later on," bhajann apakvo 'tha, "his execution of devotional service (is) not mature and he falls down, then," Nārada Muni says, yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kim, "where is the loss for that person? On the other hand, the other person who has not accepted this-he is very regularly executing his respons..., material responsibility-what does he gain by that?" This is the opinion. "If Kṛṣṇa consciousness is accepted even by sentiment, and after that, even he falls down, there is no loss. And if we are very faithful to our material duties, then," Nārada Muni says, "what do we gain by that?"

So this is very important thing. We do not gain anything. We gain only another body-again begin chapter, the same struggle for existence. And that also, there is no guarantee. According to our karma, we shall have to accept a body. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. As we associate... Just like we develop a certain type of disease as we contaminate the germ. If you contaminate the virus of smallpox, then you have to suffer from smallpox. Nature's law is so strict; you cannot avoid it. If you have been attacked by the mosquito carrying malaria germ, then you have to suffer from malaria. So kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya. As you take precaution that "I may not be attacked with malaria or smallpox or this or that"-so many, we take precaution-similarly we have to be very precautious for our next body. If we become precautious, then there is chance of being promoted. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. If you keep yourself in the sattva-guṇa, the brahminical qualification, śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, satyaṁ śaucaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam, āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam... [Bg. 18.42]. Similarly, there are kṣatriya qualities, there are vaiśya qualities, there are śūdra qualities, and there are śūdrādhama quality, less-than-the-śūdra quality. So in any quality, in any position, even by sentiment, tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ [SB 1.5.17], if we take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is the greatest profit from any position. It doesn't matter in which position he is, either he is on the brāhmaṇa position or kṣatriya position or vaiśya position or śūdra position or caṇḍāla position.

That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. Pāpa-yoni, lower class, very, very lower class... Pāpa-yoni, their description in the śāstra, kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ [SB 2.4.18]. So these pāpa-yoni, these black, they are also considered pāpa-yoni, but for everyone Kṛṣṇa consciousness is open. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda. Hūṇa, kirāta, andhra, pulinda, pulkaśa, ābhīra, śumbha, yavana, khasādaya... Mongolia, those who do not develop mustaches, khasādaya, ye 'nye ca pāpa, and lower than that, yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ-if he takes sincerely the shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa or His devotee, yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ śudhyanti, he becomes very purified. There is no, I mean to say, bar for anyone. In the Bhagavad-gītā the same thing is confirmed:

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim

[Bg. 9.32]



So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. If we take to it as our goal of life, then our life is successful. Otherwise-yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam-we shall continue the life of changing this body. That we have to do. We cannot be independent. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā [Bg. 3.27]. If we think that we are independent, that is due to our ignorance. We are not independent. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā. He is simply sammohita, by false prestige. He is not independent at all. We should always remember this. We are dependent on the laws of nature. We cannot say, "Now I invented some scientific discovery. We shall not going to die." That is not possible. You must die. That is the law of nature. You must die, you must take birth also, and you must be diseased, and you must suffer from old age. These are the four disadvantages of material existence. So if we want to get out... This is anartha. That will be explained in the next verse. Read it.



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is sātvata-saṁhitām, spiritual knowledge. It has nothing to do with anything material. Simply spiritual knowledge. So vidvān. Vidvān means the most learned, Vyāsadeva, not ordinary. Śrīmad-bhāgavate mahā-muni-kṛte. He is mahā-muni. Muni means thoughtful philosopher, and he is mahā-muni. He is greater than any thoughtful philosopher, Vyāsadeva, Veda-vyāsa. His name is Veda-vyāsa. Veda-vyāsa means he compiled all this Vedic literature. And, at last, he summarized the whole Vedic knowledge into Vedānta-sūtra, Vedānta-sūtra, a small aphorism: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], athāto brahma jijñāsā, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt... (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). In short aphorism. And it has got very deep meaning. That is Vedānta-sūtra. And this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra by the author himself under the instruction of his guru, Nārada Muni. Therefore we began this that according to the advice of Nārada Muni, that "You write about the Supreme Personality of Godhead." So he began... We began this.



bhakti-yogena manasi

samyak praṇihite 'male

apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ

māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam

[SB 1.7.4]



By bhakti-yoga... The bhakti-yoga is also mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā. Bhagavad-gītā is bhakti-yoga, but about jñāna-yoga, karma-yoga, haṭha-yoga and other yogas there are description, but at last Kṛṣṇa advises that "The most confidential part of knowledge I am speaking to you, Arjuna, is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]." This is real gain.



So this is bhakti-yoga. To surrender unto the Supreme Lord, that is bhakti-yoga. So here Vyāsadeva began his realization, bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite amale [SB 1.7.4]. By bhakti-yoga you can cleanse your mind without any contamination, immediately. If you want to be liberated from the contamination of material existence, or material modes of nature, then immediately you take to bhakti-yoga. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



You want to realize yourself as Brahman. We are Brahman-there is no doubt about it-but we have no realization because sammohita, yayā sammohitaḥ: the māyā has captured us. So immediately if you want to be liberated... Mukti means, mukti... Muktir hitvānyathā rūpam. Muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ [SB 2.10.6]. This is mukti, svarūpa. Our svarūpa is our spiritual life. When we give up other activities, anyathā, which is not spiritual... Material activities, that is not our actual business. Actual business is spiritual activity. Material activity means this body, to keep this body in comfortable position. And the body is changing. Now, today, I am Indian-I am very great Indian leader or very good philanthropist. Now, tomorrow, or the next life, I may not be Indian; I may be Chinese or I may be European. Then my whole business program changed. Again another nationality, another feeling. So in this way... And if I become cats and dogs, then another mentality. This is going on.



So I am forgetting that my identification is spiritual-ahaṁ brahmāsmi-and I am accepting all these unnecessary things, anartha. So anartha... If you want to stop this anartha, if you want to keep yourself in your original position of spiritual identity, then you have to take to bhakti-yoga. This is the conclusion of the śāstra. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt. Directly, not indirectly. Anartha. These anartha... I am not this body, but I have to change this body after hundred years or ten years or fifty years, according to the size. The dogs and cats, they change, ten years. The cows, twenty years. And human being, utmost, hundred years. And the demigods, many millions of years. But death is there. You have to change that body. When Hiraṇyakaśipu executed very severe austerity, so Lord Brahmā came to him: "So what do you want? You are executing so severe austerities. What is your desire?" "I want to become immortal." So Brahmā said, "That is not possible. Nobody is immortal within this material world. I am not immortal. How can I give you the benediction of immortality? That is not possible." So nobody... Everyone is under the laws of nature. It may be... The duration of time may be little more or less, but everyone must die. This is... And if we want to stop this business of material existence, then here is the recommendation, anarthopaśamam... Anartha. "Why we shall die?" This question does not arise. If I am immortal, as it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā...

na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin

nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥ

ajo nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ purāṇo

na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre

[Bg. 2.20]



So this question does not strike us, that "If I am immortal-I have no birth, I have no death..." na jāyate mriyate vā kadācit "...at any time. Not that sometimes I was dying. No, never." Nityaḥ śāśvato yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This is the position. "Then why I am accepting this birth and death and old age, disease? This is my problem." So we do not think that, neither we are educated how to stop it. But there is process. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā. If you simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa... Janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Not Kṛṣṇa ordinarily-factually, kṛṣṇa-tattvataḥ. Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, actually, in fact, in truth. Then what is the result? Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti: "His, the cycle of birth and death, old age, and dis..., stopped." Tyaktvā deham. We have to give up this body; that is certain. But after giving up this body, no more material body. Then what happens? He is finished? No, he is not finished. Mām eti: "He comes to Me, back to home." And when you go there, then you must possess the same body as Kṛṣṇa has got. Kṛṣṇa has sac-cid-ānanda-vig... Just like if you want to enter into the sun planet. The sun planet is made of fiery elements. Everyone there, their body is made of fire. So if you want to enter into the sun planet, then you must also make your body made of fire. Just like this body is made of earth, so similarly, there are different types of bodies made of air, made of water, made of fire, these five elements, material. Kṣitir āpas tejo marud vyoma. So in different planets... So if you go back to home, back to Godhead, then you have to gain your original, spiritual body.



There is spiritual body. That we do not know. There is no education. We have got spiritual body. That spiritual body is covered by this material layer. Just like your body is covered by shirt and coat, vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. Everything explained. We are simply giving up. One dress is now old and rotten; we throw it away and accept another dress. Similarly, this body, when it is not workable-it is old enough; the physiological function is not going on nicely-then there is change of body. Arjuna was advised that "Why you are lamenting for your old grandfather? Better kill him. He will get a new body. He will get a new body." Of course, it was spoken jokingly because grandfather... So, but the fact is that. Fact is that, that the, after the old body... Just like we have got several types of body: babyhood to childhood, child to boyhood, youth-hood, old body. Then after this, he is... Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. When we give up this body as dress, old and rotten, we get another. This is going on. But this is anartha. Anartha means unnecessarily we are undergoing this change of body. Anartha. If you want to stop it anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt, directly, immediately, what is that? Bhakti-yogam. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6]. And Kṛṣṇa also confirms. This is statement of Vyāsadeva, and Kṛṣṇa also says,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



So, bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. This is real purpose of life. This is real purpose of religion. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. The same thing. That is first-class religion. It doesn't matter what kind of religion you are following, but if the religious system teaches you how to become a devotee to Adhokṣaja-adhokṣaja means beyond our sense perception, the Supreme Lord-then your life is perfect. Then you will be happy.



sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

[SB 1.2.6]



You want satisfaction. If you want real life, then you accept this, yato bhaktir adhokṣaje. Here the same thing, anarthopaśa... This business, struggle for existence, "Survival of the fittest," they say. But nobody is fit to survive. Everyone has to die. Nobody, even big, big scientists or big, big philosophers and... They cannot survive. They talk of millions of years, but personally they live only fifty or sixty years. This is their position. They simply cheat people: "Maybe." "Perhaps." "Millions of years." And you are going to live for fifty years. Why talking of millions of years? So this is anartha.



So anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt. If we want to stop this unwanted business... If you don't want, go on with your business: bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. Now take this life, this body, of human being or Indian and then American, then cat, then dog, then hog, then tree-so many, eight million-you go on if you like. But if you are actually intelligent, if you are disgusted, that "This is not very good business. This is anartha, unwanted business. I have been forced, yayā sammohitaḥ... Being bewildered, being illusioned, misdirected by this material energy, I am trying to be happy here in this material..., and it is not my business." If one comes to this sense... That is stated in the Bhagavad..., bahūnāṁ janmanām ante: [Bg. 7.19] "After many, many births. After many, many births, jñānavān, one who is actually in knowledge, wise..." Then what does he do? Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate: He surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. The same thing, as Kṛṣṇa says, "Surrender to Me." If we do not do it... We have to do that, but if you want to wait bahūnāṁ janma, after many, many births, you have to do the same business, why not do it now? This is intelligence. If after bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19], when I actually become wise, why not become wise immediately? Kṛṣṇa says; Kṛṣṇa is canvassing. Why not take it up? And if you take it up, you are successful. Tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ [SB 1.5.17]. Even by sentiment you take it, you will be successful, it is so nice.

So Vyāsadeva recommends that anartha, this unwanted business of repetition of birth, death, old age, disease... And there is no certainty what kind of body I shall get. So this is our position. If you want to stop it, anarthopaśamam. If you stop this business, bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje... So how to execute bhakti-yogam? So lokasyājānata: "The people in general, they do not know it." There must be... For everything there must be education. Lokasyājānato vidvān. He compiled this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. For your eternal life, here is the saṁhitā, Vedic literature. You take it and study it and follow it and be happy.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



740531SB.GEN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.6

-

Geneva, May 31, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this. Therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth." [SB 1.7.6]



Prabhupāda: Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt. Anartha means... Artha means which is essential, artha. So anartha means just the opposite. So our present material condition is that we have increased some unwanted things, anartha. Therefore we have been entangled. Just like yesterday I was speaking with that president. He was thinking the problem of economics. And what is the problem? There is no problem. Anywhere, any part of the world, you live, you just have some land, and some animals. Animals means cow. Other animals also, you can keep. There is no harm. But cows must be there, animals. And you cannot destroy the cows. If you want to eat meat... That is the Indian system. Indian system, for meat-eaters, there is concession. Just like for sex life there is concession, similarly, for meat-eater also, there is concession. And for drunkards there is concession. Not impractical. Supposing one is drunkard, meat-eater, if I say all of a sudden, "Stop it," if he is not sober, he will not accept it. Just like in India there was prohibition. Gandhi, by his sentiment... There was no, I mean to say, education. He wanted to make all of a sudden stop. So there was illicit drinking. Illicit manufacture of wine increased so much that government saw that "We are losing the excise duty. These people are distilling illicit liquor." So now government, to save money, now they are manufacturing and inducing people, "All right, you go on drinking."



So unless we are sober, for stopping one kind of unwanted thing, we have to introduce another. This is karma-kāṇḍa-vicāra. If you have to raise, erect, a very high skyscraper building, then for the materials, you have to dig somewhere to make it a lake. You take it from there and put it here. This is karma. You cannot manufacture. Suppose a high skyscraper building you have constructed. The another place you have taken out something. The stock is the same, conservation of the energy. You cannot increase the stock. That is not possible.

So in this way we have been entangled. This is called anartha. Therefore that gentleman was... "If we take everyone..." That is not possible. Everyone is not going to take Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is not possible. But he was thinking that, that "If we..." Sometimes they put this argument, that "If everyone becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, who will look after this business, that business?" That will be looked after. Don't bother. The śūdra class, they will take care. The brāhmaṇa class, they will take advantage, and the śūdra class, they will work hard. Just like we are taking advantage of this microphone for Kṛṣṇa, but we are not going to manufacture this. That is not our business. Let the śūdras do it. Śūdras will be there. They will do it. This is called ajagara-vṛtti. Ajagara-vṛtti means that the mouse, they make a hole in the field for his living comfortably. You know? You have seen the holes in the field? And the ajagara, the big snake, they take advantage of this holes. They enter into it and eat the mouse, and live comfortably. So the mouse makes the comfortable place for the snake. The snake business is to enter and live comfortably. So our business is like that. You śūdras, you make all the advantages, and we take simply, go there. (laughter) That's all. That is our business. You construct house, nice house, and we enter. That's all. That George Harrison paid for that house. We enter, that's all. We do not care for this fifty-five lakhs, how to earn. No. That is Kṛṣṇa's policy. Let the less intelligent class of men work hard and the higher intelligent class of men take advantage of it. That's all.

So... But after all, it is anartha. To increase too much of these necessities of life, that is anartha. That is not required. But we have now increased the so many unwanted things, and we have been entangled. So... But Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that to minimize this anartha, one has to take to bhakti-yoga. Anartha. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt. Just like the other man came yesterday. They have created the anartha, hippie problem and drugs, intoxication problem. Now they want to subside it. They have come to our center for give some advice. But our advice is the same: anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam [SB 1.7.6]. Begin chanting. What did he say? Did he accept our formula or not?

Yogeśvara: He was reluctant.



Prabhupāda: Just see. He will not accept. He will come to consult you, but if you say something which is already formulated by him, then they will accept. That means you have to say his formula, yes, then he will accept. He has already some formula, and if you say, "Yes, it is good," then you are a very good man. And if you say something else, then I reluctant. You see? This is going on. Actually, it is said in the śāstra.



So for all these anarthas, the only means is bhakti-yoga. Śravaṇam. Bhakti-yoga means śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. Let everyone, all over the world, give chance to the people of this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. All the problems of the world will be solved. That's a fact. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt. Directly you'll have. And you can realize from your own life how many, how much anarthas were accompanying with you. Now they are all subsided. Sākṣāt. What is the means? This chanting. Now you enjoyed chanting, dancing. But people will not take to it. This is the only means. Because you have been attracted by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and dancing, you are no more interested. This morning time, in every house, you can go. Either they are sleeping or they are drinking bed tea, without washing mouth, and all the germs are going within the tea, and they are being infected within the intestines, and they are getting so many diseases. But they will not understand. But here, and the bhakti-yogam, everyone rises early in the morning and then washes himself, takes bath, becomes cleansed, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, read book. This is bhakti-yoga. Automatically everything will be... Hygienic principle, health question, economic question, and social, political-everything will be solved. It is not joking. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6].

Why the anartha is created? How? That is explained in the previous verse.

yayā sammohito jīva

ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam

paro 'pi manute 'narthaṁ

tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate

[SB 1.7.5]



Vyāsadeva, under the instruction...[break] Everything is possible simply by bhakti-yoga. So bhakti-yogena, by the means of bhakti-yoga, his mind was cleansed. Bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite 'male [SB 1.7.4]. The mind became completely cleansed. The whole trouble is our mind, our consciousness, unclean. So Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us the saṅkīrtana movement for cleansing the heart, the consciousness, the mind.



So Vyāsadeva, under the instruction of his spiritual master Nārada, he meditated in bhakti-yoga, and he saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam. Pūrṇam means complete. So we are also puruṣa, living entities. Puruṣa means enjoyer. So we are trying to enjoy, but we are incomplete, not complete. We have got so much desire to enjoy, but we cannot because we are incomplete. There are... That song sung by Vidyāpati, that tātala saikate vāri-bindu-sama. Tātala saikate. In hot sand beach you require so much water. But if somebody says, "Yes, I will supply water." "Give me some water." "No, one drop." So that will not satisfy me. So we have got so many desires. That cannot be fulfilled by so-called material advancement of life. It is not possible. So Vyāsadeva saw the pūrṇaṁ puruṣam. Pūrṇaṁ puruṣaṁ māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam. And he saw māyā also, but māyā is not conquering over him. Because Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇam, māyā cannot conquer. In full light there cannot be darkness. Any amount of darkness, you put before the sunshine, there is no possibility... It cannot stand. Within the sun globe, within the orbit of the sun, any amount of... Because the sun globe is so big and the orbit is so big that the whole universal darkness you bring there, there will be no darkness. Just imagine. It is not imagine; it is fact. The universal darkness, all the darkness of the universe, you bring before the sun, it will not effect. It cannot effect. Because the sun is full light. It is not that imitation light. Here we have got this imitation light. The big amount of cloud is there. Immediately it will be dark. But sunlight is full light. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa-puruṣam. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they think that when Kṛṣṇa comes, He reduces His energy; therefore He also becomes covered by māyā. This is called Māyāvāda. Māyāvāda means the māyā has covered everything; so māyā has covered Kṛṣṇa also. This is Māyāvāda philosophy. "Because māyā has covered me, you and everyone, therefore māyā has covered Kṛṣṇa. Unless Kṛṣṇa or the Absolute Truth, Brahman, becomes covered by māyā, he cannot take a form." This is Māyāvāda philosophy. As we have taken form, because the prakṛti, material nature, has helped us to take this form, similarly, their philosophy is, even the Absolute Truth, Brahman, He incarnates, He accepts a body of this material nature.

But that is not the fact. Kṛṣṇa said, sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā: [Bg. 4.6] "I am not external energy. I come in My own energy." And the Māyāvādī philosophers, they do not understand. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ. Therefore they have been described as mūḍhāḥ, asses, fools, rascals. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] "Because I have come here in the form of a human being, they take it for acceptance that 'Kṛṣṇa is another human being.' " But that is not fact. Here, if one sees Kṛṣṇa through bhakti-yoga as Vyāsadeva saw, bhakti-yogena manasi... [SB 1.7.4]. Mind must be saturated with bhakti-yoga. Then you can see the Supreme Person pūrṇam, not affected by māyā. Apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam. And so far māyā is concerned, although māyā is very influential, that's all right... Apāśrayam: standing at the background, cannot come in front. Just like the same example: the darkness cannot come in front of... You stand before, facing your mouth towards the sun. The darkness will be the background, not in front. Similarly, the darkness, māyā, cannot stand before Kṛṣṇa. She is always behind. Māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam.

Now, this māyā, this māyā cannot cover Kṛṣṇa, but we become covered. Therefore in the next verse it is said, yayā sammohito jīvaḥ. That māyā which is so influential that she has extended her influence over all the living entities... Yayā sammohitaḥ, bewildered. We living entities, we are bewildered. So especially those who have not taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are bewildered. They are thinking this material world is everything. And therefore they have got some problem, simply problem. He was thinking, that gentleman was thinking, "How this economic problem...?" Because he was in māyā. But had he been in bhakti-yoga, then he could understand there is no problem at all. There is no problem. It is simply māyā. It is simply illusion. There is no problem. All problems are solved. You can practically see. We have got a hundred branches, we have no problem, because Kṛṣṇa is there. So our traveling each time, lakhs of rupees, I am traveling. But one man cannot see once in life London or New York from India. I see four times in a year. So I have no problem-because Kṛṣṇa is there. We are spending lakhs and lakhs of rupees, but wherefrom the money is coming? Kṛṣṇa is sending. We have no problem. Now we have spent in Bombay eighteen, twenty lakhs of rupees. People are surprised. It is fifty lakhs' worth property. People are surprised; some of them are very envious. And if you come, you will find it is very, very fine place. It is just like a paradise garden. Twenty thousand square yards. And we have got six buildings.

So actually, when we come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no problem. Problem is created. So long we are bewildered by māyā, there is problem. Otherwise, there is no problem. Therefore it is said, yayā sammohito jīvaḥ. The jīva, or the living entities, are covered by this material encagement. He is called jīva. Jīva-bhūta. Otherwise brahma-bhūta. [SB 4.30.20] Otherwise Brahman. So long he is covered by this māyā, he is called jīva. Sammohito jīvaḥ. But when he is not sammohita, he is not bewildered, he is Brahman. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. So being bewildered by the māyā, sammohito jīvaḥ, what is his position now? Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam [SB 1.7.5]. Ātmānam, the soul, spirit soul, on account of his being bewildered, he is thinking that "I am depending on this material nature." Tri-guṇātmakam. "I am depending on these three material qualities, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa." Therefore, one who is strictly follow the principle, bhakti-yoga principle, he is not touched by the tri-guṇa. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. Immediately he is in his original position, brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati [Bg. 18.54]. This is the science. And so long one is captured by māyā, covered by māyā, his position is sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. He is thinking that "I am something of this material nature." Tri-guṇātmakam. Paro 'pi, although he is transcendental, spirit soul, paro 'pi manute anartham, he is thinking so many problems. Anartham. He is thinking of so many problems. Just like the gentleman came to consult, as soon as we proposed that "This is the medicine," he will not take. He... Then it can be mitigated otherwise. "They are simply trying to introduce their philosophy." He thought like that.

But that is not the fact. That is explained in the next verse. Yes. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6]. If you want to get out of the problems, then take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Everything will be adjusted. This is the fact. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje loka... These rascals they do not know. These rascals, mūḍha. Non-Kṛṣṇa conscious men, they have been described as mūḍhāḥ. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Lowest of the mankind. They will not surrender to Kṛṣṇa on account of their mischievous and sinful life and being fool number one, duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ, and being the lowest of the mankind. And mankind means, lowest of the man... In human form of body one can understand what is Kṛṣṇa, what is Kṛṣṇa con..., but he will not take to this. Therefore he is called narādhama, lowest of the mankind. In the human form of body, there is a chance, but they will not take it. Therefore nar... Why they do not take it? There are so many M.A., Ph.D., D.H.C. and doctors and Nobel Prize holder. Why they do not? Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. That māyā has taken away his knowledge. He will not allow. He will not allow. Māyā will not allow to take.

Therefore Bhāgavata says, naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ [SB 7.5.32]. Apagama. Naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghrim. To get out of this māyā's problem, one has to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. It is easy process. If you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, immediately you get out of all these problems. So that is not being taken. It is declared, but people have not taken. Therefore Bhāgavata says that why they have not taken? Naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghrim. They are not accepting this proposal of Kṛṣṇa, that "You surrender." Anartha. Immediately anartha will be vanquished, but they will not take it. How? Why not? They have to surrender to His devotee. Niṣkiñcanānāṁ pāda-rajo 'bhiṣekam. Mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo 'bhiṣekaṁ niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat. They cannot take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness unless they bow down to the dust of His devotee, to the dust of the lotus feet of... Mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo 'bhiṣekam. Pāda-rajaḥ. Pāda-rajaḥ means the dust at the lotus feet of mahīyasām, the exalted devotee, niṣkiñcanānām, who has nothing to do with the material world. Niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat. So long one does not take the dust of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa's devotee, he cannot surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. Therefore it is the duty of the devotees to go from place to place and just give the chance to the people to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then their all problems will be solved.

Thank you very much. (end)



750418SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.6

-

Vṛndāvana, April 18, 1975



Prabhupāda together with devotees: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Nitāi: (recites verse word for word with devotees responding; then line by line twice with devotees responding)



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



[break] "The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth."



Prabhupāda:



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



Vidvān. Vid means vetti veda vido jñāne. Vid means jñāna, knowledge. So one who has knowledge... Knowledge means ultimately to understand the originally source of everything. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. This is knowledge, to... Everyone is... The scientists, the philosophers, everyone is searching out what is the original cause. Just like modern scientists. They are searching out what is the original cause of life. That is good enquiry. But because they are surrounded by anarthas, they cannot know it. That is called māyā. So long one is illusioned by the māyā he cannot have perfect knowledge. This subject matter has been discussed in the previous verse. It is said, yayā sammohito jīvaḥ. Before that, the one verse is that Vyāsadeva, the vidvān... Vyāsadeva is addressed here as vidvān, full knowledge. So he was unhappy even after compiling Vedānta-sūtra. He was not very happy. So under the instruction of his guru, Nārada Muni, he wanted to compile the last contribution to the human society, a commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra. That is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhāṣyāyāṁ brahma-sūtrāṇāṁ vedārtha-paribṛṁhitam. This, in every chapter, at the end, it is said, brahma-sūtra-bhāṣye: "The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the commentary on the Brahma-sūtra or Vedānta-sūtra." Vedānta means the ultimate knowledge. Veda means knowledge; anta means the last contribution. So under the instruction of Nārada Muni, Vyāsadeva first of all made his life perfect. Yes. How he made his life perfect? Because if you write books without any perfection, that will not be effective. One has to become perfect before he writes some books. Just like nowadays especially in the western countries they write any rascal ideas under the name of philosophy or science, "Perhaps," "It may be." That is not the system in the Vedic civilization. Vedic civilization, people, those who are advanced in Vedic knowledge, they'll write. Vedic knowledge is called śruti, and if you write following the principles of śruti, then it is smṛti.



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



That is the advice, instruction, given by Rūpa Gosvāmī. "Without reference to the śruti, without reference to the smṛti, Purāṇa and pāñcarātriki-vidhi, if you pose yourself as a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, that is simply disturbance." This is the instruction of Rūpa Gosvāmī, the, I mean to say, what is called, development, developer of this Vṛndāvana development, under whose instruction. So when Nārada instructed that "You write something which will help people to understand the Supreme," then he engaged himself in bhakti-yoga because you cannot understand the supreme truth without engaging yourself in devotional service. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Only through devotion, submission, surrender you can understand Kṛṣṇa, not by your so-called scholarship or research work, no. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Kṛṣṇa never said, "By cultivating knowledge, speculative knowledge, one can understand Me," no. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. So therefore Vyāsadeva engaged himself in bhakti-yoga to understand the Supreme Truth. That is stated,



bhakti-yogena manasi

samyak praṇihite 'male

apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ

māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam

[SB 1.7.4]



So he visioned two things, that one, puruṣam... Apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam. Puruṣa, perfect, pūrṇam, complete. We are trying to become puruṣa or Bhagavān, but we are not perfect. The Bhagavān means pūrṇam. Ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇaḥ. Complete. So we cannot accept anyone as Bhagavān unless he is pūrṇam. Ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇaḥ. That is Kṛṣṇa. Ṣaḍ-aiśvaryaiḥ pūrṇo ya iha bhagavān [Cc. Ādi 1.3]. So by bhakti-yoge, bhakti-yogena, by practicing... That is called meditation. Meditation means to find out the Supreme Complete Person. That is called meditation, not that anything you meditate, any nonsense. No, that is not meditation. Meditation is described, dhyānāvasthita. Dhyānāvasthita, engaged in meditation. Tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Yogis, they by meditation, tries to find out the Supreme Person who is within everyone. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So by meditation to find out the supreme Paramātmā within yourself, that is called yoga practice. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. This is yogi. So that yoga is perfect when you see Kṛṣṇa. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



One who is trying to find out Kṛṣṇa within himself... Kṛṣṇa is there. So you have to be qualified to see Him. That is required. That is called bhakti-yoga. In Brahma-saṁhitā it is said, premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. That is not possible simply by gymnastic. One has to develop transcendental love for Kṛṣṇa. Premāñjana-cchurita. When your eyes are anointed with love of God, then you can see Him within yourself twenty-four hours. Sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti. This is not difficult for understanding because anyone you love, you always think of him, you always feel his presence, so why not of Kṛṣṇa? That is not difficult. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is teaching. To develop this love for Kṛṣṇa, he says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Simply you think of Me," man-manāḥ, "you become devotee of Me," mad-bhakta, "worship Me," mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru. So we are expending so much money for installing Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma here. What is this purpose? The purpose is that you will be able to see Him present in this temple, and therefore you can think of Him. That is very natural. If you see the Deity always, then you get His picture impressed within your mind, and if you always think of Him, then you see Him within your mind. Man-manāḥ. That is not difficult. And this Deity is not different from Kṛṣṇa. For devotee, He is Kṛṣṇa Himself, identical. We are spending so much money, lakhs, not for worshiping a statue. That is not very intelligent. But sākṣād-kṛṣṇa. Therefore the temple is sanctified; the process is going on to cleanse our mind. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. In this way, when the mind is cleansed of all dirty things, then you can think of Kṛṣṇa.



So that will be explained, anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣāt. So Vyāsadeva first of all made his life perfect. How? Bhakti-yogena. by practicing bhakti-yoga. And bhakti-yoga means manasā. Manasā vācā karmaṇā. Here it is said, manasā. Manasā, that is very nice bhakti-yoga, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18], as Ambarīṣa Mahārāja did. Always Ambarīṣa Mahārāja fixed up his mind at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. So here also, Vyāsadeva, bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite amale [SB 1.7.4], when the mind was completely cleansed, then he saw. What he saw? Apaśyat. Apaśyat means "he visioned, he saw," puruṣaṁ pūrṇam, "the complete Supreme Personality of Godhead." And māyā. He saw also māyā, māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam, māyā on the back side, back side. So in this way he made his life first of all perfect, then he wrote this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam after becoming perfect. Therefore you will find in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, each word is transcendental. Each word is full of meaning and transcendental knowledge because the writer, the composer of this transcendental book, is Vyāsadeva. He is perfect, Vedavyāsa, perfect in Vedic knowledge.

So there are māyās of different kind. Kṛṣṇa's māyā... Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva... Māyā means potency. So from the Vedic knowledge we can understand that Kṛṣṇa has many types of potencies, parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāv... [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. because He has to execute so many affairs, this material world, spiritual world, and just imagine so big universe. There are innumerable universes, and each and every universe there are so many planets, so many different kinds of living entities, and He has to manage everything. Therefore He is called Parameśvara. Parameśvara means the supreme controller. And Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. "I am living in everyone's heart." Now, imagine. There are innumerable universes, and each and every universe, there are innumerable planets, and in each and every planet, there are innumerable towns and cities, and each and every town, there are innumerable living entities, and Kṛṣṇa has to manage all of them. That is Kṛṣṇa. Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa has to act in such a way that whatever we are doing, that is under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says mattaḥ smṛtiḥ. Just like in the morning you get up and immediately you understand that you were sleeping, "Now I have got to do so many things." So wherefrom this memory comes? Kṛṣṇa says mattaḥ, "from Me." So just imagine how Kṛṣṇa is busy. So this māyā as described here, apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ māyāṁ tad-apāśrayam. Māyā means his meaning, that will be explained in the next verse-which is controlling this material world, that māyā. Māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam.

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is also māyā, yoga-māyā, and Durgā is also māyā, expansion of Rādhārāṇī. But Durgā's business is different than Rādhārāṇī's business. Durgā's business is yayā sammohito jīvaḥ, to keep the living entities covered not to become awakened to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is māyā's duty. So Vyāsadeva saw this māyā, this mahā-māyā, who is keeping the living entities under the cover of illusion. So it is said, "This māyā." "He saw the Supreme Person, and back of that Supreme Person he saw this māyā." Which māyā? Yayā sammohito jīva: "that māyā which is keeping the living entities in illusion." What is that illusion? That is also here: yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam [SB 1.7.5]. Tri-guṇa, tri-guṇa means the sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So, under the influence of māyā, we are identifying with the different guṇas or qualities of this material world. So sattva-guṇa, yes, sattva-guṇa is the brahminical qualification. So one is thinking that "I am brāhmaṇa." One is thinking, who is under the control of rajo-guṇa, "I am kṣatriya." Or in other words, this is, this identification, is all over the world. Now you may not think, "I am brāhmaṇa," but you may think, "I am American." Or I may think, "I am Indian." There is some sort of identification. And therefore the whole world is full of anarthas, unnecessary, unnecessary thing. I am not brāhmaṇa; I am not Indian; you are not American; you are not kṣatriya; or... This is all false identification. So this is the work of māyā, that all the living entities they are under certain impression that "I am this. I am this." And this "I am this. I am that," they cannot make any solution.

They have created the United Nations, but there is no solution because everyone is under the grip of the māyā, material energy, and they are simply creating problems. This is their business. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam [SB 1.7.5]. Ātmānam. I am spirit soul, but I do not belong to these material qualities; still, I am thinking, ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. One cannot go beyond these three guṇas, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa, or mixed. Three into three equal to nine, and again mix, nine into nine equals eighty-one. Therefore there are 8,400,000 species of living entities under the impression that "I am this; I am plant; I am fish; I am mosquito; I am man; I am demigod; I am tiger; I am Indian; I am American." In this way there are 8,400,000's of different types of identification. Therefore we find so many forms of life. Ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakaṁ manute. Yayā... This is all the work of māyā, to keep us under certain impression. And we work under certain impression and create another situation, and we get, "tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]." Now, this life, if I create a situation like a dog, then I will get the body of a dog. That's all. Or if I create a situation like the demigod, then I can go to the heavenly planets. But if I create a situation that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa," then you go to Kṛṣṇa. This is wanted. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Create a situation. Don't create a situation that "I am this. I am that." Simply create a situation that you completely understand that "I have no other business than to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and my only duty is to serve Kṛṣṇa." This is wanted. That is called anartha upaśamam.

Because we have created so many problems under the impression of different guṇas... "I am this. I am that." To become sannyāsī, that is also another problem. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that "I am not a brāhmaṇa. I am not a sannyāsī. I am not a brahmacārī I am not a gṛhastha. I am not a kṣatriya." All "not, not." "I am not this, I am not this. My only identification is that I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa." Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. This is required. So how this position you can attain, that is described in the next verse, anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. This is the remedy. Anartha, these are all anarthas. So long I will think, "I am this; I am that," "I am this; I am that," or even if you think that "I am big gosvāmī" or big brāhmaṇa, that is also anartha. That is also anartha.

Actually gosvāmī means who has control over the senses. Svāmī means the control over the senses. That is required. We have to control over the senses and identify ourself that "I do not belong to anything of this material infection, but I am eternally servant of Kṛṣṇa." Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya... [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. This is called svarūpa-upalabdhi. This is called self-realization. This is called mukti. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the definition of mukti has been given that muktir hitvā anyathā rūpam. Anyathā rūpam. I am identifying now myself as this and that. "I am American; I am Indian; I am brāhmaṇa; I am gosvāmī; I am this, that..." No. This is all anarthas, unwanted. So therefore hitvā anyathā rūpam. We are living under the impression of something else. Hitvā means when we give up this wrong impression. And sva-rūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ, when you are situated in your original position, that is called mukti. Mukti does not mean anything else. This is the definition of mukti.

You keep yourself in your original position. So our original position is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. We are part and parcel of the body of Kṛṣṇa. The brāhmaṇa is the mouth of Kṛṣṇa, and the kṣatriyas are the arms of Kṛṣṇa. The vaiśyas are the abdomen of Kṛṣṇa, and the śūdras are the legs of Kṛṣṇa. Mukha-bāhūru-pādebhyaḥ jajñire catvāro varṇā viprādayo guṇair pṛthak. The... Nobody should be hated. Just like in your body your leg is as important as your head, especially of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is advaya-jñāna, absolute. We may make some difference from head to leg. Leg is less important, head is... No. But Kṛṣṇa's any part is as important as other part. So you become the part of... You are already. But if you come to realize that you are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's body, so either you act as Kṛṣṇa's leg or as Kṛṣṇa's head, there is no difference. There is no difference. Here in the material world we have misunderstood that "Because I am head, therefore I shall hate the legs." Why? We first of all offer tulasī and flower to the legs of Kṛṣṇa, not to the head. The bhakti-yoga begins from the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. So how you can say the legs of Kṛṣṇa are inferior than the heads of Kṛṣṇa? This is called anartha. So if we enter into the process of bhakti-yogam, these anarthas will go out.

Therefore it is recommended here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. If you engage yourself in transcendental loving service of the adhokṣaja... Adhokṣaja means the Supreme Person who is beyond your sense perception. That is called adhokṣaja. So you have to engage yourself in the service of Adhokṣaja, bhakti-yoga. Then this anartha, this misunderstanding that "He is such and such. I am such and such," this will be finished, no more. That is called paṇḍita. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. Vidyā-vinaya-sampanne brāhmaṇe gavi hastini, śuni caiva śva-pāke [Bg. 5.18]. When your anarthas will be finished and you will see every living entity as part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, that is called real Brahman realization. Part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa every one of us. So we shall not only engage ourself as part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa in His service, but also we shall try to engage others because they are also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Why should we eliminate them? That is Vaiṣṇavism. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. So... And that mission is to be started from India, Bhārata.

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



So the Indians especially, they have got the opportunity to learn these Vedic śāstras and realize his self and introduce this Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout the whole world. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. And all ācāryas, they do like that. That is the business of real ācārya. So bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. So this is very important thing because it is said, lokasya ajānataḥ: "These foolish men, they do not know that their problems can be solved only by this bhakti-yoga, Kṛṣṇa consciousness." They do not know it. Lokasya ajānataḥ. Therefore vidvān... Vyāsadeva is vidvān. He is the first-class vidvān. Cakre sātvata-saṁhitām. This saṁhitā means Vedic literature for enlightening people. So every Vaiṣṇava's duty is that you make your life first of all perfect by understanding your real position and preach this cult because lokasyājānataḥ: all people throughout the whole world, they are ajānataḥ. Ajānataḥ means they do not know anything. Although very proud... They think that having some material advancement of life, that is perfection. No. Ajānataḥ, mūḍha. That is not perfection. That is not perfection. Perfection is muktiḥ sva-rūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ, to be situated in his own original position. That can be done anywhere. Bhakti-yoga can be practiced any part of the world, as it is experienced practically. What is bhakti-yoga?



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



Śravaṇam. First business is śravaṇam. You can hear. Whom? Viṣṇu, not nonsense talks. Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa you hear. So you can hear anywhere. There is no specific mention that it can be heard in such and such place. You can anywhere. But a holy place like Vṛndāvana, the hearing has got a special effect. So here we are establishing this mantra. And you foreigners, you have taken some interest. I am very much pleased. So constantly come here and hear about Kṛṣṇa. This is the pastimious place of Kṛṣṇa, Vṛndāvana. So make your anarthas vanquished. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣ... Everything we have done, simply anartha, without any meaning. But if we say, people will criticize us that "Why you are utilizing motor car ? Why you are utilizing aeroplane?" But our tactic is we can utilize any so-called anartha in the service of Kṛṣṇa. That is our tactics. That means you have created some anartha, but we can engage even this anartha in the service of Kṛṣṇa and make it meaningful. That is our business. So it requires time. But at least things unnecessarily encumbered... We are encumbered with so many unnecessary thing. So our so-called necessities of life will decrease. Anartha upaśamam . Although we are riding on motor car, we don't think it is essential. But those who are captured by the civilization, they think it is essential. That is the difference. Anāsaktasya viṣayān.



Our process is that if we have to preach, so we have to go to United States. So if there is aeroplane, why shall I waste my time? Let us accept this thing. So we don't deprecate the material advancement. But we simply warn that "Don't forget Kṛṣṇa simply for the matter of material advancement." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We don't discourage you. We don't discourage you, but when you have invented something material, utilize it for Kṛṣṇa. Anāsaktasya viṣayān. Don't be attached to the motor car. But utilize it for going fast for preaching work, that's all. This is required. This is Rūpa Gosvāmī's advice. Don't die for want of motor car. But if you get the opportunity to go faster then walking, you should utilize it. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. This is required, that everything engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. That is called yukta-vairāgya. Not phalgu-vairāgya. Rūpa Gosvāmī says, "Motor car is material; therefore we should not touch it"-this is phalgu-vairāgya. That is stated by Rūpa Gosvāmī that

prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate



Prāpañcikatayā buddhyā. "Because it is material advancement, I therefore... Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. This world is mithyā. This, any material thing, is mithyā." No. It has got some relationship with Kṛṣṇa. That is to be seen. What is that? What is this motor car? It is material. But what is this material? Bhūmir āpaḥ analo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā. Where they have got this metal? This iron, wood, metal, everything, they have got from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it has got relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Now, when it is manufactured, use it for Kṛṣṇa. That is yukta-vairāgya. So we do not hate anything, material advancement. We can utilize everything for Kṛṣṇa's service. Our only preaching is that "Don't forget Kṛṣṇa." That is our business. And if you have got a special talent, utilize it for Kṛṣṇa.



idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

[SB 1.5.22]



Now, if somebody criticizes you that "Why you are using this material ener...?" We don't see anything material. As soon as they say... This manufactured instrument, that is also Kṛṣṇa's energy. We have to see to it that it is Kṛṣṇa's energy, it is made from Kṛṣṇa's energy, and it should be utilized for Kṛṣṇa. This sense required. This sense is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So if you take to bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje, the anartha, things which are not wanted, anartha, or problems, the problems of the world, will be mitigated. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. People do not know it. Lokasya ajānataḥ. Therefore we have to teach them. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Thank you very much. (end)





750423SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.6

-

Vṛndāvana, April 23, 1975



Nitāi: "The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth."



Prabhupāda:



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



Sātvata means eternal, and saṁhitā means Vedic literature. Vedic literature... Veda means knowledge. There are two kinds of knowledge: material knowledge and spiritual knowledge. Material knowledge means regarding these necessities of this body. So our educational system, the university, everything, that is simply imparting material knowledge. But material knowledge is superfluous because this body is also superfluous. Every one of us, we know that this body is nonpermanent. It is temporary. We create a certain type of situation, and we get a particular type of body, and we enjoy or suffer. There is no question of enjoyment; it is suffering. Just like we are running on this fan because the body is suffering. Otherwise, there is no necessity of this fan. And we require this light because without light the eyes will suffer.



So actually our material knowledge, we have discovered this electricity just to counteract these sufferings of this material body. Kaṣṭān kāmān. This body is therefore anartha. Anartha means things which are not required. That is called anartha. Artha means things which we require, positive. And anartha means things which we do not require but unnecessarily imposed upon us. So that is suffering. We are thinking that we are enjoying this electric fan, but actually we are suffering; therefore the electric fan is required. So why this electric fan is required? Because the body is anartha; it has created the situation. The same electric fan will be a trouble, a misery in winter season. The same body, the same electric fan-sometimes it is pleasing, and sometimes it is not pleasing. Therefore the conclusion is this body is anartha, not required. But people do not know that without this material body we can exist. Actually we are existing in spiritual body, and this material body is a covering of the spiritual body. Just like your shirt and coat are covering of your real body, similarly, this material body is covering of the spiritual body. We have got our spiritual body. So when a person comes to the understanding that "This body is anartha, unnecessarily imposed upon me," that is called knowledge. That is called brahma-jñāna. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54].

So in order to educate people to this understanding... That is the basic principle of all Vedic knowledge, that "I am not this body. I am spirit soul, and I must find out the ultimate goal of the spiritual body or the spirit soul." So some of the transcendentalists, they think that if the spirit soul is merged into the Supreme Soul-that is called brahma-lina(?), to become one with Brahman-that is the solution of this anartha. Anartha means this body. And some of them, they think that with our spiritual body, spiritual vision, if we can observe continuously the Supreme Spirit, Paramātmā, then that is the solution of anartha. That is the yogi. Jñānī, yogi. And the karmīs, those who have no knowledge, ajānataḥ, fools, rascals... Ajānataḥ means one who does not know. That is the karmīs. Karmīs, they think that "If I can satisfy the senses of this body, that is perfection of life." So there are three kinds of philosophers to make the solution of this unwanted material body, anartha. But actual solution is to remain in your spiritual body and meet the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face and live with Him in eternal, blissful life of knowledge. That is Vaiṣṇava philosophy.

The Māyāvādī philosophy or the jñānīs and yogis and karmīs... Try to understand. The karmīs want to enjoy the senses of this body. Because the body is anartha, therefore sense gratification is another anartha. Because in this body you are enjoying certain type or certain grade of material enjoyment, sense gratification, and if you want more than that... Just like there are prescription, menu, of human food: vegetable, rice, wheat, sugar. This is actually the food for the human being. But if one hasn't got restriction within the area of the allotted foodstuff... Because we have to accept allotted foodstuff. Everything is food, but the human being has got an allotted foodstuff by the Supreme Lord. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is supplying everyone foodstuff. But not that the dogs' and hogs' foodstuff is the same for the human kind, no. Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā [Īśo mantra 1]. You should enjoy as it is allotted by the Supreme Lord. So if we transgress this law... Our constitutional position, anatomical fittings, is to eat fruit, vegetable, rice, wheat, milk or milk product. This is our constitutional position. But if we imitate the cats and dog, without any discrimination, if we eat, then my next body is ready, the hog's body or the dog's body. This is natural law. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu [Bg. 13.22]. As you associate with different types of material modes of nature, then you get the next body accordingly. Therefore on the whole, the body, either human body or demigod's body or cat's body or dog's body or tree's body or plant's body, it is unnecessary. Unnecessarily we have accepted this material body. Because our position is not this body. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. We are losing every time a particular type of body. But I am eternal. But people are so foolish, so rascal, they do not understand that "If I am eternal, why I have to change my body?" This is intelligence.

So that intelligence is there. Here it is said, lokasya ajānataḥ. The rascals, the fools, ajānataḥ, foolish... Ajānataḥ is another meaning of foolish. Ajānataḥ, ajñāna, without any knowledge how we can stop this perpetual... Not perpetual, but at least for the time being, why we are subjected to these anartha? This is the enquiry. This is called brahma-jijñāsā. But they do not know it. Ask anybody of this material world that "What is the cause of your suffering?" They cannot explain; they do not know it. Therefore it is particularly mentioned, ajānataḥ: "They do not know how to mitigate this suffering." Therefore vidvān. Vidvān, one who has got full knowledge, Vyāsadeva, he has made this sātvata-saṁhitām. Saṁhitā means Vedic knowledge, and sātvata means pure, completely pure, or for the Vaiṣṇavas or the perfect spiritualists. Lokasya ajānataḥ vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. How we can utilize this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, sātvata-saṁhitā? That is also explained in the next verse,

yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

[SB 1.7.7]



Śoka-moha-bhaya, these things are our constant companions. Śoka. Śoka means lamenting, and moha means illusion. And bhaya, bhaya means fearfulness. So we are embarrassed with these things always: śoka, moha and bhaya. Śoka: we are always lamenting, "This thing I have lost. I have lost this business. I have lost my son. I have lost...," so many. Because it is, after all, a losing business. To exist in this material world means it is a losing business. There will be no profit. Therefore whatever we are working for, searching after, real happiness, if it is not devotional service, then the Bhāgavata says, śrama eva hi kevalam: [SB 1.2.8] "Simply working for nothing, and the gain is labor."



So people are suffering in this way. Although they do not know, they are taking it as enjoying. That is illusion. Moha, that is called moha. So we are in the śoka, always in lamentation. But we are accepting this śoka position as enjoyable. Śoka-moha. And the result is that we are always fearful. Bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt. This bhayam... That is the material nature: eating, sleeping, sex life and bhayam. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. This is the bodily business: eating, sleeping, sex life and always fearful, "What will happen next? What will happen next?" These are the anarthas. Actually we are part and parcel of the sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ: [Bs. 5.1] eternal, sat; full of knowledge, sat-cit; and bliss, ānanda, pleasure. This is our life. But this is not our life-eating, sleeping, mating and bhayam. These things are required only dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt, when we identify with the dvitīya, means the second. Second means I am not this body, but the body is the second feature. So when I identify myself with this body, that is called dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ. And on account of our thoughts being absorbed in the secondary body, we are suffering.

So if we want to get relief from the suffering, then it is recommended, yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. If we regularly hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, this sātvata-saṁhitā,... Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām [SB 1.7.7]. Śrūyamāṇa means simply hearing, śravaṇam. Then, by hearing, what will be the effect? The effect will be kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe, kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe bhaktir utpadyate: "The Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa, unto Him your devotional service will be increased." Because anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. The remedy has been described that if you be engaged in the devotional service of Adhokṣaja... Adhokṣaja means the Supreme Person who is beyond your material experience. That is called adhokṣaja. Akṣaja means material, and adhah-kṛta, where material knowledge fails, that is called adhokṣaja. So if you be engaged in devotional service upon this Adhokṣaja... And who is that Adhokṣaja? That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa you cannot understand by the material knowledge. They are studying Kṛṣṇa with material knowledge, but it is not possible. That is said by Kṛṣṇa Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā, that yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ: [Bg. 7.25] "I am not exposed to everyone because the yogamāyā is covering their eyes." In another place Kṛṣṇa says, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] "Because I have come here to favor these people of this world..." These rascals, mūḍha... Mūḍha means rascal. They are deriding. They are thinking Kṛṣṇa as one of us. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja. If you want to see Kṛṣṇa by your material speculation, you will never be able to see Kṛṣṇa. Yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ.

But one may say that "I can see Kṛṣṇa by my pious activities." No, that also not possible. "I can see Kṛṣṇa by my philosophical speculation." No, that is also not possible. "I can see Kṛṣṇa by practicing yoga." That is also not possible. Then how it is possible? Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. This particular process you have to accept, bhaktyā. That is called bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. Everything is there symmetrically in every Vedic literature. We have to take advantage of it and benefit ourself. So the summary is that Kṛṣṇa is beyond your material experimental knowledge. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa by these material senses. It is not possible. Then bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga. Bhakti means to engage oneself in the service. The more you engage in the service of the Lord, (the) more you realize what is Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, it is not possible. If you don't accept bhakti-yoga, if you accept jñāna-yoga, karma-yoga or haṭha-yoga, then you can make some material progress, but there is no possibility of understanding Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is recommended here the bhakti-yogam particularly. Everywhere it is made, bhakti-yoga. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55].

So the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is further explanation of the knowledge given in the Bhagavad-gītā. So it is recommended also that we have to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam always, twenty-four hours. Not that bhāgavata-saptāha. It is a business. Bhāgavata-saptāha is not recommended in anywhere in authorized scripture. There are many big, big commentators of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrīdhara Svāmī, Vīrarāghavācārya, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Jīva Gosvāmī and many other. There are eight authorized. Nowhere you will find bhāgavata-saptāha is recommended. No. Bhāgavata should be studied every day. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. That is recommended. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam. Nityam means always, at least daily. So these temples are meant for hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam daily. That is wanted. Not that I make a ceremony, I hear for one week. Without understanding a word of Bhāgavata, I hear for one week, and the business is finished-no. You have to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam daily, regularly. Then anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣāt. This sātvata-saṁhitā is given by Śrīla Vyāsadeva so that... We are fools, rascal, ajānataḥ, ajānataḥ. Lokasya ajānataḥ. All these fools and rascals, if they hear with great attention from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam about the activities and glories of Kṛṣṇa... Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe [SB 1.7.7]. He is the parama-puruṣa. That is the verdict of all Vedic literature. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. He is īśvara, parama-puruṣa, the Supreme Person. Īśvara means the Supreme Person. In the English dictionary also it is said "God means the Supreme Person." God means the Supreme Person. So that Supreme Person is Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more superior authority than Me." But people do not understand, because ajānataḥ. Ajānataḥ means without any knowledge.

So we have to take knowledge from Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe bhaktir utpadyate. If you hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Of course, if you do not understand what is the basic principle of Kṛṣṇa or basic principle of perfection... That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the beginning. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavaḥ atra paramo nirmatsarāṇām [SB 1.1.2]. Here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the so-called manufactured religious system is kicked out. It is meant for the paramahaṁsa. Nirmatsarāṇām. Nirmatsara means one who does not become envious. So our enviousness, our envy has begun from Kṛṣṇa. We don't accept Kṛṣṇa. Mostly they will say, "Why Kṛṣṇa should be only the Supreme Person? There are many others." That is envy. So our enviousness has begun from Kṛṣṇa, and therefore it has expanded in so many ways. And in our ordinary life we are envious. We are envious of our friends, envious of our father, our son even, what to speak of others-businessmen, nation, society, community, only enviousness. Matsaratā. "Why he should go ahead?" I become envious. This is material nature.

So when one understands Kṛṣṇa, he is Kṛṣṇa conscious, he becomes nonenvious, no more envious. He wants to become friend. Suhṛdaḥ sarva-bhūtānām. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means we want to become friends of everyone. Because they are suffering without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we are going door to door, city to city, village to village, town to town to preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And by the grace of Kṛṣṇa we are attracting the attention of intelligent class of men. So if we continue this process, not to become envious... That is animal nature, dog's nature, hog's nature. Human nature should be para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. One should be very unhappy by seeing others in miserable condition. So everyone is suffering for want of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Our only business is to awaken his Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and the whole world will be happy. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje, lokasya ajānataḥ. People have no knowledge about it. So we have to push on this movement. Lokasyājān..., vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So another name of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is bhāgavata-dharma. Bhāgavata-dharma. If we accept it, then the whole human society will be happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



760818SB.HYD

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.6

-

Hyderabad, August 18, 1976



Śrīla Prabhupāda's Speech at

The Opening of the Hyderabad Temple



Prabhupāda:



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



This is a description of Vyāsadeva. Vidvān. Even from literary point of view, if you see the contribution of Vyāsadeva, it is not possible in any age. So many books. Four Vedas, Vedānta-sūtra, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas, and the most important contribution is the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That is his last contribution. Under the instruction of his spiritual master Nārada Muni he contributed Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, amalaṁ purāṇam. Amalaṁ purāṇam means there is no material contamination. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90], there are material contaminations. But above this is the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Vyāsadeva introduces dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ vāstavaṁ vastu vedyam atra [SB 1.1.2]. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa. There are some contamination, cheating. But all these things are thrown away, projjhita. Prakṛṣṭa-rūpena ujjhita. So Śrīdhara Svāmī has given his comment on this. Atra mokṣa-vāñchā api nirastam. Mokṣa-vāñchā, to become one with the Supreme. That is also another cheating. So Śrīdhara Svāmī has given his comment, very reliable comment.



So dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa. People are busy, at least those who are human beings. Dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. Beginning with dharma. Economic development, artha. Dharma-artha-kāma, sense gratification. And at the end, mokṣa. Above mokṣa is bhakti. Mokṣa is described in the Bhagavad-gītā,

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



Without being on the platform mokṣa, nobody can enter into the bhakti. It is a misconception that bhakti helps mokṣa. Somebody says, it is not the opinion of the śāstra. Bhakti begins when one is already liberated. Mokṣa. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. Without Brahman, without Brahman realization, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, there cannot be jubilation, prasannātmā. This is the sign. What is prasannātmā? Na śocati na kāṅkṣati. The material disease is everyone is hankering after something which he hasn't got. And when he loses that thing, he's lamenting. These two business. Śocati kāṅkṣati. So brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54], when one is actually self-realized, brahma-bhūtaḥ, na śocati na kāṅkṣati. This is the symptom. Then samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Then it is possible to see equally everyone. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18].



So that is liberated stage. So when one has come to the liberated stage, from there he can begin mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. Bhakti means the activities of the liberated stage. That is not material things. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is little difficult to understand because these activities are for the persons who have already attained mokṣa. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is stated,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



So do not misunderstand that bhakti is lower than something else. There are karma, jñāna, yoga, bhakti. Bhakti is the ultimate. So if you want to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth, take from His instruction, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know Kṛṣṇa or the Absolute Supreme Personality of Godhead, brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. The Absolute Truth is realized from three angles of vision: impersonal Brahman, localized Paramātmā, and ultimately Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. So if you want to understand Bhagavān... Brahman realization is possible. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padam [SB 10.2.32]. This paraṁ padam, Brahman realization... And Paramātmā realization: dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. But if you want to realize the last phase of the Absolute Truth it requires bhakti. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55].



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



This is the word used by Kṛṣṇa personally. Nobody understands Him, tattvataḥ, what He is actually. We understand superficially, "Kṛṣṇa was born in Mathurā, and He was the son of Vasudeva, and so on, so on." But one has to understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ: in truth. And Kṛṣṇa says janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti, he immediately becomes lib... If you understand simply Kṛṣṇa, tattvataḥ, then immediately you become liberated. The result is tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. We are changing our bodies, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. We are accepting... People do not know even this. We have talked with many big, big professors in Europe, in Moscow also. And they say, "Swamiji, after the annihilation of this body, everything is finished." But we get instruction from the Bhagavad-gītā, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre nityaḥ śāśvato 'yam [Bg. 2.20].



So we are missing our own culture that we do not take very much care to understand Bhagavad-gītā As It Is. We make our wrong interpretation and spoil the whole thing. These habits should be stopped. Otherwise our culture is almost already lost. Then this bhāratīya culture... It is very important culture. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



Para-upakāra. The bhārata-bhūmi is meant for doing good to others. Bhārata-bhūmi is not meant for exploiting others. This is not bhāratīya mission. Para-upakāra. So every Indian...That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Because every Indian is born Kṛṣṇa conscious, naturally he has got instinct. Don't destroy it. Don't destroy it. That is our request. You have got already. We have seen practically, whenever we hold some festival in Calcutta, Bombay and other big cities, thousands of people, twenty thousand, fifteen thousand, thirty thousand people come. They are hankering. So if we simply introduce this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, you'll very soon see that the face of India is different. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣāt. We have captured so many anartha. Anartha means meaningless life. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje lokasyājānataḥ [SB 1.7.6]. The foolish people, they do not know it. Therefore vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām. The sātvata-saṁhitā is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So let us combinedly preach the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā.



Bhagavad-gītā is the preliminary study of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhagavad-gītā ends sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekāṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is the end of Bhagavad-gītā's instruction, that "Give up all nonsense, just take shelter under My lotus feet." If you hesitate that "If I give up everything..." You haven't got to give up everything, but you have to understand the meaning of life. Arjuna, when he understood Bhagavad-gītā, he did not give up his profession as a military man. But what was the change? The change is Kṛṣṇa inquired from Arjuna: "What is now your decision? I have spoken to you everything about jñāna and guhya-guhyatamam. Now you consider upon it and whatever you like you do." Yathecchasi tathā kuru [Bg. 18.63]. So upon this Arjuna replied naṣṭo mohaḥ. "My illusion is now over." Naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā. "My memory is now returned." Kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73], "I shall act according to You." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Try to understand what is the purpose of Bhagavad-gītā. You haven't got to give up everything. You can be engaged in everything but if you utilize everything according to the instruction of Kṛṣṇa then it will be successful. Otherwise it will be failure. So we have tested all these things, how many programs and plans we have made and everything has failed. Why not try to take the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, the instruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and try to utilize it for practical life. And it will be successful. There is no doubt about it. I am speaking from my practical experience.

Now these foreigners, they are neither Hindus nor Indian nor brāhmaṇas. How they are taking? They are not fools and rascals. They are coming from respectable family, educated. So we have got our centers in Iran also. In Tehran, I am just coming from there. We have got so many Mohammedan students, and they have also taken to it. In Africa they have taken to it. In Australia they have taken to it. All over the world. So that is the Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission.

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma



This is the prediction of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. As many towns and villages are there all over the world, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement will be spread. So there is no credit for me, but it is only a teeny attempt, and humble attempt. So if one man could do, if you say, some success, why not all of us? Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given power of attorney to all Indians. Bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra [Cc. Ādi 9.41]. He's speaking to the manuṣya, not to the cats and dogs. So manuṣya-janma yāra janma sārthaka kari'. First of all, try to understand what is the purpose of life. That is called janma sārthaka. Janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra. Go. Everywhere there is very good demand for Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So everyone should be prepared, everyone should understand Bhagavad-gītā. Of course, it is not possible for everyone to go. Still, if one understands... That is also Caitanya Mahāprabhu's order. Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. He says everyone of you become a guru. How can I become guru? I am not very learned scholar, I have no education. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu says no. Even though you are not very much educated or not born of a very high family, you simply, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. That's all. You become a guru. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. Don't adulterate it, but as Kṛṣṇa says, you say. You become guru. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... So I have tried that. I have tried to follow the Caitanya Mahāprabhu's instruction, and I am presenting Bhagavad-gītā As It Is. There is no magic, there is no jugglery and people are taking. If you do that everyone will be happy, the world will be happy and India's glory will be spread all over the world.

Thank you very much. (end)



760905SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.6

-

Vṛndāvana, September 5, 1976



Devotee:



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



"The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth."



Prabhupāda: We were discussing this verse yesterday. Anartha. This anartha means this material civilization. There is no need, and still we have accepted it. That is called anartha, meaningless. So there are hundreds and thousands of anarthas, as it is stated that śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. Sahasraśaḥ means thousands and thousands. Because we have created anartha, unnecessary necessities of life, therefore we have to know, we have to learn, we have to teach so many unwanted... Just like there is a problem now, especially in the Western countries, unwanted population. They do not want, but it is increasing. Similarly, unwanted necessities. This is called anartha. Simple thing. Just like we require some food. That is essential. We cannot live without taking food. That is not possible. So Kṛṣṇa is giving very simple formula, that annād bhavanti bhūtāni. If there is sufficient quantity of anna, or eatables, then people become very nice, well-satisfied, either animal or man. If he can eat sufficiently, he's satisfied. So annād bhavanti bhūtāni. Bhavanti means flourish. He becomes healthy, he becomes strong, and he can think nicely, he can work nicely. So anna is required. But simple method is given how anna is produced. That is also given, annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. If there is sufficient rain, then you can easily produce food grain. Just like this year, the rain is sufficient; everywhere we go it is green. Green means sufficient food for the animals. And if the field is very soft, you can till it and you can get easily, very nicely, foodstuff. Therefore parjanya, water, rain, is required. Parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. And yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. And by performing yajña there will be cloud and rain.



That was the... Yajña is required. In this age, Kali-yuga, it is very difficult to perform the Vedic ritualistic yajñas. It requires tons of ghee and food grains. And people have nothing to eat even. But śāstra has made it very easy. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. If you perform the saṅkīrtana-yajña, then it is as good any other yajña. Yajña means to satisfy the yajña-puruṣa, Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu. So in the Kali-yuga, simply by performing yajñas you can satisfy the Supreme Lord. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ. We have seen in many places by performing yajña, the saṅkīrtana-yajña, where it was very dry, rain has fallen. This is practical. So things are very easy. But instead of producing food grains, we are producing Goodyear tires. So how we can eat? Now when there is scarcity of foodstuff you cannot eat the Goodyear tires. But people's attention has been diverted in the industrial activities. They are given allurement, "Come here. I shall give you twenty rupees per day. You give up your agricultural activities. You come in the factory. Produce tire tube, iron stool," and so on so on. So we are violating the orders of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says that produce foodgrain. But we are producing unnecessary things. And therefore you are suffering. Kṛṣṇa is giving very good advice: annād bhavanti bhūtāni. You produce sufficient foodgrain, all over, not only here. Another anartha is this nationalism. Nationalism: "This is America," "This is India," "This is Africa," "This is Australia." Why? Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Simple thing. Everything belongs to God. Īśāvāsya. There will be no scarcity. I have studied very thoroughly that there are sufficient land still without any cultivation. In Africa I have seen sufficient land. But they are utilizing it for producing coffee and tea. No food grains. So these are the anarthas. Anartha. Unnecessary. People will not die without coffee and tea. But they have made the whole world self-dependent on coffee and tea, mercantile policy. There is anartha.

So anartha, if you want happy life, peaceful life, progressive life, then you have to curtail these anarthas. Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Without curtailing these anarthas, unwanted things, you cannot become happy. So that is recommended here. Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt sākṣād bhaktim adhokṣaje. As soon as you become a devotee, all anarthas become immediately vanquished. Just like here, these Europeans and Americans, they are accustomed to anarthas from the very beginning of their life. And the latest anartha was their intoxication, LSD. But by bhakti-yoga, because they have taken to bhakti-yoga, very easily they have given all these habits. Even government is surprised. In Europe, and especially in America, their government is spending millions of dollars to stop this LSD habit. They cannot do it. They praise our movement in this connection. And as soon as one comes to this movement, he immediately gives up. Immediately, without any hesitation. I make this first condition, that you have to give up all kinds of intoxication. Not only LSD, but even drinking tea, coffee, smoking, everything you have to give up. Chewing pān, everything. And they agree. We do not make any compromise that "You can do any nonsense and still you become initiated. Give me some money." No. We don't make such compromise. You must first of all agree to give up all these sinful activities. Then I can accept you. I can initiate you. This is our process.

So compulsory, the government is trying to make compulsory, but that cannot. You cannot make a person honest simply by legislation. He must be vimarśanam. Prāyaścittaṁ vimarśanam. One must be fully conscious, "Now what I am doing, it is wrong." Then anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Just like a person who is a thief, he knows that "I am stealing, and if I am arrested, I'll be punished." He knows that. And he has seen that one thief is arrested. So we get two kinds of experiences. One kind of experience by hearing: "If you do this, then the result will be this." That is hearing. And one kind of experience by directly seeing. So the thief has both. He has seen that a thief has been punished, and he knows by hearing from the lawbooks or from religious books that stealing is not good. But still he commits repeatedly, again and again stealing. Why? Because he has no knowledge. Therefore knowledge is essential. That knowledge can be revived. This is kṛṣṇa-kīrtana. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has recommended, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam, ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. You want ānanda, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Everyone is seeking after ānanda. So pūrṇānanda. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's recommendation.

So bhakti-yoga means chanting. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. This is the beginning. Hear about Viṣṇu, chant about Viṣṇu. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. No, not any other. Śāstra says Viṣṇu. But there are many rascals, they say you can chant any name. Why? Why the śāstra says śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, chanting and hearing about Viṣṇu, not for any other god? That is not recommended. But they make. Because they are impersonalists, they have no God, they have made "God means imagination." But God is not imagination. God-here is Kṛṣṇa. He's not imagination. He says aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2], "I am the origin of everyone."

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



So because you do not know what is God, so our life is void. But here Kṛṣṇa is personally coming, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. What is that glāni? Dharmasya glāniḥ. That you are very dharmika, so-called dharmika, but you have no understanding what is God-that is nonsense. That is not dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means the order of God. That if you do not know God, if you manufacture your God, "God has no head, no mouth, no nose, no nothing, no, no, no, ultimately zero..." Ultimately zero. So there are two kinds of dangerous person. One person is atheist, agnostic. And another person is Māyāvādī, impersonalist. Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādī. Therefore these two things are mentioned: Māyāvādī, "God means has no head, no leg," and śūnyavādī, "There is no God." So the person who says "There is no God," he's gentleman, because he does not believe. But the person who takes the shelter of Vedas and professes that "I am vaidika, I am vedāntī," and refuses the form of God, he's more dangerous.



It is the statement of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

veda nā māniyā bauddha haya ta' nāstika

vedāśraya nāstikya-vāda bauddhake adhika



The nāstika, the Buddhists, they are called nāstika according to our śāstra, because Lord Buddha denied the existence, the authority of the Vedas.



nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātaṁ

sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam

keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare



Keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra. Keśava, Kṛṣṇa has come, taking the form of Lord Buddha. We Vaiṣṇava, we worship Lord Buddha as the incarnation of Keśava, Kṛṣṇa, but we don't accept his philosophy. So there is a great history. We have mentioned many times. So these Buddhists, they say that "We do not recognize your Vedas." So veda nā māniyā bauddha haya ta' nāstika. Therefore we call them agnostic. They do not... Because why we do not accept them authority? Because if you do not accept the authority of the Vedas, then you become godless immediately. Because Kṛṣṇa said vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. If you do not understand Vedic knowledge, if you do not understand Vedānta, if you do not understand Upaniṣad-without understanding this Vedic knowledge, understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is vague. It is no clear idea. Therefore Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has said,



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



If one is not in awareness of the conclusion of Vedas, conclusion of the smṛti, conclusion of the Purāṇas, and pañcarātra-vidhi. Nārada-pañcarātra, aikāntikī harer bhaktiḥ, without reference to this Vedic literature, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has said utpāta, simply disturbance. Simply a disturbance. Manufacturing. They'll manufacture some ways. There are so many anarthas. If we come to detail it will take long, long time.



Anyway, if we want to, I mean to say, abolish all kinds of anarthas, unwanted things, then we must take to bhakti-yoga. Then everything will be clear. Everything will be clear, very clear. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ. This śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ, just like you are so kind enough to come here to hear about Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by this process. This has been recommended by Caitanya Mahāprabhu: sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You remain in your place. You don't require to become a sannyāsī, mendicant, or brahmacārī, or change your place. No. When Rāmānanda Rāya quoted this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to Caitanya Mahāprabhu... He was discussing about the aim of life and the process of reaching the aim of life. He mentioned so many things-karma, jñāna, yoga, etc., so many things. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, eho bāhya, āge kaha āra: "Yes, this statement is not very important. If you know still further more, you can say." So in this way, step by step... When Rāmānanda Rāya came to this conclusion, that

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām



This is the statement, that remain in your place, but hear from the authorities about Kṛṣṇa, then everything will be clear. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Even if you do not understand a word, but if you hear from the realized soul about Kṛṣṇa, then, hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti suhṛt satām. Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. If we become sincere to hear about Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will help us. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, dadāmi buddhi-yogam [Bg. 10.10]. He'll give intelligence. This is the process. Teṣām evānukampārtham aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ nāśayāmi [Bg. 10.11]. These things are there.



Therefore if we want to abolish all unwanted things of life, simply we come to the spiritual platform. Because that is our aim. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This human life is meant for spiritual understanding, not for any other purpose. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ, śāstra recommends. Only for spiritual understanding engage your activities. And what will be other things, about my family life, worldly life? That is said that tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham. Just like you don't aspire or don't wish for distressed condition. It comes upon you. Similarly, whatever happy condition in your life is expected, that will also come. You don't require... There are many places. So our endeavor, the human energy should be fully engaged in understanding Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Nothing else. Other things we should minimize. Yāvad artha-prayojanam. Just to maintain the body and soul together you should live very nicely. You should not become weak by health; otherwise, we cannot execute. But don't eat more, don't eat unnecessary things. Atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ. Atyāhāra, to eat more or to collect more than is required, that is forbidden by Rūpa Gosvāmī.

atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati

[NoI 2]



So anartha-nivṛtti, that is required because we are surrounded by so many anarthas, unwanted things. They are all impediments, stumbling blocks on our progressive journey to Kṛṣṇa realization. Here it is said anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje lokasyājānataḥ. People do not know it. Therefore vidvān, Vedavyāsa, he has compiled this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Sātvata-saṁhitā. It is Vedic version, and directly to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and become free from all contamination of the material nature. Because we are now under the contamination of material nature.



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



We are thinking we are very independent, we can do any nonsense, whatever we like. Who cares for...? But that is not good, because we are not independent. We are completely under the grip of material nature. Simply as a crazy man we declare independence. That is not a very good idea. We must know what are the anarthas and how we shall get out of it.



Thank you very much. (end)



750424SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.7

-

Vṛndāvana, April 24, 1975



Nitāi: "...the feeling for loving devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts up at once to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion, and fearfulness."



Prabhupāda:



yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

[SB 1.7.7]



In the previous verse we have discussed how to be free from the unwanted association, anartha. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣāt. Material life means to be involved with so many unwanted things. That is material life. At the present moment, especially in this Kali-yuga, we are very, very much fallen. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. Prāyeṇa alpa āyuṣaḥ kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ. So this human life is especially meant for cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or spiritual understanding of life. Unfortunately, we are very, very slow, manda. Manda means bad, fallen, abominable. The whole population in this age, they are very, very fallen, manda. Why manda? They have advanced so much in material comforts. That is not required. Real requisition is how to develop our spiritual understanding. That is wanted. But they are not interested, manda. Manda means slow or very, very bad. They do not know.



People say... Just like you go in European and American cities for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, and especially the Indian gentlemen, they come. They laugh. They say, "What is this? We have rejected the so-called Hare Kṛṣṇa chanting, and these people have taken and chanting in the street." They think that... Many students in Europe and America, Indian students I mean to say, they put forward that question to me, "Swamiji, how this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra will help us? At the present moment we require technology." They challenge me. Of course, I reply. This is the position of India. They have given up Hare Kṛṣṇa. They are working very hard for getting some money for bread. It is said in the śāstra that in the Kali-yuga people will have to work so hard, like an ass, to get their morsel of food. We have seen in Calcutta, somebody with sacred thread, he was pulling ṭhelā and perspiring. And somebody known to him, he said, Panditji, palale(?), means "I offer my respect to you," and the ṭhelā-wālā says, jitalau(?). This is the position. A brāhmaṇa is pulling ṭhelā; it is working like an ass. Pulling ṭhelā is not the business of human being, but although he thinks himself to be a brāhmaṇa, he is engaged in pulling ṭhelā. This is Kali's position, manda. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyāḥ [SB 1.1.10], unfortunate, unfortunate.

Therefore Ṛṣabhadeva has forbidden, that "This life, human form of life, is not meant for working so hard like hogs and dogs." Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. This is the advice. But we are advancing in civilization-to get our food, we have to work so hard. This is condemnation of life. Human life should be very peaceful, and without any hard work we shall get our food and save time for advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is human life, not that for senses gratification we work so hard like an ass. This is called anartha. Anartha means unwanted things. We can see practically. The birds and beasts, they are living very easy and comfortable life without any problem. They rise early in the morning regularly. You have seen. As soon as there is little light, immediately they will rise up and they will talk amongst themselves and go, one tree to another, and he will eat one or two fruits, little fruits, ample fruit. They have no scarcity of food. And live very pleasantly. For eating, sleeping, sex life, they have no problem. These are primary necessities of life. Why there should be problem for these things? But in the human society there is problem. That is called the effect of Kali-yuga. Effect of Kali-yuga means the so-called advancement of material civilization means to become godless, immoral, and they must suffer. That is going on.

So we are increasing our anarthas, anarthas, and we are becoming entangled in the cycle of birth and death. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. Once we take a certain type of body, we enjoy or suffer for some time; then again we have to give up this body, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13], and there is no guarantee what sort of body you are going to get. But it is certain that you are going to get a body. And that may be offered to you by the laws of nature. It may be an important, more important body than what we have got just now, or it may be less important. It may be cats and dog or hog, and it may be the body of demigod. That is according to karma. So in this way we are passing our life eternally. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. We get one type of body, and again we give it up. Dehāntara-prāptiḥ. This is called anartha, anartha. Anartha upaśamam. What is that anartha? This is anartha. Why shall I get a new type of body? I am eternal. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Why I am getting this temporary body? This is called brahma-jijñāsā. Unless a man is awakened to this consciousness, "Why?"-Kena Upaniṣad-he is not human being; he is animal. The animal cannot question. The dog cannot question that "Why I have got this dog's body, and my master has got the human body?" No. He has no such knowledge. But if a human being cannot consider that "I am also an animal, and this dog is also animal. I am situated so comfortably, and the dog is loitering in the street for a little food. Why this condition...?" So śāstra says, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. One should think that "If I get another body, whether I shall get the dog's body or a human body or demigod's body?" That is consideration. That is intelligence. Not that "Because I have got this American comfortable body or Indian comfortable body, I should be very much satisfied and do whatever nonsense I think," no. We are under the grip of the stringent laws of material nature. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu. This is human intelligence. One should not be satisfied with this comfortable or so-called educated human body. We should be prepared what we are going to get next. That is real knowledge. Because it is anartha. Anartha means unwanted. "Why shall I get at all any body? I am eternal; I must live eternally." That is human knowledge. That is called brahma-jijñāsā.

So Vyāsadeva, vidvān. Vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. He is learned; we are all fools. Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām [SB 1.7.7]. If we... He has made for us. He is compassionate. Strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnām [SB 1.4.25]. Those who are actually advanced brāhmaṇa, they take care of. But those who are not brāhmaṇas-strī, śūdra, vaiśya and dvija-bandhu... Dvija-bandhu means born in higher family, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya, but does not take care of the real values of life or does not know what is spiritual life. He is called dvija-bandhu. Dvija-bandhu means "a friend of a dvija." He cannot be called the born of a dvija. This particular name is very significant, dvija-bandhu. Just like a son of a high-court justice. You can call him the son of the justice, but he is not justice. Similarly, a son born in brāhmaṇa family, kṣatriya family, higher circle, if he does not act like that, then he should be called according to his qualification. Tat tenaiva vinirdiśet yady anyatra vinirdiśet [SB 7.11.35]. This is the instruction of Nārada Muni. If the son of a brāhmaṇa has acquired the qualities of a śūdra, then he should be called a śūdra, not a brāhmaṇa. Unfortunately the..., in India especially, where we have got all the śāstras, against the śāstras, without any qualification of a brāhmaṇa one is claiming to be brāhmaṇa. In Mahārāja Pṛthu's time, he was especially supervising whether a brāhmaṇa is engaged in his brahminical activities, whether a kṣatriya is engaged in his kṣatriya activities. Not that a brāhmaṇa is engaged in śūdra activities and he should be called a brāhmaṇa. That was restricted formerly.

So if we want to become free from anartha then we must follow the Vedic way of civilization. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāg... [Bg. 4.13]. According... The other day I was suggesting the governor that "Open varṇāśrama college." As we are training a medical practitioner and an engineer or any particular type of line, similarly, there must be training school and college where a person or a boy may be educated as a brāhmaṇa or as a kṣatriya. It is very simple thing. We should not... I was suggesting, "The secular government does not mean that let people do whatever he likes." No. Yata mata tata patha. No, that is not... A government's duty is, if anyone is proclaiming himself a Hindu, the government must see that he is acting as a Hindu. If a person is claiming to be Mussulman, he must act as a Mussulman. That is secular government. Secular government may be impartial, but it is not the government's duty to let the people to be whimsical: "Whatever he likes, he can do." No. That is not civilization. So we were discussing on this point.

So these anarthas will increase as long as we are godless rascals and demons. Therefore here it is suggested, anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. If you want to be a right gentleman, means according to your position... If you are a brāhmaṇa, you should act as a brāhmaṇa; if you are a kṣatriya, you should act as a kṣatriya; if you are a vaiśya, you act as a vaiśya; and if you are none of them, then you are a śūdra. In this way, if we live like a gentleman, then we can make progress further in spiritual advancement. If we live foolishly, whimsically, as we like, yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ [Bg. 16.23], whatever we like, and others engaged, "Yes, whatever you do, it is right," yata mata tata patha, this is rascaldom. No, you must act according to the śāstra. But there may be question that "Whether it is possible now to revive the old cultural position?" Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore not condemned but rejected. When He was talking with Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, so Caitanya Mahāprabhu was putting question, and Rāmānanda Rāya was answering. So in the beginning Caitanya Mahāprabhu enquired from Rāmānanda Rāya, "What is the aim of life?" Sādhya-sādhana. "What is the aim of life and how to achieve it?" So Rāmānanda Rāya, he was a learned scholar and devotee, he prescribed the varṇāśrama-dharma. He said, "This is the beginning of human life." And he quoted a verse from the Viṣṇu Purāṇa,

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



Because our aim of life is to approach Lord Viṣṇu. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. The modern civilization, they do not know it, na te viduḥ, that what is the aim of life. The aim of life is to satisfy Lord Viṣṇu. This the aim of life. Just like ordinarily, the common citizen, a good citizen, his duty is to abide by the laws of the state. That is called good citizen. And if you do not become a good citizen, then you are put into the prison house, good citizen and bad citizen. Similarly, the aim of human life is to approach Viṣṇu. But the materialistic persons, they do not care for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they manufacture their own plan with materialistic idea. Durāśayā ye bahir-artha... Bahir-artha, the external necessity, that is called bahir-artha. The bahir-artha and anartha is the same thing. Because that is not necessity. We are born under certain laws of the nature. Now instead of trying to improve this... That cannot be improved, because the destiny is there. If you are to enjoy a certain type of happiness, it is there already with your birth. A particular type of body which you have obtained, that is already there. You don't require to improve it. It will never be improved. So our main business is how to improve in spiritual life. That is required. Materially, but if you improve in spiritual life, then if you have got any desire for material improvement, that will be automatically served. You don't require to try for it separately.



tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



This is the conclusion of the śāstra, that "You have got this human form of life. Your only business is how to advance in spiritual consciousness or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is your only business."



But because we are surrounded by so many unwanted things, anartha, we are becoming entangled in the cycle of birth and death and old age and disease in different forms. So we do not know it. Most people, they do not know it. Therefore Vyāsadeva, lokasya ajānataḥ. Because these fools and rascals, they do not know it, therefore he has compiled the sātvata-saṁhitā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And the next, it is recommended,

yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

[SB 1.7.7]



The bhakti-yoga means to become free from these anarthas, unwanted things we have created. Now, how it will be, how we shall become free from the anarthas, that is recommended, yasyāṁ vai śrū... "That sātvata-saṁhitā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, if we hear regularly..." Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām [SB 1.7.7]. Simply by hearing. You don't require to understand even; the hearing is so powerful. That is stated in other place, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Kṛṣṇa-kathā is puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. If you simply hear and talk about Kṛṣṇa, you become pious, pious. Even if you don't understand the Sanskrit or English, simply if we become eager to hear about Kṛṣṇa, then you become pious. It is so powerful. Therefore it is recommended, yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. This should be our practice. We are giving this Bhāgavata translation all over the world. And you will be surprised that we are selling more than thirty, forty lakhs of rupees per month. This movement is helping the whole human civilization. So yasyāṁ vai... If one purchases... That is our propaganda. Some or other, we are giving one book. This is in the matter of following the footprints of our Guru Mahārāja. Our Guru Mahārāja, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī, he was publishing one small paper, Dainika(?) Nadiya Prakash in Bengali. And if a brahmacārī would go and sell a few copies, he would be very, very glad. He would be very, very glad. And similarly, he advised me also that "If you get some money, publish book." And he used to say that "This press propaganda, the publication propaganda, is bṛhad-mṛdaṅga." So just to satisfy him we are trying to publish this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Caitanya-caritāmṛta, very, very authoritative books, in English. And by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, it is unique in the history that religious book can be sold forty lakhs of rupees per month. It is record-breaking. There is no such instance. Because we are trying to give the opportunity, yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām [SB 1.7.7]. Simply by hearing he will become pious. People are suffering on account of becoming impious. So one cannot understand what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa, unless he has finished his impious activity.



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



This is the principle, that you cannot keep men in their impious activities, at the same time he becomes religious or God conscious. That is not possible. That is not possible.



So Caitanya Mahāprabhu has prescribed a very easy method to become pious. That is the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. The real disease is within our heart. Hṛd-roga-kāma. Hṛd-roga-kāma. We have got a disease, heart disease. What is that? Kāma, lusty desires. That is called hṛd-roga-kāma. So we have to cure this heart disease, hṛd-roga-kāma. And that will be done simply by chanting and hearing the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam. The heart is all right, but it is covered by the material dirty things, namely the three guṇas: sattva-raja-tamo-guṇa. But by hearing simply Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, by hearing chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, you will be purified. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityaṁ bhāga... If we take this opportunity... We are opening centers all over the world just to give the people this opportunity, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam. Then, as soon as the heart is cleansed by hearing about Kṛṣṇa... Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends that. Yāre dekha, tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is also kṛṣṇa-upadeśa because by hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you will be interested in kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, about Kṛṣṇa. That is also kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, and the upadeśa, instruction, given by Kṛṣṇa, that is also kṛṣṇa-upadeśa.

So this is the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that you go and preach and make propaganda about kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are teaching all our men how to spread kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, how to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣāt. Then all the unwanted things he has contaminated will be finished. Then pure consciousness... Pure consciousness is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Pure consciousness means to understand that "I am very much intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa as part and parcel." Just like my finger is very intimately connected with my body. Intimate... If there is little pain in the finger, I become so much disturbed because I have got intimate connection with this finger. Similarly, we have got intimate connection with Kṛṣṇa, and we are fallen. Therefore Kṛṣṇa also feels little pain, and therefore He comes down.

paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

[Bg. 4.8]



Kṛṣṇa is feeling pain. So you become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then Kṛṣṇa will feel pleasure. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



Thank you very much. (end)



760906SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.7

-

Vṛndāvana, September 6, 1976



Devotee:



yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

[SB 1.7.7]



Translation: "Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic literature, the feeling for loving devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts up at once to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion and fearfulness."



Prabhupāda: Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. The Sātvata-saṁhitā, we have already discussed yesterday morning. Vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. This is Vaiṣṇava. Vidvān. Vaiṣṇava is always vidvān. Vid means knowledge and vān means one who has knowledge. That is called vidvān. Vidvān. So Vyāsadeva, he's known as Veda-vyāsa. He's the giver of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is not given by him. The Vedic knowledge is given by Kṛṣṇa Himself. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, He gave the knowledge to Lord Brahmā. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. Ādi-kavi, the original learned person. Just like this modern nonsense theory that there was in the beginning no life. But that is nonsense. In the beginning there was Brahmā, the most learned person.



So this theory, modern scientists, that there was no human being or there was no man, they are all rascal speculation. It has no value. Here we get the knowledge, that originally the Vedic knowledge was given to Lord Brahmā, and from Lord Brahmā, Nārada received the knowledge, and from Nārada Vyāsadeva received the knowledge. And from Vyāsadeva, by paramparā disciplic succession, we have received this knowledge. The knowledge is the same. There is no alteration. Because it is coming through the paramparā system there is no breakage. Just like from a very top height, if you give something, but if it is given hand to hand it does not break. But if you drop anything from very high place it will be spoiled. Therefore it comes through the paramparā. Take for example one fruit, ripened fruit. This Bhāgavatam is accepted as the ripened fruit of the Vedic desire tree. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3]. It is the ripened fruit of all Vedic knowledge. Because Vedic knowledge means to understand God. That is Vedic knowledge. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is Vedic knowledge. To understand the Supreme Lord, the original person. That is the end of Vedic knowledge. So that Vedic knowledge is presented in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and therefore in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Vyāsadeva offers his respectful obeisances, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Vāsudeva is the origin. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. One who has known that vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti, "Vāsudeva is everything," sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. He's not only ordinary mahātmā, he is su-durlabhaḥ. Durlabhaḥ means "very rare," and when you add this word su, it is "very, very difficult." Su-durlabhaḥ. That kind of mahātmā... (aside:) You sit down properly. Who is that man? You sit down properly. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19].

So how one can understand Vāsudeva? Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births. Because we are-all living entities in this material world-we are all rascals. We must know it. All rascals. Abodha-jataḥ. Everyone who is born in this material world, either he may be... Even Lord Brahmā, and down to the small insect. Anyone who has come to this material world... Because we are not material. We are spiritual identity. Na jāyate na mriyate vā. Never takes birth, never dies. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This is the identification given by Lord Kṛṣṇa. But we are so foolish and rascals we never question that "My position is na jāyate na mriyate vā. I never take birth, never I die. Then why I am afraid of death and why I am actually undergoing birth and death? I am born, everyone knows. I come out from my mother. Therefore jāyate. So why I have taken birth? And again everyone knows, 'As sure as death,' mriyate vā. So why this discrepancy?" This is human being. The cats and dog, they cannot question these things.

So this question is called brahma-jijñāsā, that "I am spirit soul, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. So 'ham. I am the same quality as the Supreme Lord. So why I am put into this condition?" This is beginning of human life. This is the beginning of human life. And if one does not inquire this, then he is animal. Plain thing. Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī. He was minister, but he could understand that "What to speak of becoming a minister... Minister can become any rascal. I am the fool number one." Therefore he came to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and the first question was ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. He was never proud, that "I am minister, I am so learned scholar. Why shall I go to Caitanya Mahāprabhu and ask Him who am I?" This is humbleness, and this is the qualification of becoming a disciple. When one becomes humble, when actually one understands that he is fool number one, he has to go to guru to understand the value of his life. Then he is intelligent. And so long he keeps himself in the darkness, that "I know everything. Who is richer than me? Who is learned than me? Who is powerful than me? I am this, I am that," that means he is rascal. Abodha-jataḥ. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jataḥ. So long we keep ourself in this misunderstanding that "I know everything. I am very great person," then whatever he is doing, it is his defeat. Abodha-jataḥ. Parābhavaḥ. That is going on. The so-called leaders, they do not know what is their spiritual identification, and becoming unnecessarily proud, they are doing anything and everything. Abodha-jataḥ. They do not know they'll have to suffer for this ignorance. We have repeatedly said that if you keep yourself in the ignorance and if you do... Because wrong thing is done by rascals and ignorant. No intelligent man will do any wrong thing. That's a fact. Violation of the law is done, either a criminal willfully doing or a person, one who does not know the law, he commits. But you know or not know, if you have violated the law, then you have to be punished.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



You are not independent.



So Vyāsadeva, he is giving us this knowledge. Vidvān lokasyājānataḥ. The whole population, the total number of the living entities-either he is Brahmā or a small-proportionately, they are all in ignorance. Otherwise why Brahmā required Vedic knowledge? It is said, tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. Ādi-kavaye, Brahmā, he is svayambhū. He's so great that he's directly born from Nārāyaṇa, svayambhū, not through any material mother. Just imagine how he is great. And Brahmā is great, everyone knows. So he had to take knowledge also. Otherwise, why it is said tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye? Even though he's the most learned, ādi-kavaye, he had to take knowledge. So you can say "He is the first creature, there was nobody there. How he took knowledge? Who gave him knowledge?" The answer is there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that Vāsudeva gave him. "Where is Vāsudeva? There was nothing." No. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Vāsudeva means who stays everywhere. Vasati sarvatra. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. So Vāsudeva is there. So Brahmā was, although there was nobody else except Brahmā, he was in the darkness. Still, Vāsudeva was there. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna [Bg. 18.61]. So He gave the knowledge. Tene brahma. Brahma means Vedic knowledge.

So vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. Vāsudeva is everywhere, and He is ready to help us, and if we become sincere to take knowledge from Vāsudeva... Even you are in the wilderness, anywhere you are, you are with Vāsudeva. You are not alone. He is so friendly that He is living with you as your most intimate friend. That is described in the Vedic literature. Two birds are sitting in one tree. This is the tree, and two birds, ātmā and Paramātmā, they are sitting in the same tree. One is acting according to his whims for enjoying senses, and another is simply looking over: "When this rascal will turn his face towards Me?" This is going on. (aside, referring to microphone:) Why it is stopped? Oh. So Vāsudeva is always ready to help us, provided we want to take help from Him. And He, not only internally He is helping, externally also, He's sending His representative to teach us. And there is śāstra, just like this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Sādhu, śāstra, guru. Guru is there, śāstra is there, saintly persons are there. You take advantage. And the Lord is there within yourself. So why don't you take? This is intelligence. If we don't take the advantage... And this is possible in the human form of life. A cat and dog cannot take advantage of the sādhu, śāstra and guru. Only the human being can accept it. Therefore here it is said, yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe [SB 1.7.7]. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, sātvata-saṁhitām, given by Vyāsadeva... Not given by Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva is simply delivering what he has received from his guru, caitya-guru. He is delivering that knowledge. Vedic knowledge he is delivering, and he has written this book. Lokasyājānataḥ. People are all rascals.

So the advantage we must take. What is that advantage? Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. If you simply hear, that's all. Just like you are hearing. If you kindly come here and listen the instruction of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you become perfect. Simply by hearing. You haven't got to make any gymnastic or any physical labor. Simply come into the temple. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Simply see the Deity. Naturally you will think of Deity: "Oh, how nicely the Lord is dressed." That is thinking. Man-manāḥ. Immediately thinking. The temple is constructed after spending so much money. Why? To give you chance of thinking. Because there is the beginning. It is not the money is wasted. Rascals are thinking that "Unnecessarily they have spent so much money." No. Paropakāra, giving chances to the rascal people to come here and see the Deity and think of Kṛṣṇa, this is wanted. If he simply thinks, "Oh, how Kṛṣṇa is nicely dressed," that is thinking. Man-manāḥ. And if you offer little obeisances, māṁ namaskuru, then you still make further progress. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. And if you hear about Himself, in this way you become perfect. There is no necessity of very high education, M.A., Ph.D., D.H.C. No. This simple. Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. Here it is said, "Simply by hearing." Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe [SB 1.7.7]. The whole idea is how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is the perfection of life, how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. So if we hear this literature given by Vyāsadeva, sātvata-saṁhitā... Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām Simply by hearing. Kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe bhaktir utpadyate. Because we require, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says directly. Bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. So how you can become bhagavad-bhakta, here is the process: bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ.

Now what is the use of bhakti? Just see how Bhāgavata is compiled, how nicely-because it is transcendental literature. You can say, "What is the use of bhakti? Why shall I waste my time, come in the temple and hear about Kṛṣṇa?" Actually they are doing that. Nobody is coming. Such a big temple. Of course, there are many temples they are going, but in other places also people have lost interest, all interest. Either temple or church or mosque, they do not go. Therefore they are surprised. In America the Christian priests are surprised because they are closing their churches. In London I have seen hundreds of churches are now closed. Nobody is going. If there is meeting, only the caretaker and few old ladies go. Because why they will go? That's a fact. And actually churches are being sold. It is not lying propaganda. Anyone, English boy, he'll confirm this statement. Yes. People are losing interest. So here it is said that bhaktir utpadyate. The bhakti can be awakened. It is not an artificial thing. If it was artificial thing, why the English and American boys... They had nothing to do with Kṛṣṇa, they never heard in their life about Kṛṣṇa. How... This is admitted by the Christian priest, that "These boys, they are our boys, and formerly, before this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they never came to church, never inquired about God. Now how it is that these boys are mad after God?" They are surprised. And it is actually surprising. Why? Because the bhakti is there. It was not awakened by the so-called leaders and the priests. It was not awakened. Religion means to awaken that Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is religion. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. That is religion. Religion is not formalities and ritualistic ceremonies. Religion means how to awaken the normal condition, to become lover of God. That is normal condition. Love is there, but because we have no objective, because we have no instruction where to place our love we are loving so many things-up to the dog. Instead of God we are loving dog. Love is there.

So bhakti means yato bhaktir adhokṣaje. That means..., bhakti means love. Unless you have bhakti... Just like you are giving me so many garlands. Why you are giving me? Because you love me. Otherwise there was no necessity. There was no necessity. A third person is not coming. But because you have got some love, therefore you are worshiping your spiritual master. So bhakti means love. Without love there is no question of bhakti. So this bhakti has to be awakened. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta: nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Bhakti is there. Otherwise as I have said many times, how you have become bhakta? There are European, American girls here present. For kṛṣṇa-bhakti they have sacrificed everything. Even they do not dress attractively so that they may be attractive to other boys, and their life may be spoiled. Why? For bhakti. For Kṛṣṇa. This is the bhakti. That is wanted. Kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe bhaktir utpadyate. This is success of life. Kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe, Kṛṣṇa says, and in the śāstra it is said, and all the sages, all the learned scholars, ācāryas, they accept kṛṣṇa parama-puruṣa. The Supreme Father:

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



Ahaṁ hi sarvasya prabhavaḥ: "I am the origin of everything." Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], the Vedānta-sūtra. "Kṛṣṇa, Brahman, Parabrahman-He is the origin of everything." Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. One must know it. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. These things are there.



Therefore kṛṣṇe parama. The life, success of life means how you can awaken your love for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe. Parama-pūruṣe, that is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya. It is not artificially awakened. There is, already nitya-siddha. As we are nitya-siddha... Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). We are nitya; similarly kṛṣṇa-bhakti is also nitya. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there along with the living entity; it is not an artificial thing. Just like sugar-sweetness is already there. It is the nature of sugar. It is not an artificial thing. Sugar means sweetness. Living entity means kṛṣṇa-bhakta. If he's not kṛṣṇa-bhakta, he's a rascal. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Those who are narādhamas, lowest of the mankind, they do not become kṛṣṇa-bhakta. They become other. Therefore they are duṣkṛtina. Why they are not kṛṣṇa-bhakta? Duṣkṛtina, full of sinful activity.

So you cannot become kṛṣṇa-bhakta and indulge at the same time in sinful activities. Then it will be spoiled. You must be very careful. We have selected, summarized the essence of sinful activities is illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication, and gambling. This is the essence. If you save yourself from these four principles, then you become sinless. And unless you become sinless, there is no question of kṛṣṇa-bhakta. Rest assured.

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



One can be strictly engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness when he's free from all sinful activity. Otherwise not possible. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is very kind. If you are engaged in kṛṣṇa-bhakti sincerely, if by mistake you commit some sin, that can be excused. But if you purposefully commit sinful activities, you'll never get Kṛṣṇa's approach. That is a great... Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. That is very great offense, that I am a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and... Just like the Christian people go to church, that "I am a devotee of Christ. I can do any nonsense, and on Sunday I shall go, I shall admit, 'Yes, my Lord, I have done this.' " "All right. Excused." Then? Then I'll do again tomorrow." This is not wanted. That is pāpa-buddhiḥ, that "Somehow or other let me be atoned today, and from tomorrow I shall begin my business. And again I shall come Sunday." This is pāpa-buddhiḥ. Such persons are never excused, but they do not know. But by mistake or by chance, unknowingly if we commit some mistake, that is excused. Sapada-mūlaṁ bhajatāṁ priyasya. Because he is engaged in the service of the Lord. Not only that, one who is engaged, if you simply admit, "Sir, from today I shall be Your servant," immediately, immediately you become free from all... Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You just surrender to Me." And you do it, and immediately ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. Immediately. But don't commit again. He can excuse immediately. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. Not that you take advantage of Him. Don't take advantage of Him, and "Because I have become so-called sādhu I can do all nonsense and Kṛṣṇa will excuse." No. That is nāma-aparādha. If by mistake or by chance you do something wrong, that can be excused. That is natural. Suppose you are servant, you have committed some mistake. The master immediately does not dismiss. He warns you: "Why you have done this thing? Do not do it again." That is natural.



Similarly kṛṣṇa-bhakti is there. If we carefully study, yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām... Study means you can say that it requires education. No. It doesn't matter. śrūyamāṇāyām. Kṛṣṇa has given you the ears. Therefore Vedic knowledge is called śruti. You go to a proper person, guru, and hear from him. Therefore this word is used: śrūyamāṇāyām. If you hear from the right person, then kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe bhaktir utpadyate. Then you develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And if you say, "What is the use of bhakti? Let me enjoy." No. It is required, if you are serious. What is that required? Śoka-moha-bhayāpahā. Things are going on śoka, moha and bhaya. Bhaya means fearfulness. Even a small bird, he's also fearful. You see the bird is sitting up. It is not coming down. Why? Sometimes it comes down when we are not there. What is that? Fearfulness. Fearfulness. It is a small bird. We have nothing to do with them. Nobody has got... But still it is fearful. So any body, any material body you accept there will be fearfulness. And why you are fearful? There is loss and gain. So when there is loss there is śoka, and the śoka..., and fearfulness is moha, illusion-because I don't belong to this material world. Artificially you have accepted this body. On account of this body I am subjected to these principles: śoka, moha, bhaya. So as you become advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, more and more you advance, then these three things-śoka, moha, bhaya-will be completely eradicated. That is the gain of bhakti-yoga.

Thank you very much. (end)



760907SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.8

-

Vṛndāvana, September 7, 1976



Prabhupāda: He's not here? Paṇḍita? Where he is?



Hari-śauri: Oh, he's here.



Prabhupāda: Read it. (hums)



Pradyumna: (chants oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya) Yasyām?



Prabhupāda: No, that is finished. Number three. Number eight.



Pradyumna:



sa saṁhitāṁ bhāgavatīṁ

kṛtvānukramya cātma-jam

śukam adhyāpayām āsa

nivṛtti-nirataṁ muniḥ

[SB 1.7.8]



"The great sage Vyāsadeva, after compiling the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and revising it, taught it to his own son, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was already engaged in self-realization."



Prabhupāda:



sa saṁhitāṁ bhāgavatīṁ

kṛtvānukramya cātma-jam

śukam adhyāpayām āsa

nivṛtti-nirataṁ muniḥ

[SB 1.7.8]



So this saṁhitā... Saṁhitā means Vedic literature. There are many rascals, they say that "Bhāgavata was not written by Vyāsadeva, it was written by some Bopadeva." They say like that. Māyāvādīs, the Nirīśvaravādī. Because although Nirīśvaravādī, or Māyāvādī leader Śaṅkarācārya, he wrote comments on Bhagavad-gītā, but he could not touch Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, because in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the things are so nicely set up, kṛtvānukramya, that it is not possible by the Māyāvādīs to prove that God is impersonal. They cannot do it. Nowadays they are doing, reading Bhāgavatam in their own way, but that does not appeal to any sane man. Sometimes I have seen a big Māyāvādī is explaining one verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that "Because you are God, therefore if you are pleased, then God is pleased." This is their philosophy. "You do not require to please God separately. So if you are pleased by drinking wine, then God is pleased." This is their explanation. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has condemned this Māyāvādī commentary. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said, māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa [Cc. Madhya 6.169]. Māyāvādī kṛṣṇe aparādhī. He has plainly said. No compromise. The Māyāvādīs, they're great offender to Kṛṣṇa. Tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān [Bg. 16.19], Kṛṣṇa also says. They're very, very envious to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is dvi-bhuja-muralīdhara, śyāmasundara, and the Māyāvādī explains that "Kṛṣṇa has no hand, no leg. This is all imagination." How much offensive it is they do not know. But to warn people like us, Caitanya Mahāprabhu has plainly warned that "Don't go to Māyāvādīs." Māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa. Māyāvādī haya kṛṣṇe aparādhī. This is the statement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



So you should be very, very careful. Don't go to hear any Māyāvādī. There are many Māyāvādīs in the dress of Vaiṣṇavas. Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained about them, that ei 'ta eka kali-celā nāke tilaka gale mālā, that "Here is a follower of Kali. Although he has got a tilaka on the nose and neck beads, but he's a kali-celā." If he's Māyāvādī, sahaja-bhajana kache mama saṅge laya pare bala. So these things are there. You have come to Vṛndāvana. Be careful, very careful. Māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile [Cc. Madhya 6.169]. There are many Māyāvādīs here, many so-called tilaka-mālā, but you do not know what is there inside. But great ācāryas, they can find out.

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



They create disturbance only. Therefore we have to follow the Gosvāmīs, Gosvāmī literature, especially Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, which we have translated in The Nectar of Devotion, every one of you should very carefully read and make progress. Don't be victimized by the Māyāvādī so-called Vaiṣṇava. It is very dangerous.



Therefore it is said, sa saṁhitāṁ bhāgavatīṁ kṛtvānukramya cātma-jam. It is very confidential subject matter. He taught it, instructed to Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Ātma-jam. Like father, like son. There is no difference between son and disciple. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has equalized,

lālane bahavo doṣās

tāḍane bahavo guṇāḥ

tasmāt putraṁ ca śiṣyaṁ ca

tāḍayen na tu lālayet



That is the, I mean to say, Vedic system-to teach the son and teach the disciple. If one cannot teach the son-the son is disobedient-he should give up his family life. Otherwise a father is in obligation to teach the son properly. But if it is not possible... Sometimes it so happens as family members, they do not take care. Otherwise Vyāsadeva's son is expected to become Śukadeva Gosvāmī. If not, such family connection should be given up. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanam. Family life, if it is favorable for advancing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it should be accepted; otherwise it should be rejected. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanam.



So what was the qualification of Śukadeva Gosvāmī which induced Vyāsadeva to teach him this saṁhitām? Śukam adhyāpayām āsa nivṛtti-niratam: he has no more attraction for material world. That is the qualification. Nirvṛtti. There are two kinds of life: nirvṛtti and pravṛtti. Pravṛtti means materialistic, karmīs. Generally karmīs, they have got tendency to enjoy this material world. That is called pravṛtti. Pravṛtti-mārga. Pravṛttes tu... Pravṛtti is natural inclination. Anyone who has come to this material world... Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānām. Everyone is in the pravṛtti-mārga. What is that pravṛtti-mārga? The pravṛtti-mārga is these things: sex, meat-eating, intoxication, like that. This is pravṛtti-mārga. Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttes tu mahā-phalām. So the whole Vedic literature is there how to make him stop this pravṛtti-mārga. That is the whole plan. Otherwise there are many instances, loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityas tu jantuḥ. Nitya. A jantuḥ, he's called jantuḥ. Jantuḥ means animal or no intelligence. Those who are jantuḥ, they have got this tendency. Pravṛttir eṣā. What is that? Vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā: sex and meat-eating. Āmiṣa, meat, egg, fish; and madya, intoxication. This is pravṛtti. Loke vyavāya. Vyavāya means sex. Āmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā tu jantuḥ. Jantuḥ means living being, conditioned in the material world, they have got this general tendency. Pravṛtti. You will find in animals, in birds, in beasts, and beastly human being, two-legged beast... There are four-legged beasts and two-legged beasts. Four-legged beasts are the animals-cats, dogs, tigers, etc. Cows, asses. They are four-legged beasts. And there are two-legged beasts, dvi-pāda-paśu. It is not manufactured; it is there in the śāstra. Dvi-pāda-paśu. Dvi means two, and pāda means legged. So any human being who is attached to this pravṛtti-mārga-sex, meat-eating, intoxication, gambling-he is dvi-pāda-paśu, two-legged animals. This is pravṛtti-mārga.

Therefore education should be in such a way planned that he should be nirvṛtti-mārga. Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nirvṛttes tu mahā-phalām. These are general tendency for the conditioned soul. But if anyone can control by training by education these things-vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā: sex life, intoxication and meat-eating-then he's called niratam. He becomes qualified. Vyāsadeva preferred to teach Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to his son Śukadeva Gosvāmī because he was niratam, nivṛtti-niratam. He was engaged. From the very beginning of his life, as soon as he was... It is said for sixteen years within the womb of his mother, he did not come out purposefully so that he may not be materially attached. Because a small child, the baby comes out from the mother's womb. Within the womb, when he's in suffering, he prays to God, "This time kindly release me. Now I shall begin bhagavad-bhajana." One who is little advanced in his previous life... Because it is very, very terrible condition within the womb of the mother. We have forgotten. But we can imagine, if you are packed up in a bag and put hand and legs tightly knotted, just imagine. You cannot live even for three minutes. They say if you are airtight packed-up like that, as we are put into the womb of the mother, we cannot exist more than three minutes. But we existed by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Only by the mercy. That is also nowadays very dangerous. In that packed-up condition, he's there, he's already suffering, and the mother is planning to go to the doctor and kill the child. Just imagine how precarious condition in the womb of the mother. And if we do not try in this life that "I shall not again enter into the womb of the mother," then what is the value of this life? We have to learn it from the śāstra. You cannot see actually, but the medical science explains that a child is placed in this way. In Bhāgavata also it is stated how the child grows his body, how it is put into that precarious condition.

So one should be senseful, that "So much suffering awaiting..." Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. And Kṛṣṇa says, "You have to accept another body." Not that death is finish. They have made it a very easy formula, that after death everything is finished-because they are rascals. They do not take lesson from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa said, tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati: [Bg. 2.13] you have to change your body. But these rascals, they do not know. "What kind of body I'm going to get? How the body is going to be changed? No, don't care. Go on." Mūḍhā janmani janmani [Bg. 16.20]. Mūḍhā-yoniṣu. They do not even try to understand wherefrom so many varieties of life are coming-jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. And still they are passing on as scientist. What science? It is only ignorance. If you have to study science, you have to take it from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa said, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. According to your guṇa you are creating your next body. Just like according to the infection of a certain disease you are creating your future diseased condition, similarly sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. There are three kinds of the modes of material nature, and as you associate with the three kinds of material nature, you prepare your next body. That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. If you associate with sattva-guṇa, then you are promoted to the higher planetary system: Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka. But these rascals, they do not know; still they make an estimate. And what is that estimate? Wherever they go they find only rocks and sands. That's all. There are so many lokas. Each loka is full of living entities, and these rascals are simply taking photograph of rocks and sands. Just see their position. And they are passing on as scientist. How misleading these things are, and how people are being misled. You see.

So Kali-yuga is a very precarious condition: no knowledge, ignorance, and no nirvṛtti. Everyone is in pravṛtti. So whatever their condition may be, but if you want actually freedom from this material conditional life, then you should follow ācārya. Ācāryavān puruṣaḥ. Ācāryopāsanam. Kṛṣṇa is personally acting as ācārya. He's coming again as ācārya, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He has got so many representatives ācārya: Śrī Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Nimbārka, Viṣṇu Svāmī, so many ācāryas. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam [Bg. 4.2]. So take lesson from the ācāryas. Śukadeva Gosvāmī is ācārya. Vyāsadeva is ācārya. He's making the next ācārya by teaching him-adhyāpayām āsa, śukam adhyāpayām āsa-so that he is becoming ācārya. So we have to go the ācārya and take lesson. Then, in the previous verse we are advised,

yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ

kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe

bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayāpahā

[SB 1.7.7]



This is wanted. We are always perplexed with śoka, moha and bhaya. If you want to get out of it, then read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Now if you are... If you say that "I'm uneducated, illiterate. I cannot read," there is no need of reading. Hear. Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyām. Simply hear. But hear from the right person, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Not rascals, professionals. Then it will be useless. Here... Why? Anyone knows some grammar or little literary education. Why...? Śukadeva Gosvāmī had no opportunity to go to a school. Śukadeva Gosvāmī... Śukadeva Gosvāmī, as soon as he took birth, after sixteen years keeping himself within the womb of the mother, immediately left home. So where is the possibility of taking education? And he was given instruction while he was in the womb of his mother.



So these things are sometimes inconceivable. But it is not inconceivable. It is possible to... Our real point is that Śukadeva Gosvāmī was not a grammarian, but he learned everything from his father by hearing. Therefore it is called śrūyamāṇāyām. If you hear from the right person, properly, then you become perfect. There is no need of literary education. Therefore Vedas are called śruti. Śruti means... Formerly the students, they were learning everything. Their memory was so nice and sharp that simply by hearing from guru's mouth they would learn. In the Kali-yuga, because the memory is not so str... [break] ...Vyāsadeva recorded this in writing, that "The rascals will come henceforward. They will have not very sharp brain, memory, so let me keep this literature in writing so that in future they may take advantage of it. Or somebody will read and they will hear. In this way their life will be successful."

So Śukadeva Gosvāmī is the next ācārya, but one has to learn from the original ācārya. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. So unless we come to the paramparā system, ācārya after ācārya, there is no right education. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu's private secretary, personal secretary, Svarūpa Dāmodara, he advised, bhāgavat para giya bhāgavat sthāne. If you want to learn Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you go to a person whose life is Bhāgavatam. Grantha bhāgavata and person bhāgavata-both of them bhāgavatas. So bhāgavat para giya bhāgavat sthane. One whose life is Bhāgavatam and nothing else, you should learn Bhāgavatam from him, not from the professional person who are earning livelihood by reading or reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That will not be effective. You have to find out like Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Then this study of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam will be effective.

Thank you very much. (end)



760908SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.9 Excerpt

-

Vṛndāvana, September 8, 1976



Pradyumna: "Śrī Śaunaka asked Suta Gosvāmī: Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī was already on the path of self-realization, and thus he was pleased with his own self. So why did he take the trouble to undergo the study of such a vast literature?"



Prabhupāda:



śaunaka uvāca

sa vai nivṛtti-nirataḥ

sarvatropekṣako muniḥ

kasya vā bṛhatīm etām

ātmārāmaḥ samabhyasat

[SB 1.7.9]



So Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he is ātmārāma, he... This śloka will be explained in the next verse, ātmārāmāś ca munayo. Ātmārāma, there are many varieties of meaning of ātmārāma. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has explained in sixty-four different ways in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. So how Caitanya Mahāprabhu was a great scholar-He is great in everything-but to make a show at least, He showed His scholarship in explaining this ātmārāma verse. Sa vai nivṛtti-nirataḥ sarvatropekṣako muniḥ. Nivṛtti means one who has ceased all material activities. He has practically nothing to do with this material world and still it is said, kasya vā bṛhatīm etām. And still, he went out and preached Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam when Parikṣit Mahārāja was going to die. So this is the question: how the ātmārāma becomes interested in other activities? He is ātmārāma, he is already satisfied. So these activities are not material activities. Nivṛtti-nirataḥ, we have to stop this material world, material activities.



That does not mean you will have to stop your activities. The other part of the activities, they will begin after stopping these material activities. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. One who is ātmārāma, brahma-bhūtaḥ, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, I am not this material body, no more I have to do anything for this material body. Ātmārāma. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. People are anxious, especially the karmīs, how to maintain this body, but when one comes to the conclusion that "I am not this body," naturally his interest for maintaining the body, diminishes. Practically, it becomes nil. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **, you will find from the behavior of the Gosvāmīs, they practically conquered over the necessities of this body. But that does not mean he has to cease all activities. The Māyāvāda philosophy, they say that when one becomes brahma-bhūtaḥ, ātmārāma, he has nothing to do any more. No. The śāstra does not say that. Śāstra says that when you become ātmārāma, or brahma-bhūtaḥ, your material anxieties, material activities, they become stopped. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54], prasannātmā, he has nothing to do.

Suppose if somebody is assured that now, henceforward you haven't go to do anything, everything will come automatically, naturally one becomes prasannātmā, very jolly. I am free from the anxieties. Because this material world means full of anxieties, sadā samudvigna-dhiyām, that is material world. And when you come to the spiritual platform, there is no anxiety, no na śocati na kāṅkṣati. That is anxiety-free. So anxiety-free does not mean you haven't got to do anything. Your material life is purified, sarvopādhi vinirmuktaṁ tat paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. When we become free from the designation, "I am this body, therefore I am American, I am Indian, I am the father of this family, so I have got my wife, I have got my children," so many things, this is material relationship, so... (break-end)



760909SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.10

-

Vṛndāvana, September 9, 1976



Pradyumna:



sūta uvāca

ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

[SB 1.7.10]



"All different varieties of ātmārāmas (those who take pleasure in ātmā, or spirit self), especially those established on the path of self-realization, though freed from all kinds of material bondage, desire to render unalloyed devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead. This means that the Lord possesses transcendental qualities and therefore can attract everyone, including liberated souls."



Prabhupāda: Read the purport also. (Pradyumna reads first few paragraphs of purport) So this śloka is still more elaborately explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. This is the summary. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained this verse in sixty-four ways, each word explained-and how many ways each word can be explained-and from all angles of vision He has proved that Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu's scholarship... Of course, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no comparison to His excellence in every respect. Six opulences. Na caitanyāt kṛṣṇāj jagati para-tattvaṁ param iha. That is explained by Kavirāja Gosvāmī. Ṣaḍ-aiśvaryaiḥ pūrṇo ya iha bhagavān sa svayam ayam [Cc. Ādi 1.3]. He has explained like that. Ṣaḍ-aiśvaryaiḥ pūrṇaḥ-all knowledge, all beauty, all strength-everything in full. Pūrṇam. Pūrṇam idam. Pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. He is pūrṇa, and whatever He does, that is also pūrṇa. You cannot find any defect in the creation of the Lord. In the arrangement of maintenance and in the arrangement of annihilation you cannot find out any flaw. Perfection. Pūrṇa.



So Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa in every respect, and if we take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa-sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]-if we fix up our mind always at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then everything will follow very perfectly. That is promised by Kṛṣṇa. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. If one is engaged always in love and affection... Not as official love. Ecstatic love, spontaneous, that is wanted. That example is here in Vṛndāvana. At least, as we get information of Vṛndāvana from the śāstras, from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, how spontaneously the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana-the gopīs and the cowherds boys and the birds, beasts, the calves, the animals, the trees, everyone, even the flies, the bees, the insect, even the dust, the grass-everyone is..., they are all cinmaya, spiritual. They are not material. But they are attracted to Kṛṣṇa in different varieties. [break]

...varieties are not of matter. Here in this material world the varieties are of material external energy, bahiraṅga. Bahiraṅga-śakti. There are three manifestations of Kṛṣṇa's energy. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. That is the Vedic injunction, that the Lord's energy is manifested in varieties-not impersonal. If we study very intelligently, then we can understand how Kṛṣṇa's energy is working in varieties. You study even one flower, you'll see how varieties of color and arrangement of the petals, everything. Don't think as the rascals, they say "nature." What is nature? Nature is an instrument, just like typewriter . You're typewriting... You are typewriting, not that the typewriter typewriting. That is a mistake. Those who have less intelligence, poor fund of knowledge, they see that the typewriter is working. No. The typewriter means the person who is using the machine, he is just like this microphone. Microphone is not talking; I am talking. It is an instrument. Similarly, what we call nature, that is an instrument only, not that nature is working. Nature is dull. What is this microphone? It is made of dull matter. It cannot work. But a human being has arranged these material things in such a way...

The material elements means earth, water, air, fire. A scientist means, or a craftsman means he can utilize the ingredients in such a way. Just like this temple. It is a composition of earth, water, and fire. Tejo-vāri-mṛd vinimayaḥ. Tejo means fire, and vāri means water, and mṛt means earth. So what is this building? It is... You have collected earth, and shaped it into a brick, and then put it with water, and then put into the fire-it becomes brick. Then you smash it, powder it, it becomes mortar. Then you set up. In this way... The, originally, tejo-vāri-mṛt. Fire, water, and earth. So the fire, water, earth, has not made this nice temple. It is the person, the brain, the engineer, the architect-they have made.

So this is a wrong idea, that matter is doing independently. That is not possible. Therefore it is clearly said in the Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Matter does not work. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His different energies, He is working. That is Kṛṣṇa. You have to understand like that. Kṛṣṇa is in the background. In another place in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. If you say that Lord Brahmā has created, because he is the creator of this universe... Deva, there are three principle devas-Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. Kṛṣṇa says aham ādir hi devānām. Actually that is the fact. Even Brahmā is originated from Viṣṇu's navel; therefore Brahmā's name is Padma-yoni. And he, when he was created, he saw everything dark, so he was instructed to undergo tapas-these are explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam-then he was given the intelligence how to work. So even a person like Brahmā is also instructed by Kṛṣṇa how to create. So any person, any ingredient, any matter, everything is working under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore His name is Kṛṣṇa.

So Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaj advises, Kavirāja Gosvāmī, that

siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā haite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

[Ādi 2.117]



Siddhānta. How Kṛṣṇa is great. Ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ. Therefore it is said how Kṛṣṇa is great. God is great. In the Western world, they say God is great, but one does not know how He is great. That you will find in the Vedic literature. Just like in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, ittham-bhūta-guṇo-hariḥ: He's so great. That you have to learn from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Simply to know God is great, it is good. But how He is great, how He is working, that we have to take lesson from the Vedic literature. You cannot find such information anywhere, in any book throughout the whole world. So there is no question of studying Vedas from a sectarian point of view. For the sake of knowledge, everyone should study this Vedic literature. And it is summarized in Vedānta-sūtra. Therefore it is called Vedānta-sūtra. Sūtra means summarized. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Now these two words, atha ataḥ brahma-jijñāsā-four words-it contains volumes of knowledge. Therefore it is called sūtra. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. They are Brahma-sūtra. Brahma-sūtra padaiś caiva. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that brahma-sūtra padaiś caiva hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ [Bg. 13.5]. The truth, Absolute Truth, is fixed up by Brahma-sūtra. So Brahma-sūtra is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Brahma-sūtra is the summary of the whole Vedic literature. Because in future people will misinterpret. Therefore the author of Brahma-sūtra, Vyāsadeva, made natural a comment. And that comment is Brahma-sūtra bhāṣya, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Don't be misguided by rascals, that "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is written by somebody else. It is not written by Vyāsadeva." These are rascals proposition. This is given by Śrī Vyāsadeva, and he is the author of Brahma-sūtra. Lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. This is sātvata-saṁhitām.



So we have tried to explain this sātvata-saṁhitām in English for study of the whole world, because English can be understood, or it can be translated easily. So these activities are going on. And we are very much thankful to you that you are cooperating. So in India you may find some difficulty. Still, your valuable cooperation is required for the benefit of the whole world. Lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām.

ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ



We have to spread the transcendental qualities of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe. Yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe, bhaktir utpadyate [SB 1.7.7]. That is the life's mission. So as far as possible, try to understand. As advised by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa, don't be lazy. Always try to understand Kṛṣṇa, siddhānta, by siddhānta, by Vedic conclusion-not by manufacturing ideas. Siddhānta. Don't be lazy. That is the instruction of Kavirāja Gosvāmī.



siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā haite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

[Ādi 2.117]



If you study according to the Vedic conclusion, don't manufacture ideas and whims and sentiments. If you go through siddhānta, then you'll be more and more firmly fixed up. Ihā haite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa. Then your life is successful.



Thank you very much. (end)



760910SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.11

-

Vṛndāvana, September 10, 1976



Pradyumna:



harer guṇākṣipta-matir

bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ

adhyagān mahad ākhyānaṁ

nityaṁ viṣṇu-jana-priyaḥ

[SB 1.7.11]



"Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, son of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, was not only transcendentally powerful. He was also very dear to the devotees of the Lord. Thus he underwent the study of this great narration Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam."



Prabhupāda:



harer guṇākṣipta-matir

bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ

adhyagān mahad ākhyānaṁ

nityaṁ viṣṇu-jana-priyaḥ

[SB 1.7.11]



This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, mahā-purāṇam, it is called mahā-purāṇam. Mahad ākhyānam. Ākhyānam, narration, history. It is not fictitious; it is history. The activities of the Kauravas, Pāṇḍavas, many other activities mentioned here. Dhruva Mahārāja, Prahlāda Mahārāja, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja... Many, many devotees and their activities, their history. It is not mythology. The rascals, they say mythology. No. It is history. Mahābhārata. Mahā means greater and bhārata means this planet. So Mahābhārata means the history of this planet. Now it is minimized, "India." India is given the name given by the Britishers or the Europeans. Real name is Bhārata, Bhārata-varṣa, according to the name of Mahārāja Bharata. So this greater India, Mahābhārata, this is also history. Itihāsa. Itihāsa-purāṇa. Purāṇa means old history. Purāṇa means old. It is not mythology. Purāṇa.



So Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is amalaṁ purāṇam. Amalam. Mala means dirty things and amalam means without any dirty things. What is that dirty things? The dirty things means the material modes of nature-sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Because it is material it is called mala, dirty. And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: amalam, without any material contamination, because simply narration of Bhagavān and Bhagavān's devotees. Bhāgavata, bhakta. Therefore it is named Bhāgavatam: dealings between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

So who will be interested in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam? That is mentioned here: harer guṇākṣipta-matiḥ. Kṣipta means madness. Here is a man, kṣipta, means he's mad. So there are two kinds of madness. One madness is for material enjoyment. They are also mad, pramatta. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. The material madness entangles people more and more in the process of birth and death. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung, anādi karama-phale paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale taribāre nā dekhi upāya. Anādi karama-phale paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale. Somehow or other, we have fallen in this material world, the ocean of nescience, bhavārṇava. Arṇava means ocean, and bhava means repetition of birth. In this ocean we have fallen. Therefore our prayer should be not for any material opulence, as we generally do. Dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi: "Give me money or mitigate my distress." This is very lower stage of devotion, to ask something from the Supreme Lord. Ārto jijñāsur arthārthī . In the beginning, provided one is, background is pious... Because without piety nobody can approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Those who are simply acting piously, such person can approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not impious person can... Therefore we shall be very, very careful about impious activities. Impious activities, we know the four legs of impious activities: illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating, and gambling. So therefore we should be very, very careful about these impious activities. You cannot make any spiritual progress by simultaneously acting impiously and at the same time... It may... Not it may-it is sure it will go. But it will go very slow. Just like if you have got dry wood, then the fire ignites very easily. And if you bring wet fuel, it takes time. Of course, as soon as there is fire, the wetness of the fuel will dry. But it will require extra energy. And if you put dry fuel, then it ignites very easily. So in order to keep us dry without being wetted by the impious activities, then spiritual progress will be very quick. We should remember that.

Actually, if we want to be advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is our duty to keep ourself dry from material wetness. That is our duty. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpam. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, especially two things: viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam atha yoṣitāṁ ca [Cc. Madhya 11.8]. Two things: woman and money. If we become attracted... Woman means for man the woman is woman, and for the woman the man is woman. Not that woman means a particular class. Woman means which are enjoyable. So in this material world, the man is enjoyable by the woman, and the woman is enjoyable by the man. For both of them, viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam atha yoṣitām. Yoṣit means enjoyable. This body is superfluous. The bodily structure, it can be changed. Perhaps you know, now in medical science they can change the woman's body into man's body, and the man's body into woman's body. It was formerly being also changed. In Bhāgavata you'll find that in a garden-I forget the name-in a garden where Lord Śiva was engaged with Umā, husband and wife, all of a sudden many saintly persons entered to see Lord Śiva. At that time Umā, Pārvatī, became very much ashamed. She was not very properly dressed. So immediately the saintly persons, they left, that "Lord Śiva is now in his private affairs." So Lord Śiva, to please Pārvatī, he immediately said, "Hence forward, anyone who will enter this forest, he'll become woman." So one king, I forget the name, with his party, without the knowledge he entered the forest, and all of them became women.

So the idea is that the man's body can be transformed into woman's body, and a woman's body can be transformed into man's body. Because we are not this body, dress. Suppose I have got this dress. This man's dress I can transform into woman's dress with a sari; but that does not mean I am woman. So every one of us living entities, we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. The outward dress, man and woman, that is dress. Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. We are changing this dress. So in this material world, because our mentality is to enjoy, therefore he is called puruṣa. Puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān [Bg. 13.22]. Puruṣa, here puruṣa, the living entities... It is said puruṣa. Puruṣa means both men and women because everyone has got the spirit, "I shall enjoy." Therefore he is described as puruṣa. Puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi. In this material world, bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān, kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. We are getting different types of bodies on account of our different desires. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. According to the desire, Kṛṣṇa is so kind, as we are desiring He is supplying some body. That is also explained: īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Īśvaraḥ, He is situated everyone's heart. So He knows what I want. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe [Bg. 18.61]. It is pointed out, hṛd-deśe, "in the core of the heart." You haven't got to search throughout the universe. He is within the heart. He's there. Therefore the yogis, they try to find out the Supreme Lord within the heart. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. That is yogi who tries to find out the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the heart. That is dhyāna. That is meditation. Meditation does not mean anything nonsense. To see the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu.

So prakṛti-stho hi. We are in this material world. What is this material world? Material world means three modes of material nature: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So according to the association, kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya. Either sattva-guṇa, or rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa. This is going on, and therefore we are getting different types of body. So this is going on. It is called bhavārṇava. So if we want to get release from this entanglement of being polluted by the three modes of material nature, then we have to come to this platform, nirguṇa. Nirguṇa. Nirguṇa means to associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead or to be engaged in devotional service. That is nirguṇa.

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Immediately. Immediately you can be placed on the transcendental platform as soon as you begin your devotional service. Avyabhicāreṇa, without any deviation. Ananya-bhakti. Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. That is wanted. What is that ananya-bhāk? Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam: [Brs. 1.1.11] without any material desires. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. That is pure devotion.



So Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore recommends that niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. Anyone who is aspiring to become advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya... Why bhagavad-bhajana required? Pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya. For a person who wants to go to the other side of the ocean of nescience, pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣoḥ. [break] ...means one who is very rich man. No. Rich man and poor man doesn't matter. If one is interested simply with the four principles of the bodily necessities, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna-eating, sleeping sex and defense, they are called viṣayīs. Viṣayiṇām... Viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. If viṣayī means rich man, then why the śāstra says viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt: the enjoyment of these four necessities of body, it is available everywhere? The sparrow, he's also enjoying viṣaya. There is a male and female, and they are jumping from one tree to another, from here to there. And as soon as they require, they are enjoying sex and eating something. So eating, sleeping, mating, this is going on. That viṣaya is available... I have seen at night a small insects, they are also enjoying eating, sleeping, mating. A small, very small ant is captured. Jīvo jīvasya jīvanam. One life is meant for being eaten by another life. You can see, very small. He has got all the same tendencies. So viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. So one has to become free from this viṣaya. Viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam atha yoṣitāṁ ca hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu [Cc. Madhya 11.8]. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... So we should be very careful. Viṣayiṇām, a devotee, if he thinks, "Oh, here is a nice woman. If I could enjoy her," or "Here is a nice man. If I could enjoy him." This is viṣayī. Viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam. To see one woman is not dangerous, but to think of enjoying, that is dangerous. Similarly, to see one man is not dangerous-you cannot avoid that; you are on the street here-but to see with the spirit of enjoyment, that is dangerous.

So we should be very careful. That requires, I mean to say, training, very strong training in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unless one is strongly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that long habit of enjoying spirit cannot be given up. This is, loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantoḥ. Jantu, animals. Anyone who is addicted to vyavāya, sex life, āmiṣa, meat-eating, madya-sevā, intoxication... That is the natural tendency of anyone in this material world. Vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityāḥ. So spiritual advancement means to give up this āmiṣa-madya-sevā. That is spiritual life. Spiritual life does not mean you have to grow four hands and four legs. No. Simply you have to give up these tendencies of vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā. Therefore śāstra gives you training how to... Therefore here it is said, harer guṇākṣipta-matir bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ. (aside:) Don't do that. Don't divert attention. If you cannot understand, you can go play there. Harer guṇākṣipta. So you cannot be mad after harer guṇa unless you give up your madness of material enjoyment. So long we are mad after material happiness, then we do anything wrong, nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Vikarma means activities which are forbidden. Just like vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā-these are forbidden. But they indulge in these things nowadays all over the world, vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā. This is vikarma, forbidden activities. But they indulge in. Why? Because pramatta. They have become mad.

So madness there is. So one madness you have to give up-this material madness-and you have to become mad after Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful. That madness is exhibited by Caitanya Mahāprabhu:

yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



That madness wanted. Yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa: one moment appears to be one yuga. One yuga means twelve years. So yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam. Crying. There is tears in the eyes like the torrents of rain. Yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa cakṣuṣā... Śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvam. "I feel the whole world is vacant." Why? Govinda-viraheṇa me. This madness is wanted. Without Govinda, that madness. So that madness (was) fully exhibited in Vṛndāvana by the gopīs. They were mad after Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, went to Mathurā, they became so mad that they had no other business than cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam, simply crying torrents of rain. That is wanted. That is Vṛndāvana life. Not that seeking after sex in Vṛndāvana. That is... That means such person will have to take birth as monkey next life. Monkey. Because they have taken shelter of Vṛndāvana, and still they're indulging, monkey's business, so they have to... It is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇaḥ [SB 10.14.8]. In Vṛndāvana the land, transcendental land, that will not go in vain. But these persons who are indulging unnecessary sex life in Vṛndāvana, they'll have to take birth as monkeys in Vṛndāvana, and then next life they'll be liberated. So otherwise, why in Vṛndāvana the monkeys? They are also devotees, but they could not proceed nicely. So animal life means stopping sinful activities, and whatever sinful reaction is there in one life finished. We should be very, very careful. Dhāma, dhāma-aparādha. In the dhāma... In other places if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, the result of such chanting will be increased thousand times if you chant in Vṛndāvana. Similarly, in other place, the sinful activities, if you commit that sinful activity in Vṛndāvana, then it will be thousand times increased. So we have to be very careful.



So Kṛṣṇa is very kind. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣa..., bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam. If we act impiously, we have to suffer. But for a devotee, karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54]. Karmāṇi nirdahati. Others, for sinful activities, they will have to continue, but if a devotee is in sinful activities, in one life it is finished. But don't take this concession. We should be very much careful not to commit. So we shall have to increase our madness for harer guṇākṣipta-matir bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ. And bādarāyaṇi, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, is also addressed as Bhagavān. If one is mad after Bhagavān, he's as good as Bhagavān. Harer ākṣipta. One who is mad after Bhagavān, he's as good as Bhagavān. Therefore bādarāyaṇi is addressed here as Bhagavān. In the spiritual world, Bhagavān and His paraphernalia, there is no difference. Don't think that the calf or the cows in Vṛndāvana is less than Kṛṣṇa. No. They're as good as Kṛṣṇa. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. They are expansion of Kṛṣṇa's ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. Kṛṣṇa wants to play with the cows and calves. So He's ānanda-cinmaya. His spiritual potency appears as cows and calves. Therefore we see Kṛṣṇa is embracing the calves and cows. He's not embracing a material cow. He has nothing to do with material. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ.

So a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa is also addressed Bhagavān. Pure devotee. Not that a magician. A pure devotee. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ adhyagān mahād ākhyānam. This is mahād ākhyānam. It is not ordinary ākhyānam. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Amalaṁ purāṇam. He was liberated person, but being to hear about Kṛṣṇa more and more, this is not material; this is spiritual. Mahad ākhyānaṁ nityaṁ viṣṇu-jana-priyaḥ. Nityam. Bhāgavata is not for a saptāha. Bhāgavata is meant for nityam. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Not that one is completely free from the modes of material nature, but prāyeṣu: almost finished. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. Then he becomes interested. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Or by serving Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam regularly, nityam. As it is said, nityaṁ viṣṇu-jana-priyaḥ. Viṣṇu-jana and hari-jana. Hari-jana does not mean cāmāra and bangi. Hari-jana means... Cāmāras and bangis can be elevated to hari-jana but not by rubber-stamp, "Viṣṇu-jana." Viṣṇu-jana and hari-jana, the same thing. So viṣṇu-jana-priyaḥ. Those who are viṣṇu-jana, their most favorable subject matter of understanding is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam.

Thank you very much. (end)



760911SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.12

-

Vṛndāvana, September 11, 1976



Pradyumna:



parīkṣito 'tha rājarṣer

janma-karma-vilāpanam

saṁsthāṁ ca pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ

vakṣye kṛṣṇa-kathodayam

[SB 1.7.12]



"Sūta Gosvāmī thus addressed the ṛṣis headed by Śaunaka: Now I shall begin the transcendental narration of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and topics of the birth, activities and deliverance of King Parīkṣit, the sage amongst kings, as well as topics of the renunciation of the worldly order by the sons of Pāṇḍu."



Prabhupāda: (aside:) The flies are disturbing, how we are...



parīkṣito 'tha rājarṣer

janma-karma-vilāpanam

saṁsthāṁ ca pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ

vakṣye kṛṣṇa-kathodayam

[SB 1.7.12]



This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is another Purāṇa, history. We have already explained. So sometimes a class of devotees known as sahajiyā, they say that "What we have got to do with the narration of Kurukṣetra battle?" They immediately jump to the kṛṣṇa-līlā, directly with the gopīs. And Kṛṣṇa's activities in other field, they think it is useless. But that is not the fact. Anywhere Kṛṣṇa is acting, that is transcendental-the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, historical references, description, so superficially it appears that what a devotee has got to do with this battlefield? But battlefield or no battlefield, wherever there is Kṛṣṇa, that is transcendental. This has to be understood. Otherwise, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, why he should indulge in describing how Uttarā's pregnancy was saved by Kṛṣṇa, how the brahmāstra was thrown by Aśvatthāmā? So Śukadeva Gosvāmī is liberated person. Why he should indulge in these material things? No. Those who are advanced, they know that Kṛṣṇa's dancing with the gopīs, that līlā and Kṛṣṇa's playing as the leader of the battlefield of Kurukṣetra is the same. It is all transcendental. One should not make any distinction between the two. Saṁsthāṁ ca pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ vakṣye kṛṣṇa-kathodayam. Pāṇḍu-putrāṇām, the pāṇḍu-putras, or the Pāṇḍavas, son of Pāṇḍu, they're all devotees. Even their political affairs, because there is connection with Kṛṣṇa, it is kṛṣṇa-kathā. Those who are with poor fund of knowledge [break]



...directly taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa or to take shelter of a pure devotee who is under the shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Mad-āśrayaḥ. So if one takes shelter of a pure devotee... Just like electricity: the powerhouse is far away, but the power is coming. Suppose your body is electrified, and if I touch, then my body immediately becomes electrified. And if somebody touches me, then other's body. This is electric. Similarly, one who is pure devotee, he's authorized by Kṛṣṇa, he's electrified.

So if one takes shelter of a pure devotee, then he becomes purified. Yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ śudhyanti. That is the statement given by Śukadeva Gosvāmī. How the caṇḍālas can become purified? The example I have already stated. Then at the end, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ. This is the supreme transcendental power of Viṣṇu. He can do. Sometimes they say that unless the body is changed, how a caṇḍāla can become purified? Yes, body is changing. Because we do not know how the body is changing... Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. Dehāntara-prāptiḥ. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā tathā [Bg. 2.13], like that. Tathā means "like that." Dehāntara-prāptiḥ. So these are dehāntara. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā. This is dehāntara. Every moment we are changing our body. This is dehāntara. Kṛṣṇa says, the greatest authority. How you can say that there is no dehāntara? He has dehāntara. Suppose in my childhood I am born in a caṇḍāla family, but if by initiation, by taking shelter of a pure devotee, I become initiated, so dehāntara is there, going on. So if I take initiation seriously, so in the next dehāntara... Suppose yesterday I was a caṇḍāla. Now by this time there is dehāntara, and if I am purified by initiation... So this argument... Dehāntara, is already there. Scientifically, in modern understanding, and on the authority of Kṛṣṇa's statement, dehāntara is going on. Not that somebody was European or... We take Europeans as mlecchas or yavanas. Yes, he was yesterday mleccha and yavanas, but he has changed his body, and after changing if he's initiated, then dehāntara. Śudhyanti, he's purified. Śudhyanti.

So how this is possible, if we cannot understand... Because Lord Viṣṇu's energy is inconceivable. Inconceivable, acintya. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has discussed. Unless you accept acintya-śakti of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you cannot understand. You have to accept. It is acintya, inconceivable, by us. But it is not inconceivable by the advanced devotees. Or anything being executed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is not inconceivable by Him. Svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca. He's so perfect in knowledge that what we are thinking inconceivable, that is very, very easily done with full knowledge by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So what is inconceivable by us, it is not inconceivable by Him. Therefore we have to learn it from,

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



We cannot understand directly. It is not possible. So we have to approach tattva-darśī. Just like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, tattva-darśī. He says śudhyanti. Yes, he's purified. Although he is born of kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśāḥ, caṇḍāla. Caṇḍālo 'pi dvija-śreṣṭho hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ. So it is inconceivable by us how a caṇḍāla can be dvija-śreṣṭha, more than a brāhmaṇa. It is inconceivable by me. But when we get a statement of the authorities like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and above that, Kṛṣṇa... Because the conclusion of Kṛṣṇa and the conclusion of pure devotee like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, they are the same. Just see here. Kṛṣṇa says māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim [Bg. 9.32]. So unless one is purified, how he can go to parāṁ gatim? And Śukadeva Gosvāmī also says the same thing. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra. Pāpa-yoni. They are pāpa-yoni. Śudhyanti prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ. Simply we have to go through the process; otherwise everything is possible. That is the omnipotency of Kṛṣṇa.



We use this word "omnipotency," but we do not know actually what is that omnipotency. Omnipotency means He has got diverse energies. That is omnipotency. And we do not know by which energy He's acting in a particular case. But this is a fact, that His energy is working. And He says also in the Bhagavad-gītā directly, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Mayādhyakṣeṇa, "Under My supervision prakṛti is acting." So how prakṛti is directed, how Kṛṣṇa is directing prakṛti to make a nice flower... Just like here, they're painting flower on the wall. It takes so much time, so much arrangement. Still, it is not as good as a natural flower. Here you have painted one rose flower, and here are roses. There is art also, and here is art also. Without art, without artistic sense, how this nice thing, beautiful thing, can come in? You'll find a beautiful flower bloom in a plant, you appreciate it. And don't think, as the rascal says, "By nature it has come automatically." No. The same energy as you are taking, you are applying your energy to paint a flower on the wall with your paints and brushes... But Kṛṣṇa is also doing that, but His energy is so inconceivable that we cannot see how He's working. But He's working. Otherwise why Kṛṣṇa says, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ: [Bg. 9.10] "Prakṛti is working under My direction"? Is it a bluff? No. Actually prakṛti is acting under His direction.

It is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā,

sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.44]



So prakṛti. Icchānurūpam api yasya. That prakṛti, Durgā, is acting under the direction of Govinda. Icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. The direction is there. Direction is there actually. But because we cannot conceive how in this plan the direction of the Supreme Lord is there so that a nice flower is coming with so beautiful feature. But direction is there we should know. In ordinarily we say sometimes that "Not a blade of grass moves without the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." So everything is going on under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Don't think that it is taking automatically. There is no such thing as automatical. But the direction is so quick, so sufficient and so perfect. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. Automatically, immediately. There are so many machines we have. Just like the computer. There is machine working, but it is so minute that simply by pushing one button, so many things immediately done. This is a material machine, manufactured by a human being. And how much perfect the machine of Kṛṣṇa will be, just imagine.



So this material nature is nothing but machine. It is not God. Those who are with poor fund of knowledge, they are taking directly this material nature as working. No. Material nature has no power to act. It is dull. The same example, the computer. It is a very nice machine, but it cannot work automatically unless an expert pushes the button. So material nature cannot do anything. It is Kṛṣṇa's direction. So in everywhere there is Kṛṣṇa's direction. One who has got the eyes to see, for him, kṛṣṇa-kathodayam. Whatever he sees, he remembers Kṛṣṇa.

sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti

[Cc. Madhya 8.274]



One has to become advanced devotee to understand how Kṛṣṇa's direction is going on. They can understand. Don't think that things are taking place automatically. Therefore even in reverse condition a devotee does not see that "This thing is happening without direction of Kṛṣṇa." Even if he is in an adverse condition, he does not feel any pain, because he knows that "This adverse condition is also under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. So I am fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. Why I shall take this adverse position as not mercy of Kṛṣṇa? It is also mercy of Kṛṣṇa." Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam [SB 10.14.8]. A devotee is not disturbed by adverse condition. He takes that this is a gift of Kṛṣṇa. Tat te anukampām. "It is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Although I am put into difficulty, it is Kṛṣṇa's mercy."



So anyone who takes in that way, mukti-pade sa daya-bhāk: his going back to home, back to Godhead, is guaranteed. Because he takes everything as Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja was so much chastised by his father. You know how he was put into difficulty so many ways. But he was taking, "This is Kṛṣṇa's mercy." He did not take otherwise. So in this way wherever... Everywhere there is Kṛṣṇa's hand, so what to speak of this battlefield or any other thing. So we should not take otherwise, that "This the best part and this is the lowest part." No. Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa directly. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, but we cannot see. But at least in Mahābhārata, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in Kṛṣṇa's dealing with the Pāṇḍavas, the Kṛṣṇa's hand is there. That is Kṛṣṇa's desire. [break] ...it is not like that. One who is advanced, one who is actually in knowledge, they will take kṛṣṇa-kathodayam. Wherever Kṛṣṇa's kathā is there, it is as good as any other. That is the way of... Thank you very much. (end)



760912SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.13-14

-

Vṛndāvana, September 12, 1976



Devotee:



yadā mṛdhe kaurava-sṛñjayānāṁ

vīreṣv atho vīra-gatiṁ gateṣu

vṛkodarāviddha-gadābhimarśa-

bhagnoru-daṇḍe dhṛtarāṣṭra-putre

bhartuḥ priyaṁ drauṇir iti sma paśyan

kṛṣṇā-sutānāṁ svapatāṁ śirāṁsi

upāharad vipriyam eva tasya

jugupsitaṁ karma vigarhayanti

[SB 1.7.13-14]



"When the respective warriors of both camps, namely the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas, were killed on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, and the dead warriors obtained their deserved destinations, and when the son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra fell down lamenting, his spine broken, being beaten by the club of Bhīmasena, the son of Droṇācārya (Aśvatthāmā) beheaded the five sleeping sons of Draupadī and delivered them as a prize to his master, foolishly thinking that he would be pleased. Duryodhana, however, disapproved of the heinous act, and he was not pleased in the least."



Prabhupāda:



yadā mṛdhe kaurava-sṛñjayānāṁ

vīreṣv atho vīra-gatiṁ gateṣu

vṛkodarāviddha-gadābhimarśa-

bhagnoru-daṇḍe dhṛtarāṣṭra-putre



bhartuḥ priyaṁ drauṇir iti sma paśyan

kṛṣṇā-sutānāṁ svapatāṁ śirāṁsi

upāharad vipriyam eva tasya

jugupsitaṁ karma vigarhayanti



So Drauṇi, Droṇācārya's son, a brāhmaṇa, but he took the profession of a kṣatriya. That is degradation. When a brāhmaṇa takes the occupation of a kṣatriya, it is degradation. So this Drauṇi, although he belonged to the brāhmaṇa family and he accepted the profession of a kṣatriya, he degraded so much that he cut off the heads of five sons of Draupadī while they were sleeping. So much degradation. A kṣatriya never slains anybody who is sleeping. Kṣatriya's business is to challenge, and if the other party has no weapon, he supplies weapon. Then there is fight, then it is decided. One must die. That decision is there. When there is fight between two kṣatriyas, the decision is that one must die. Unless one dies, the business, the fighting, will never stop. That is called vīra-gatim. Vīra-gatim. If a kṣatriya dies in fight, he gets the promotion of vīra-gatim, means he goes to the heavenly planet. This was advised by Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna, that "You fight. If you are victorious, then you will enjoy this kingdom, and if you are killed, then you'll go to the heavenly planets. Then where is your loss? Both ways you shall gain. Why shall you not fight?" This advice was given by Kṛṣṇa.



So here it is said yadā mṛdhe kaurava-sṛñjayānām. In the fight all the parties who died, they all obtained vīra-gatim. And most of them they achieved svarūpa. That is described in a different place. Svarūpa means his original, spiritual form. All the soldiers or the kings who died, and at the time of death who were seeing Kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa was there in the battlefield-all of them achieved their original, spiritual form. Svarūpam. And those who did not see Kṛṣṇa, they got promoted vīra-gatim, in the heavenly planet. So fight is not always bad. If it is dharma-yuddha, according to the prescribed rules, not whimsical fight, dharma-yuddha, then there is gain. This science is lost. There is no such thing. Now fighting means hooliganism, vandalism, guṇḍā-ism. That is not fight. Here is fight: vīra-gatim gate. They are all promoted.

Then at last the fighting was between Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Bhīma. This vṛkodara... Vṛkodarāviddha-gadābhimarśa. Both of them, Duryodhana and Bhīma, they were very expert in fighting with gadā. So when they were fighting, Balarāma... Balarāma... Kṛṣṇa was neutral, but He was taking the side of Arjuna. He was driving the chariot. That means He was on the side of the Pāṇḍavas. But actually He was not fighting. So Balarāma also did not fight, and in order to avoid any parties, He went to holy places at that time. He was traveling all over India from different holy places, one place to another. So when He returned, He had some sympathy with Duryodhana. Because Duryodhana was His disciple to learn how to fight with this gadā, club, naturally He was sympathetic, Balarāma was sympathetic. So when He came, they were..., fighting was going on. So just to show Him respect, they stopped fighting and everyone was silent. Because the Pāṇḍavas knew that Balarāma was sympathetic with Duryodhana, and if He takes the side of Duryodhana, then everything will be spoiled, because He is the Supreme Person. But He did not do so. He advised them, "My dear Duryodhana, I know you are a great fighter. You have got strength. You have learned, you know the art of fighting. But you are not so strong as Bhīma." And He advised Bhīma, "My dear Bhīma, you have got the strength of ten thousand elephants. Naturally you are superiorally stronger. So he knows the art better than you, and you are bodily stronger than him. So there will be no decision. The fighting will go on. Can you not stop? Because there will not be decision. The fighting will go on. Unless one is dead, the fighting will go on. So what is the use? Nobody will be victorious. The fighting will go on. Better stop."

But they remained silent. Silent means they did not like the idea. Because Bhīma had many old grudges against Duryodhana, because when Draupadī was being insulted, they had to sit down silent, no protest. There were so many incidences-rivalry, insult and counterinsult. So they took the opportunity of feeding the old grudge by fighting. Everyone was determined, "I must kill." Duryodhana was determined to kill Bhīma, and Bhīma was determined to kill. So when they did not listen to the instruction of Baladeva, then Baladeva left the place. He went to Dvārakā, back. Of course, Kṛṣṇa was there, because Kṛṣṇa was to give hint to Bhīma how to kill Duryodhana. So Duryodhana, by the blessings of his mother, his whole body became iron-like solid. So by beating by the Bhīma, it was not easy. So the story is that Gāndhārī, the mother of Duryodhana, she was great chaste woman. Because her husband was blind, she used to remain as blind woman covering the eyes. But she had some power. Chaste woman, anyone who sticks to the regulative principles, he gets a power, spiritual or material. He gets power. A brahmacārī gets power if he follows brahmacarya. Everyone, if we follow the prescribed rules and regulations, automatically you become powerful.

So Gāndhārī had some power. So her eldest son, Duryodhana, was advised to see the mother naked. She advised, "My dear son, tomorrow morning when you come to offer your obeisances to me, you come naked. I shall see you and you will be solidified just like iron." So he was going naked and Kṛṣṇa saw. So He asked him, "Where you are going?" "I am going to see my mother." "How is that? You are going naked? At least you have some langota(?). This is not good." So he took the instruction of Kṛṣṇa and covered the private part with a langota. And when Gāndhārī saw, she saw that he was not fully naked, so she regretted, "O my dear son, I asked you to come before me naked. Why you have got this...?" "No, Kṛṣṇa advised." Then she began to smile, that "My attempt is failure." So Kṛṣṇa knew it, that part which was covered, that was not turned iron. The other parts turned into iron on account of seeing by Gāndhārī. So in this fight Kṛṣṇa hinted Bhīma that "You strike here. That part is not ironized." Although it is against the regulative principle to strike the opponent party below this waist, Kṛṣṇa advised that "Unless you transgress this law, you cannot kill him." So he was stroken below the waist, and he was not killed, but his waist was broken. Therefore it is said vṛkodarāviddha-gadābhimarśa. Then he died. This is mentioned here.

So bhagnoru-daṇḍe. Bhagna uru. Uru-daṇḍa was broken. Bhagnoru-daṇḍe dhṛtarāṣṭra-putre. Dhṛtarāṣṭra-putra, Duryodhana was dhṛtarāṣṭra-putra. At that time, Drauṇi, his master was Duryodhana. A brāhmaṇa became a servant of kṣatriya, that is degradation. A brāhmaṇa cannot become servant. Nobody can become servant. Only the śūdras can become servant. Brāhmaṇa never becomes servant. They are instructed, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. This is brāhmaṇa's qualification. They will train the brahmacārīs and the gṛhasthas how to become perfect, discipline. First discipline is truthfulness. A brāhmaṇa will never speak lies. That is the first qualification. So who is going to take training in that way? Nobody is interested. This is Kali-yuga. We are trying to train people "No illicit sex, no meat-eating, no gambling, no intoxication." Still, there are some failures. And if we teach in our institution, "Please do not speak lies," people will laugh: "What is this nonsense? Nowadays is it possible to remain in this society without speaking lies?" This is the position. This is called Kali-yuga. Nobody is interested to be trained up as a brāhmaṇa. Nobody is interested to be trained up as a kṣatriya, neither as a vaiśya. They are all śūdras. Therefore it is said, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. There is no training. It is very very difficult to train them to become purified by training. These statuses of life were different status of training so that ultimately one can become brāhmaṇa, and when he's fully trained up as a brāhmaṇa then he transcends the brāhmaṇa's position, and he becomes a Vaiṣṇava.

So to become Vaiṣṇava is not so easy thing. One has to become brāhmaṇa, then when he surpasses the stages of becoming brāhmaṇa then he becomes a Vaiṣṇava. Śuddha-sattva. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam. Then Kṛṣṇa is born. When one comes to the Vaiṣṇava stage, then he can understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Just like Kṛṣṇa was born of Vasudeva. Similarly, when one comes to the stage of Vasudeva... Vasudeva means perfect Vaiṣṇava. Do you think Kṛṣṇa accepts somebody as father, an ordinary man? No. He is perfect Vaiṣṇava. Kṛṣṇa accepts somebody as mother... Who is His mother, father? Nobody can be. He is the ādi-puruṣa. He's original person. Who can become His father, mother? But He accepts, when He descends to exhibit His līlā... Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata tadātmānam [Bg. 4.7] [break] ...janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. Don't take ordinarily: "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is born of a father, Vasudeva, and of a mother, Devakī. That's all. We know He was born." No. One has to learn who is His father, who is His mother, how He accepts His devotee as father. That is called yo jānāti tattvataḥ. This is tattvataḥ.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



To understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ, in truth, that is not so easy. It is possible for a man out of many millions of men. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati.



So that tattvataḥ one can understand simply by pure devotional service. If you become a pure devotee, without any contamination-unalloyed devotee-then Kṛṣṇa reveals: "This is I am. I am like this." You cannot speculate upon Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. Nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo na bahunā śrutena na medhayā. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa simply because you are a learned Sanskrit scholar. You are a rascal. Kṛṣṇa is not so easy to be understood by scholarship or Sanskrit language. Don't commit this mistake. Kṛṣṇa is understood by a person to whom Kṛṣṇa reveals. That is understanding. Nāyam ātmā. This is completely said: Nāyam ātmā, nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo na medhayā. Because you have got a fertile brain, therefore you'll be able to understand Kṛṣṇa? No. Na bahunā śrutena. Oh, because you are very good scholar, you have studied so much... No. If Kṛṣṇa reveals to you, then you'll be able. That revelation is possible when you are a devotee. Otherwise, it is not possible. Nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyaḥ.

So we have to wait for that opportunity when Kṛṣṇa reveals. How that revelation is possible? Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. By sense perception or sense speculation you cannot. Nāmādi. Even the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra you cannot understand. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi. Nāma, rūpa, līlā, parikara, vaiśiṣṭya..., everything. You cannot understand with these blunt senses. Then how? Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When you engage your senses, purified senses. Sevonmukhe. Purified senses means when the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord-everything-then you can understand Kṛṣṇa. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is not your servant: "Kṛṣṇa, I want to see You." No. That you cannot see. Svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When He's pleased, when He sees that "Here is a pure devotee," then He reveals.

So the Pāṇḍavas were pure devotees; therefore Kṛṣṇa took his side and they became victorious in the fight. And Kṛṣṇa is always ready to give protection to His devotees. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. His sudarśana-cakra always protects His devotees. That is the position of devotee.

Thank you very much. (end)



760913SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.15

-

Vṛndāvana, September 13, 1976



Pradyumna:



mātā śiśūnāṁ nidhanaṁ sutānāṁ

niśamya ghoraṁ paritapyamānā

tadārudad vāṣpa-kalākulākṣī

tāṁ sāntvayann āha kirīṭamālī

[SB 1.7.15]



"Draupadī, the mother of the five children of the Pāṇḍavas, after hearing of the massacre of her sons, began to cry in distress with eyes full of tears. Trying to pacify her in her great loss, Arjuna spoke to her thus."



Prabhupāda:



mātā śiśūnāṁ nidhanaṁ sutānāṁ

niśamya ghoraṁ paritapyamānā

tadārudad vāṣpa-kalākulākṣī

tāṁ sāntvayann āha kirīṭamālī

[SB 1.7.15]



So Draupadī's five sons were killed-five sons by five husbands. You know the history of Draupadī. She had five husbands, which is forbidden nowadays. Although in some hilly districts still this system is current, that one woman has got five or six husbands-this practice was there even in high circle-that is now forbidden. Devareṇa sutotpattiṁ kalau pañca vivarjayet. Don't try to imitate Draupadī. That is not allowed in this age.



aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ

sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ

kalau pañca vivarjayet

[Cc. Ādi 17.164]



So when Draupadī was gained by Arjuna, the five Pāṇḍavas were in the forest incognito. So when they came to their mother in jubilation, they exclaimed, "Mother, we have got a very nice jewel." So mother said, "All right, my dear sons, enjoy it, all of you, five." So on the order of mother they accepted Draupadī as a common wife. But that does not mean she had many sons. Only five sons. By the five husbands, one son. That is also another system. Not competition that each husband will produce dozens of children. No.



So when the mother understood that her sons were killed, certainly she was very, very unhappy. Mātā śiśūnāṁ nidhanaṁ sutānāṁ niśamya ghoraṁ paritapyamānā. Lamenting. That is natural. So tadārudad vāṣpa-kalākulākṣī. With tears, she was crying, and tāṁ sāntvayan, pacifying, āha kirīṭamālī. Kirīṭamālī is Arjuna. So they were directly connected with Kṛṣṇa. Draupadī's another name is Kṛṣṇā. And still they had to suffer the material pangs. Not that because one is Kṛṣṇa conscious there will be no material suffering. Actually, those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, they have no material suffering. Although it appears that they are suffering, they are not suffering. They can accept any so-called suffering and accept it as mercy of Kṛṣṇa. They never take it as suffering. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam [SB 10.14.8]. A devotee, when he's in suffering, so-called suffering, he accepts it as the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Tat te 'nukampām. And he rather thanks Kṛṣṇa, that "I had to suffer many more times, but You have minimized it, giving me little suffering. So it is Your mercy." And if anyone lives on that attitude, everything taken as Kṛṣṇa's mercy, then he is guaranteed to go back home, back to Godhead. Mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk. Dāya-bhāk means his going back to home, back to Godhead, is exactly like the inheritance of property by the son. Mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk. So we should learn from the Pāṇḍavas that Kṛṣṇa was always present with them, still they had to suffer so much material tribulations. So they were never unhappy, neither they requested Kṛṣṇa that "My dear friend Kṛṣṇa, You were always with us. Still we had to suffer." Never expressed that. That is pure devotion. Never try to take any benefit from Kṛṣṇa. Simply try to give benefit to Kṛṣṇa. Do not take any benefit from Kṛṣṇa. This is pure devotion.

Perhaps you know that once upon a time Rūpa Gosvāmī desired that "If I would get some nice foodstuff, I would have invited Sanātana Gosvāmī and cook some nice food." He desired like that. They were living in Vṛndāvana here and there, under the shade of a tree. They had no stock, nothing. So one very beautiful girl came and offered rice, ḍāl, ghee. She said, "Bābā, we have got some festival." In this country they address saintly person as Bābā. So she offered so many things, and he immediately invited Sanātana Gosvāmī-they were living separately. And Rūpa Gosvāmī was very good cook also. So he prepared very nice preparation and offered to Sanātana Gosvāmī prasādam. So Sanātana Gosvāmī astonishingly inquired that "Where you got all these nice things in this forest?" So he told the whole story, that "In the morning I desired, and in just a few hour, time, little time, one very beautiful girl came and offered this ingredients." So after hearing the description of the beautiful girl, Sanātana Gosvāmī could understand that she was Rādhārāṇī. So immediately he chastised Rūpa Gosvāmī, that "You have taken service from Rādhārāṇī. This is not good. We are trying to give service to Rādhārāṇī, and you have taken service from Rādhārāṇī."

So this is Vaiṣṇava consideration. They are firmly determined not to bother Kṛṣṇa with anything. Simply to serve Him. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa also finds opportunity when to serve His devotee. This is the reciprocation. The devotee wants to serve Kṛṣṇa without any return, and Kṛṣṇa also wants to serve devotee whenever there is opportunity. This is the transaction of love: not to take anything return.

āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ

[Cc. Antya 20.47]



This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching, that "From Kṛṣṇa's side, He may do whatever He likes"-that is full surrender-"still, He is my master. He's nobody else. He is still my worshipable master." Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung,



mānasa deho geho jo kichu mor

arpiluṅ tuwā pade nanda-kiśor



Nanda-kiśora is Kṛṣṇa. So this is full surrender. "My dear Nanda-kiśora, whatever I have got, now I am offering everything to You." What I have got? Mānasa deho geho: "I have got my body, I have got my mind, and a so-called home or a wife or a few children. What I have got? So everything is offered to You." Mānasa deho geho jo kichu mor. This is full surrender. Now he says, mārobi rākhobi jo icchā tohārā: "I am surrendering to You everything. Now if You like You can save me, or if You like You can kill me." This is full surrender.



So these Pāṇḍavas are the best example, and better than the Pāṇḍavas, there are other devotees. And the topmost surrendered devotees are the gopīs. There is no more higher exalted devotees than the gopīs. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended that the gopīs, ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā. There is no better type of worshiping Kṛṣṇa than the method by which gopīs worship Kṛṣṇa. They, their love was so intense that they did not care for any family, any honor, or any prestige-nothing. That is the highest, topmost loving stage of Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa also loved the gopīs, so much so that Kṛṣṇa asked them that "You cannot expect any return from Me for your ecstatic love. I cannot give you. It is beyond My power." So they purchased Kṛṣṇa. And the topmost gopī is Rādhārāṇī. So we should not consider these gopīs' dealings with Kṛṣṇa as ordinary material dealings. It is not that. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. The gopīs are expansion of Kṛṣṇa's pleasure potency. That is described by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmāt. Hlādinī-śakti. Kṛṣṇa has got the pleasure potency. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He has got multi-energies. In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is also said, parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis tathedam akhilaṁ jagat. Whatever we see, that is display of the potencies, different potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just like the sun is ninety-three millions of miles away from this earthly planet. Still we are getting heat and light energy of the sun. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is Kṛṣṇa's energy. Although He is in the Goloka planet, which is the topmost planet in the spiritual world... You cannot estimate the how far the spiritual world is from this material world. From material calculation they say it takes about some forty thousands of years to go to the limit of this universe. Then beyond that universe there is the spiritual world. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyaḥ [Bg. 8.20], another nature, avyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ. Then you pass through the spiritual world, brahmajyoti. There are innumerable, unlimited number of Vaikuṇṭha planets. Then, above all of them, there is the planet Goloka Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa resides.

It is said in the Brahma-saṁhitā, goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya [Bs. 5.43]. Goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni. That is Kṛṣṇa's personal planet, Goloka Vṛndāvana. Goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu teṣu teṣu [Bs. 5.43]. There are other planetary system, Hari-dhāma, Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma. Then, this is, this material world is called Devī-dhāma, and between the Goloka, between the spiritual world and material world there is...Goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu [Bs. 5.43]. So there are so many status (?) of planetary system. Each planet is full with living entities. The spiritual planet, they are full of living entities: they are all liberated, nitya-mukta. And those who are within this material world, planets, they are nitya-baddha. Nitya-baddha, nitya-mukta. There are two kinds of living entities. The nitya-baddhas are only few, but the nitya-muktas are many, many. This material world is only one fourth energy of the creation. The three-fourths energy is in the spiritual world. And here in the one-fourth energy there are innumerable universes, and each universe is full with different types of planets, and each planet is full of living entities. But these rascals, they say it is..., there is no living entity; it is sand and rocks. So this is not the fact. You have to understand from the Vedic literature about the planets, where which planet is existing, where is spiritual world, where is material world. All informations are there. Don't speculate and simply think that this planet is full of living entities, all other planets are vacant. This is most unusual argument. There is no meaning. But we are not concerned with that. We have got our own information from the Vedas.

So Kṛṣṇa's pastimes is going on. Somewhere, or elsewhere it is going on. Therefore His pastimes are called nitya-līlā, nitya-līlā-prakāśa. This vṛndāvana-līlā is nitya-līlā: it is going on continuously somewhere or other within this material world. And the spiritual world, it is permanently there. So the Pāṇḍavas, they are associates of the nitya-līlā. They are not ordinary human beings. Wherever there is kṛṣṇa-līlā, they go. Therefore Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa that "How can I believe that You, first of all, many millions of years ago You spoke this philosophy to the sun-god?" Kṛṣṇa replied, bahūni me janmāni... What is that verse? Ah, bahūni me vyatītāni janmāni tava cārjuna. "Arjuna, both you and Me were together, and we have passed through many different līlās. But you have forgotten; I remember." That is the difference between God and the living entities. They cannot be equal. We forget... The Māyāvādī's philosopher, they put this argument that "Because we have forgotten. Now in māyā we have forgotten that we are God." So what kind of God he is if he forgets? God never says "I have forgotten." Kṛṣṇa says, vedāhaṁ samatītāni: [Bg. 7.26] "I know past, present, future." So where is the question of forgetting? So if somebody forgets, that God is different from the God who does not forget. Therefore we have to accept two. Immediately you have to accept dvaita-vāda: one forgetting-God and one not-forgetting-God. You cannot accept one. That is not possible.

And that is the fact. Just like Kṛṣṇa says that "I remember when I spoke to sun-god. You have forgotten." So there are two. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's another name is Acyuta. He never falls down from His position. And if we fall down from the position... Therefore we are not on the same level. We may have some power, and we can claim that "I am God"-that you can claim-but not that God, like Kṛṣṇa. Therefore two words are there: īśvara, parameśvara. In the Brahma-saṁhitā therefore it is described that īśvaras, there may be many, but not parameśvara. Parameśvara is one. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. So these Māyāvādīs, they forget this, that īśvara, parameśvara, there are two words. Ātmā and paramātmā, there are two words. So they are not equal. And Kṛṣṇa says mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. He is the supermost īśvara. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). Although both of us are nitya, eternal, and living entities, still, there is difference. He is supreme living entity, we are subordinate. Prabhu and aṇu. Vibhu and aṇu.

So this philosophy is perfect, and anyone who accepts this Māyāvāda philosophy, that God and living entity are on the same level, they have got poor fund of knowledge.

Thank you very much. (end)



760914SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.16

-

Vṛndāvana, September 14, 1976



Pradyumna:



tadā śucas te pramṛjāmi bhadre

yad brahma-bandhoḥ śira ātatāyinaḥ

gāṇḍīva-muktair viśikhair upāhare

tvākramya yat snāsyasi dagdha-putrā

[SB 1.7.16]



"O gentle lady, when I present you with the head of that brāhmaṇa, after beheading him with arrows from my Gāṇḍīva bow, I shall then wipe the tears from your eyes and pacify you. Then, after burning your sons' bodies, you can take your bath standing on his head."



Prabhupāda:



tadā śucas te pramṛjāmi bhadre

yad brahma-bandhoḥ śira ātatāyinaḥ

gāṇḍīva-muktair viśikhair upāhare

tvākramya yat snāsyasi dagdha-putrā

[SB 1.7.16]



So yad brahma-bandhoḥ. Brahma-bandhu, or kṣatra-bandhu, a person born in the family of a brāhmaṇa but has no brāhmaṇa qualifications, he is called brahma-bandhu, "friend of a brāhmaṇa." Bandhu means friend. A person, a man, his father is high-court judge. So there is no harm that he belongs to the family of such and such high-court judge-but that does not mean he is high-court judge. This should be noted. That is the difference, brāhmaṇa and brahma-bandhu. Brāhmaṇa means guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. He must have the quality, śamo damaḥ śaucaṁ titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. He must be self-controlled, controlling the mind and the senses. Then very clean, śaucam. Satyaṁ śaucam. Then titikṣā, tolerant; ārjavam, very simple. No duplicity. Simple. Ārjavam. Jñānam, full knowledge; vijñānam, knowledge applied in practical life. This is vijñānam. Just like we call science. Science means to know the thing correctly, and by practical experiment to understand the things correctly, that is vijñānam. Jñānam means theoretical knowledge, and vijñānam means practical application of the knowledge. Simply if I know "This is the qualification of brāhmaṇa," but there is no practical application, that will not do. One must pass the engineering examination and work as engineer; then he's called an engineer. One has passed the law examination and is practicing in the court, then he's lawyer. Two things required. Similarly, all these varṇa-vibhāga, divisions of varṇas... Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. Guṇa means he must have the necessary quality, at the same time he must work with that quality. Then he is... Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13].



So here, Aśvatthāmā, he's born of a brāhmaṇa father, but his work has been proved just like a butcher. Therefore he is called brahma-bandhu. He's called not a brāhmaṇa: brahma-bandhu. Brahma-bandhoḥ śira ātatāyinaḥ. Ātatāyinaḥ, aggressor. A brāhmaṇa does not require to kill a person with weapon. No. That is kṣatriya's business. If one is actually a brāhmaṇa-of course, in the Kali-yuga such brāhmaṇa is not to be found-his simply curse is sufficient to kill a man. If a brāhmaṇa curses somebody... Just like Mahārāja Parīkṣit, he was cursed by a brāhmaṇa's son. Means not fully brāhmaṇa, not grown-up. A child, a boy twelve years old, he cursed Parīkṣit Mahārāja that "Within seven days you'll be bitten by a serpent," and it came to be true. So brāhmaṇa does not require any sword or any arrow to kill a man. His very word is sufficient. Therefore when somebody was to be killed, the brāhmaṇa would bring him to the kṣatriya-not killing himself by weapon. Just like Viśvāmitra, he wanted to kill one rākṣasī, so he came to Mahārāja Daśaratha, kṣatriya, to do the business of killing. There are so many... That is shastric evidences.

So here, a brahma-bandhu... Aśvatthāmā was born of a brāhmaṇa, Droṇācārya. But he killed the five sons of Draupadī most abominably, when they were sleeping. So what to speak of brāhmaṇa, he's less than a kṣatriya even. Because a kṣatriya also do not kill anybody while one is sleeping. A kṣatriya challenges, offers him weapon, fights, and then one of them is killed. That is... So here it is brahma-bandhoḥ ātatāyinaḥ. Ātatāyinaḥ, aggressor. Anyone who kidnaps one's wife is called aggressor. One who sets fire in your house, he's aggressor. One who is coming to kill you with weapon, he's aggressor. In this way there is a list of aggression. So aggressor can be killed immediately. If somebody is aggressor, there is no sin in killing aggressor. Enemy who sets fire to the house, administers poison, attacks all of a sudden with deadly weapon, plunders wealth, or usurps agricultural field, or entices one's wife is called an aggressor. Everything... This is Vedic knowledge. Everything has got definition.

So this Aśvatthāmā was an aggressor. Therefore Arjuna decided to kill him. He is, although he's born in a brāhmaṇa family... Naturally a person born in a brāhmaṇa family is expected to become a brāhmaṇa by qualification. That was the training. The brahmacārī... Generally the sons of brāhmaṇa and kṣatriyas especially, these two sects, up to vaiśya, they were trained up as brahmacārīs. And śūdras were not interested. The door is open for everyone, but the lower class, except brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, they are not interested to become brahmacārī or their parents are not interested. Just like we are going to open this brahmacārī school, or āśrama, but I am doubtful whether we'll get many children. Because in this age people are interested to become śūdras. Nobody is interested to become brāhmaṇa. Technology. Technology means śūdra. Technology is not the business of a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, or vaiśya. No. Just like blacksmith, goldsmith, carpenter, craftsman. These are technology. They are meant for the śūdras. Brāhmaṇas, they are to be trained up how to become truthful, how to become controller of the senses, how to become simple, how to become tolerant. In this way. Kṣatriya-how to become strong, stout, brave, no going away when there is challenge, not to go away from fighting, to possess land, to rule over, īśvara-bhāvaś ca, and charity. These are the kṣatriya qualifications. The charity was given by the kṣatriyas. Even there are instances that Muhammadan rulers in this country, they also gave in charity land and temple in Vṛndāvana. There are many instances. Aurangzeb gave some land, Jahangir gave some land. There is still one temple, it was constructed by Jahangir, and the other side of the Yamunā there is a village called Jahangir-pura. That village was given to the brāhmaṇas for maintaining the temple. So charity, that is kṣatriya's business, and perform yajñas, give in charity, to rule, not to go away from fighting, challenge, very strong, stout-these are kṣatriya qualification. And the vaiśya qualification-agriculture. Kṛṣi. Kṛṣi-gorakṣya, and cow protection. Kṛṣi-gorakṣya-vāṇijyam. And if there is excess, then vāṇijya, trade. Otherwise there is no question of trade. And vaiśya... And śūdra, paricaryātmakam [Bg. 18.44]-to work for some payment. That is this blacksmith, goldsmith, weaver. You take some work from him and pay him something, maintain him. That is śūdra. So in the śāstra it is said, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In the Kali-yuga almost everyone is a śūdra. You'll find they're interested in accepting some service. Even one is born of a brāhmaṇa family, he is looking after some good job. That is śūdra mentality. That is not brāhmaṇa's business. Brāhmaṇa will not accept anyone's service, neither the kṣatriyas, neither the vaiśyas. Only śūdras.

So considering all these points, Aśvatthāmā is accepted here as brahma-bandhu. And at the same time he's aggressor. Brahma-bandhoḥ ātatāyinaḥ. Therefore Arjuna promised, "I shall kill him." Arjuna did not promise to kill a brāhmaṇa. No. That was not his business. Because he's proved to be brahma-bandhu and ātatāyinaḥ, he deserved to be killed. Therefore it is sanctioned (?). So, next verse you can read. This verse is finished.

Pradyumna:



iti priyāṁ valgu-vicitra-jalpaiḥ

sa sāntvayitvācyuta-mitra-sūtaḥ

anvādravad daṁśita ugra-dhanvā

kapi-dhvajo guru-putraṁ rathena



Arjuna, who is guided by the infallible Lord as friend and driver, thus satisfied the dear lady by such statements. Then he dressed in armor and armed himself with furious weapons, and getting into his chariot, he set out to follow Aśvatthāmā, the son of his martial teacher."



Prabhupāda: So "Arjuna, who is guided by the infallible Lord as friend and driver." Kṛṣṇa's name is Acyuta. Cyuta means fallen, and acyuta means never fallen. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they foolishly say that when God becomes entangled by māyā, He becomes a living entity-jīva-bhūta. Jīva means when He forgets that He is God, then he becomes a jīva, living entity. This is Māyāvādī philosophy. But how God can degrade to become a man or an animal? He is Acyuta; He never falls. Otherwise how He is God? If God also falls... Just like we fall down... Aśvatthāmā, he is son of a brāhmaṇa, but he is fallen to become a butcher because he's a living being, he's different from God. In another place we find Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna that both Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa was present when the Bhagavad-gītā instruction was given to sun-god millions of years ago. Kṛṣṇa said that "You have forgotten. I did not." So this is Acyuta. He never falls down from any standard. He is always perfect, complete.



So one who is not complete, he's jīva. Aṇu and vibhu. Vibhu, there are many examples. Just like fire, blazing fire, you have got experience. And there are sparks. The sparks fall down sometimes and become extinguished, without any illumination, without any burning power. When..., so long the spark is within the fire, it has got the same quality, illumination and burning quality. But as soon as falls down-extinguished, no more illumination, no more burning power. So our position is like that. Although we are part and parcel of God, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7], because we have cyuta, fallen down from our spiritual atmosphere... Just like spiritual atmosphere, Kṛṣṇa's friends, cowherd boys, they're playing with Kṛṣṇa. That is also playing. And here in this material world the boys they also play football play. But these two plays are different. One is spiritual and another is material. The same example: the spark, when it is with the fire, it is illuminating and burning, but when the sparks fall down, they may fall down on the ground. There are three chances. One chance is the spark falls down on dry grass-then there is fire. As soon as the spark falls down on the dry grass there is fire for some time. And when the spark falls down on the ground, it is extinguished. And when the fire, spark, falls down on the water, then it is not only extinguished; it becomes no more inflammable. Very difficult to inflame. Similarly, when we fall down from the fire, spiritual world, we associate with three qualities. Puruṣaḥ prakṛti 'stho hi bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān [Bg. 13.22]. This is the statement of Bhagavad-gītā. Prakṛti-jān guṇān. In the prakṛti, in this material world, there are three modes of material nature: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So there is chance... When you fall down, you can fall down anywhere. This example, the same example. A spark falls down from the original fire, so it can fall down on the dry grass, it can fall down on the water, it can fall down on the ground. There are three chances. Similarly, when the living entity, originally part and parcel of God, the same quality... Not the same quantity. Just like spark and fire, they are same quality but not same quantity. Fire is very big; therefore the big fire is acyuta. It is never degraded. But the small fire is degraded.

So when Kṛṣṇa comes, big fire comes, He is not degraded. He's acyuta. He is... Don't think that because Kṛṣṇa has come in this material world, so He is also affected by the material qualities. No. In Bhāgavata it is said, etad īśanam īśasya. This is controlling power. Although He comes in this material world, He's not affected by the material qualities. He's not fallible; He's Acyuta. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is described as acyuta. When Arjuna was asking Kṛṣṇa to move his chariot, so he addressed Him as Acyuta. Senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me acyuta [Bg. 1.21]. Why Acyuta? Because Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord and Arjuna is living being, entity. Arjuna is servant and Kṛṣṇa is the master. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. How the servant can order the master? It is not the etiquette, neither it is possible. Therefore Arjuna reminded Kṛṣṇa, "Acyuta, my dear friend, You are Acyuta, never fallible. You promised that You shall drive my chariot. So now because You are my driver, I'm asking You to follow my orders. Don't be sorry. Acyuta." This is the purpose. Therefore senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me acyuta [Bg. 1.21]. In this way we find Kṛṣṇa never failed in His promise. He remained always... When He was pierced with the arrows... Sometimes the chariot driver is killed. the horses are killed to make the enemy inactive. Because without horses, without chariot driver, how he can drive?

So Kṛṣṇa is Acyuta. He never falls. So this is a false theory that when God falls down He becomes a jīva, and when He is again revived in His original position, He becomes God. This is nonsense theory. It has no meaning. God never falls down. But rascals, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11], because they're rascals, they think Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's līlā in Vṛndāvana, so many rascals, they think that Kṛṣṇa's dealing with the gopīs is the same as one young man or young boy plays with other young girls. No. They are different. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. This dealing, in this material world, between young boys and girls, they're material. They're simply a reflection of the original dealings. The verse in the Vedānta-sūtra, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. From Brahman everything is emanating. Without being in Brahman, nothing can be manifest or existing within this world. So these love affairs between young girls and young boy, is there in Brahman. That is the dealing of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. So that dealing is pervertedly reflected within this material world. It is not the same thing. It is different. But those who are not in the knowledge, they take it that the dealings... Idam Viṣṇu and the vraja-vadhū... It is so nice that actually if one hears about the dealings of the gopīs and Kṛṣṇa, then he becomes so elevated in devotion that he forgets the lusty dealings between man and woman. That is the result. It is stated in the Bhāgavatam, apahinoti, bhaktiṁ pratilabhya apahinoti kāmam.. If one is eligible to hear the dealings of gopīs and Kṛṣṇa, the result will be he'll forget the lusty desires of this material world. Therefore it is not for all. These dealings of gopīs and Kṛṣṇa is meant for the liberated person. They can hear, not the ordinary persons. Therefore this kṛṣṇa-līlā is given in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So don't jump over. First of all you try to understand Kṛṣṇa, Acyuta. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ svarāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. To understand Kṛṣṇa, not only... The Bhagavad-gītā is the ABCD, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins when one is actually Kṛṣṇa conscious. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. Then Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins. So don't jump over the kṛṣṇa-līlā or jump over Rādhā-kuṇḍa unless you are a liberated person. This is the instruction. Acyuta. You must be also acyuta-not falling down from the standard of pure devotional service. Acyuta-gotra.

A Vaiṣṇava, when he's asked about his identification, he gives acyuta-gotra. "Now I belong to the Acyuta, not to my original family." Therefore for a sannyāsī, when he's asked "What is your identification?" it is said, pūrvāśrama. Pūrvāśrama means "Formerly I belonged to such and such family. Now I belong to the family of Kṛṣṇa, acyuta-gotra." This is the etiquette. One should not... Sannyāsī should not be inquired about his identification because he has given up the family relationship. So he should not be bothered. That is not etiquette. Even somebody inquires, he should inquire like that, pūrvāśrama: "What was your pūrvāśrama? Before taking sannyāsa, what was your identification?" So to take sannyāsa means to become in the family of Acyuta. Acyuta-gotra. Gotra means family. In Indian system there are gotras of big, big ṛṣis' name: gautama-gotra, kaśyapa-gotra, vasiṣṭha-gotra. Like that. So they are coming in disciplic succession, or family. All of them were gṛhasthas. Some of them are coming from the family, and some of them are coming from disciplic succession, but both of them are of the same gotra. So therefore it is understood, acyuta-gotra. Those who are renounced order of life, they are called acyuta-gotra.

Thank you very much. (end)



760915SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.18

-

Vṛndāvana, September 15, 1976



Pradyumna:



tam āpatantaṁ sa vilakṣya dūrāt

kumāra-hodvigna-manā rathena

parādravat prāṇa-parīpsur urvyāṁ

yāvad-gamaṁ rudra-bhayād yathā kaḥ

[SB 1.7.18]



"Aśvatthāmā, the murderer of the princes, seeing from a great distance Arjuna coming at him with great speed, fled in his chariot, panic stricken, just to save his life, as Brahmā fled in fear from Śiva."



Prabhupāda:



tam āpatantaṁ sa vilakṣya dūrāt

kumāra-hodvigna-manā rathena

parādravat prāṇa-parīpsur urvyāṁ

yāvad-gamaṁ rudra-bhayād yathā kaḥ

[SB 1.7.18]



So here is one reference that Lord Brahmā was pursued by Lord Śiva when Brahmā was running after his beautiful daughter. So similarly, here, Aśvatthāmā, he knew that Arjuna is coming to kill him, so he was running very swiftly. Āpatantaṁ sa vilakṣya dūrāt. From distant place, when he saw that Arjuna was coming... So dehātma-buddhi. This is the distinction between person in bodily concept of life and person who is liberated from the bodily concept of life. So when Durvāsā Muni cursed or wanted to kill... What is the king? Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. So Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was a devotee. Unnecessarily he was harassed by Durvāsā Muni, but because Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was a pure devotee, advanced, he was not afraid of being killed. He was not afraid. There are many instances. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. He was attempted to be killed by his father so many times, but he was never afraid. Although he was five-years-old boy, but he was not afraid.



So that is the distinction between an advanced devotee and ordinary man. Dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Death means changing of the body. So there is nothing to be very much afraid of, but one is afraid of death because at the time of death the tribulation, the miserable condition of the body is very, very severe-so much severe that one cannot remain. He has to give up this body. Just like sometimes out of disappointment, too much suffering, one commits suicide-death. So death means very, very painful, as much as birth is also very, very painful. Therefore Kṛṣṇa presents, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyadhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. One who is intelligent enough, he should always keep before him the sufferings of birth, death, old age, and disease in front. (aside:) You can, side. Birth, death, old age and..., they are very suffering condition, but if one is advanced devotee, he's not afraid of. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati [SB 6.17.28]. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ, he's never afraid of. Death is coming, that's all right. What is the wrong there? Provided he knows that "After giving up this body, I am going to Kṛṣṇa"? Dhīras tatra na muhyati. He's dhīra. One who is dhīra, he's not afraid of.

So we have to become dhīra. Then we shall not be afraid of death. Unless we are dhīra... There are two classes of men: dhīra and adhīra. Dhīra means one who is not disturbed even though there is cause of disturbances. One may not be disturbed when there is no cause of disturbances. Just like we are not, now at the present moment, we are not afraid of death. But as soon as we find there is earthquake, and we are afraid of this building may fall down, the cause of disturbances, then we become very much disturbed-sometimes screaming. So one who is not disturbed, even there is cause of disturbance, he is called dhīra. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. This is the statement of Bhagavad-gītā. We have to become dhīra from adhīra. But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice that adhīra can be dhīra. This is the profit of this movement. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī dhīrādhīra. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is pleasing to both the classes of men, namely the dhīra and the adhīra. It is so nice. Dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau pūjitau. This was introduced by Caitanya Mahāprabhu and followed by the six Gosvāmīs. Vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau.

So this is the movement how to make an adhīra dhīra. Everyone is adhīra. Who is not afraid of death? Who is not afraid of...? Of course, they are too much agnostic, they forget. But there is suffering. We can see how one suffering at the time of death. There are some men dying... Nowadays it has become a very common... Coma. One is lying in the bed for weeks, two weeks, crying. The life is not going. Those who are very, very sinful. So there is great pain at the time of death. There is great pain at the time of birth, and there is pain when you are diseased, and there are so many pains when you're old. The body is not strong. We suffer in so many ways, especially rheumatism and indigestion. Then blood pressure, headache, so many things. Therefore one should be trained up how to become dhīra. These things, disturbances, make us adhīra, and we should be trained up to dhīra. That is spiritual education. One has to know it. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. These sufferings, mātrā-sparśāḥ, tan-mātra. On account of the senses, sense perception, we suffer. And the senses are made of material nature. So one has to become above the material nature, then he can become dhīra. Otherwise, one has to remain adhīra. Dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau.

So Aśvatthāmā became very much disturbed. Tam āpatantaṁ sa vilakṣya dūrāt kumāra-hā. Hā, from hananam, killing. So he is described here not as Aśvatthāmā, (but) kumāra-hā, one who killed the five boys of Draupadī, kumāras, boys. Boys are called kumāra. Prahlāda Mahārāja has said kaumāra. Kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha [SB 7.6.1]. So from the childhood... Because here kumāra-hā. They were innocent boys, they were killed. So we do not know whether I am a kumāra or I'm old man, there is no certainty of death. Any moment death can take place. Not that "I am now kumāra, I can play. When I shall become old man, I shall chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." This is not a very good policy. Prahlāda Mahārāja says, "No. Immediately." Kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha. Therefore the children, those who are actually dhīra, Vaiṣṇava, they should give education to the children. What education? Not this so-called technical education or smoking education, drinking education and so many rascal education. This is not education. Education means bhāgavata education: to understand God. That is wanted. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Education should be given in such a way that the student should be very, very inquisitive. Inquisitive what about? Inquisitive about Brahman, not about this body. The body is matter, and the spirit soul is Brahman. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is human life. One should be inquisitive to know about spiritual life, what is spirit soul. That is the first education. But where is that education? There is no such education. Prahlāda Mahārāja teaches that immediately, from the beginning of life, as soon as one is four or five years old, he should be educated about Brahman. That is called brahma-jijñāsā. Beginning. That is wanted. And for him there is need of guru. One who is inquisitive or serious about inquiring about Brahman, he requires guru. Guru is not a fashion. Guru is necessity. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Tad-vijñānam. Tad-vijñānam means spiritual education. For material education there is no need of guru. You keep... Guru, of course required, but guru means to inquire about spiritual subject matter. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. Uttamam. Uttamam means udgata-tamaṁ yasmāt. Tamam means darkness. This world is darkness. Everyone, we know, as this material world is dark. And because it is dark there is need of the sunshine, there is need of the moonshine, there is need of electricity, there is need of fire. Because it is constitutionally dark. And the Vedic injunction is tamasi mā: "Don't remain in darkness." Jyotir gama: "Go to the light." And our Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he gives what is that light:

kṛṣṇa-sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra



That light is Kṛṣṇa. And anything which is not Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa is everything, but to make a general division, māyā, that is andhakāra.



So we should not remain in māyā. We should remain always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then our life is successful. Otherwise we shall continue the life of darkness, uttamam. Udgata. Tama, darkness. You have to pass over this darkness. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. Here in the dark... Just like in the darkness if you walk, in every step there is danger. Every step there is danger. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām. If you want to avoid this dangerous life in darkness, then you must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa-sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra. Māyā is andhakāra. Yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra. The sūrya, as soon as there is sunshine, the darkness automatically goes away. So if you keep Kṛṣṇa always in view in your brain, within your heart... Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. If you simply keep Kṛṣṇa within the heart... Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Then your life is success. Otherwise, in the darkness, there is always danger in every step. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām.

samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ

mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ

bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ

padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām

[SB 10.14.58]



This is the version of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam. Pada-pallavam, lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, yaśo murāreḥ. Murāri is Kṛṣṇa. One who has taken shelter of the lotus feet, which is compared with a boat, plavam, then he has nothing to fear from this material ocean of darkness. And this place, this material world, which is darkness, and where there is danger, step by step... Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām. Teṣām, for them, it is not for them. It is for the persons who want to remain in the darkness. And one who does not want to remain in darkness, for him, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. He has to take shelter of the bona fide guru.



If you are serious about not remaining in darkness, as it is said in the Vedas, tamasi mā jyotir gama. If you take this instruction of Vedas... Vedic instruction you have to take. Otherwise you'll suffer. That is Vedas. Why Veda is there? To give you intelligence. Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said, anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gela ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa karila [Cc. Madhya 20.117]. These rascals, anādi-bahirmukha jīva, bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, jīva, they do not know when they have forgotten Kṛṣṇa. Anādi. Anādi means even before creation. Before creation. Long, long period. So anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gela ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa... What is the meaning of these Vedas and Purāṇas? To remind us about Kṛṣṇa. So how we'll understand Vedas and Purāṇas? Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. You have to go to the guru. Why? Jijñāsuḥ śreya... If you want to know the real life, then you have to go to guru. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Then what is the sign, what is the symptom of such guru where I shall get real information? That is also stated. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam, śābde pare ca niṣṇātam. One who is fully aware of the transcendental science or words, śabda, śabda-brahma. Śabda-brahma means Vedic literature. One is completely in awareness of Vedic knowledge. Śābde pare ca niṣṇātam. Niṣṇātam means one has taken a dip in the ocean of this Vedic literature. Niṣṇātam. And what is the result? Śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam. The Supreme Brahman... Brahman, Paramātmā, Bhagavān. Brahmaṇi, either of them. But Bhagavān is the best. Or, if you cannot approach Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Brahman is also. Because if one is in Brahman, he has a chance to make further progress.

But in Kali-yuga it is very difficult to go very slow. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya Mahāprabhu and all the śāstras, they are giving directly in touch with Kṛṣṇa. Step by step, it is very difficult. So that is the special gift in this age. That is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that in this age there is a special gift. What is that special gift? Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya. Kalau... In this age this world is full of faults, but there is one facility: kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. One can become liberated and go back to home, back to Godhead. Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is there to take kṛṣṇa-kīrtana very easily. We have got report from Europe, in Yugoslavia people are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra even there, in Yugoslavia. That is a Communist country, is it not? What is that place, Yugoslavia? They are taking very nice part in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. So as Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, that there is no question of language difficulty. Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is so nice that any part of the world or any part of the universe you can go and chant, and it will be appreciated. There is no need of language difficulty. So take this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, chant yourself, preach all over the world. Everyone will be happy and there will be no more fearfulness from death. Dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. No more death.

Thank you very much. (end)



760916SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.19

-

Vṛndāvana, September 16, 1976



Prabhupāda: Slow, just to drive the flies.



Pradyumna:



yadāśaraṇam ātmānam

aikṣata śrānta-vājinam

astraṁ brahma-śiro mene

ātma-trāṇaṁ dvijātmajaḥ

[SB 1.7.19]



"When the son of the brāhmaṇa (Aśvatthāmā) saw that his horses were tired, he considered that there was no alternative for protection outside of his using the ultimate weapon, the brahmāstra (nuclear weapon)."



Prabhupāda:



yadāśaraṇam ātmānam

aikṣata śrānta-vājinam

astraṁ brahma-śiro mene

ātma-trāṇaṁ dvijātmajaḥ

[SB 1.7.19]



So this dvijātmaja, son of a brāhmaṇa. He's not addressed as a brāhmaṇa because his actions are different. Unless one acts as a brāhmaṇa, he's not accepted as a brāhmaṇa. This is the Vedic system. Lakṣaṇam.



yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ

puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta

tat tenaiva vinirdiśet

[SB 7.11.35]



Lakṣaṇam. Brāhmaṇa's lakṣaṇam, kṣatriya's lakṣaṇam. Lakṣaṇam means symptoms. One must act as a brāhmaṇa. So he is accepted as brahmātmaja. Of course, everyone can claim that his father is like that. But that does not mean he has acquired the father's qualifications. That is not meaning. And onward the son may claim that "Such and such big man is my father." Of course, from social point of view, we sometimes give respect, as it will be seen. Aśvatthāmā, because he happened to be a great personality, Droṇācārya, so he was excused from capital punishment. Otherwise, Arjuna decided to kill him. But because he was a very great man's son, guru-putra, considering that "If he dies, then guru's wife will be very much unhappy," Draupadī advised... She was unhappy on account of death of her sons. So they considered that Aśvatthāmā's mother, she's innocent, but on account of the son's death, she would be unhappy. So considering all these points he was excused from the capital punishment.



So yadā aśaraṇam ātmānam aikṣata. He was running on on the back of a horse, but when he saw that Arjuna is coming nearer, so he has no other alternative, protection. Then he thought of the brahmāstra. Brahmāstra is the last weapon. Just like it is similar to modern nuclear weapon, brahmāstra. As by releasing nuclear weapon there is radiation, similarly, we have got description that when Aśvatthāmā released his brahmāstra, there was a big radiation, people were feeling very terrible heat. And then Kṛṣṇa informed that "This heat is due to the Aśvatthāmā's release of brahmāstra," and Arjuna was advised counteract it. Now they do not know how to counteract this nuclear weapon. Formerly they knew. I throw one kind of weapon, and if you are expert, you can counteract it. Now they have discovered the nuclear weapon, but they have not yet discovered the counteraction. Fight means I show some expert fighting craft or experiencing. The opposite party must also show something better than that. That was fighting. And in this way when one party fails, he's killed. And if he's killed then war stops. No more war. This was the system.

So Aśvatthāmā was thinking of this brahmāstra. Astraṁ brahma-śiro mene ātma-trāṇaṁ dvijātmajaḥ. Hopelessly. So far, of course, I know that this nuclear weapon was already discovered by the German people and Hitler, it is said that he did not use it. Because he knew it that "If I throw this nuclear weapon there will be devastation." So from this point it can be considered that he had some human consideration. So he's advertised very adversely, but if it is a true fact, then how he could have this human consideration that he did not throw the nuclear weapon? And this was taken by the Americans and it was thrown in Japan. That is the history so far we know. So anyway, as we have got experience, the nuclear weapon is very, very dangerous. Similarly the brahmāstra is also very, very dangerous. And another weapon, they knew this art, śabda-vedhī. Śabda-vedhī means if I throw some arrow, it will go to my enemy wherever he is. A little sound of the enemy will attract this weapon, and it is sure to kill my enemy. Śabda-vedhī. There are many instances in Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata. Śabda-vedhī-vāk.

So such warfare of mantra, very subtle. This, at the present moment this warfare is carried on gross weapons. But finer than that, there is mantra war. By mantras the warfare can go on. So this warfare is mantra. That is... Just like indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ [Bg. 3.42]. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā that the indriyāṇi, so far our body's concerned, the indriyas, the senses are prominent. But more important than the senses, above the senses is the mind. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ [Bg. 3.42]. So as we have discovered so many weapons... That is gross, to be handled by senses. Even this nuclear weapon, it is handled by the scientists. But it is not by mantra. That science is still to be discovered by the modern scientists, how to... Or just like this mantra. Snake-charming mantra still there are. You are dealing the snake poison with some counter medicine. This is one kind of treatment. But there is another kind of treatment. That is called mantra, by chanting mantra. Or by herbs you can counteract snake bite. Still, there are in India. Therefore Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said that mantrauṣadhi-vaśaḥ sarpaḥ. Sarpa means snake. It can be brought under control by mantra and herbs. Still, in our Māyāpura some Mohammedans, they know how to use these herbs and mantras for treating snake bites. In Māyāpura there are many snakes, and occasionally snakebite cases are there. But they treat it. And mantra has got power. It has been seen by many medical men in Lucknow. That's a long story.

So mantra is powerful. This is mundane. Now you can imagine how spiritual mantra is powerful. Even in mundane world the mantra acts. This is very subtle thing. Then how much... Because

indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur

indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ

manasas tu parā buddhir

yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ

[Bg. 3.42]



So gross understanding-the senses, the body, directly sense perception-this is gross. I see you, you see me. I touch you, you touch me. I taste something... This is gross. Above this gross there is mental platform. So mantra is also on the mental, little above, intelligence. And above that there is spiritual platform. So if on the material platform, mental platform, the mantra can act so wonderfully, how much spiritually the mantra can benefit you. You have to simply imagine. So this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is completely spiritual. If you chant it, spiritually enlightened, then surely it will act. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. It will act. Therefore chanting is so important.



Chanting is not... Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura said this sound vibration is not this material sound. Kṛṣṇa is not material sound. It is Kṛṣṇa, spiritual. Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His holy name, Kṛṣṇa. There is no difference.

nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

[Cc. Madhya 17.133]



As Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa, perfect, complete, śuddha, without any material contamination. Pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya, eternal. Pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-muktaḥ. Mukta means not of this material world. Mukti means anything which does not belong to, in this material world. That is called mukti. So the holy name, chanting of holy name, if we act it properly, without any offense, then we are directly in connection with Kṛṣṇa. There is no doubt. Pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto 'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ.



And Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore says that this holy name of Kṛṣṇa is imported from Goloka Vṛndāvana. It is not material sound. Golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. It is not ordinary sound. Don't take it as ordinary. Śabde-sāmānya buddhir hari-nāmni. That is nārakī-buddhi. Just like to consider the Deity as made of stone. Arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matiḥ, to consider guru as ordinary human being. Similarly, to think śabde-sāmānya buddhiḥ, the holy name of the Lord as ordinary sound vibration, that this... That is nārakī. That is not considered by spiritually enlightened persons. But those who are rotting in hellish condition, for them these are the consideration. Patthār pūje hari mile(?). They think that they are worshiping patthār. These rascals say patthār pūje hari mile to me pūju pahāḍa(?). They think, he's such a rascal, he's thinking that the Deity is patthār or stone. But it is not like that. It requires good brain to understand how Kṛṣṇa can appear in a form which can be seen by us. How Kṛṣṇa can appear in a form of sound which we can hear. It is for our benefit. Not that it is material. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma saṅkīrtana. Hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana is not ordinary sound. Don't treat it as ordinary sound. It is the... Just like we, by radio we can send message from Europe, it may come to India. [break] ...such powerful machine and you can talk. That is possible. But that is not this sound. Golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmilo kene tāy. So don't think that this hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana is ordinary vibration of this material world. Never think so. You should immediately see that the saṅkīrtana, Hare Kṛṣṇa, is Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā. Harā and Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Sītā-Rāma or Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa. Any form of the Lord Viṣṇu. Hare Kṛṣṇa means the Supreme Lord and His spiritual potency.

So we address; Hare, "Oh, the energy, spiritual energy of the Lord," and Kṛṣṇa, "O the Supreme Lord," Hare Rāma, the same thing. Paraṁ Brahman. Rāma means Paraṁ Brahman, Kṛṣṇa means Paraṁ Brahman and... So what is the meaning of addressing, "He Kṛṣṇa, He Rādhe, He Rāma." Why? There should be some... Why you are asking? That "Just engage me in your service." That is taught by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya

[Cc. Antya 20.32, Śikṣāṣṭaka 5]



This is our prayer. It is not our prayer that, "O Kṛṣṇa, O Rāma, give me some money, give me some woman." No. This is not the prayer. Of course, in the neophyte stage they can pray like that, but that is not, I mean to say, śuddha-bhakti, pure devotion.



Pure devotion means to pray to the Lord, begging some service. "My Lord, kindly engage me in Your service." That is the perfection of life, when one is engaged in the service of the Lord in love. You can become a very great saint and live in a secluded place and become puffed-up that you have become very great personality, and people may come to see him, that "He's not to be seen, he's engaged in chanting." My Guru Mahārāja has condemned this. He said, mana tumi kisera vaiṣṇava. "My dear mind, your mental concoction, you are thinking that you have become a very big Vaiṣṇava. You do not do anything and sit down in a secluded place and imitating Haridāsa Ṭhākura, chanting. So you are a nonsense." Mana tumi kisera vaiṣṇava. Why? Nirjanera ghare, pratiṣṭhāra tare. To get some cheap adoration as a great chanter. Because if one is actually chanting, why he should be attracted by woman and biḍi? If he is actually in such position like Haridāsa Ṭhākura then why he should be attracted by material things? That is a false show only. That is not possible for ordinary person.

Therefore ordinary person must be physically engaged. That is not physical, that is also transcendental. Always busy in some business of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is wanted. Not that, "Oh, I have become a great scholar and I have now learned how to become a great Vaiṣṇava. I chant sixty-four rounds, and think of my wife somewhere, and then good-bye to Govindajī and leave Vṛndāvana." These rascaldom do not follow. Govindajī drives such rascals away from Vṛndāvana. So Vṛndāvana, one who is living in Vṛndāvana, he must be very anxious how to spread the glories of Vṛndāvana-candra all over the world. That is wanted. Not that Vṛndāvana-candra is my private property and I sit down in a place and lick up. No, that is not wanted. That is not wanted. That is condemned by my Guru Mahārāja.

So mana tumi kisera vaiṣṇava. He says, "What kind of Vaiṣṇava, rascal, you are." Nirjanera ghare pratiṣṭhāra tare. "Simply for cheap adoration you are living in a secluded place." Tava hari-nāma kevala kaitava. Your chanting of so-called Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is simply cheating. He has said that. One must be ready very vigorously. And that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's also order. Caitanya Mahāprabhu never said that "You chant." He has given certainly the chanting, but so far His mission is concerned, He said that "Everyone of you become guru." Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. And deliver, preach, that people understand what is Kṛṣṇa.

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



Pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi. That is His mission. It is not that "Become a big Vaiṣṇava and sit down and imitate." This is all rascaldom. So don't follow this thing. So at least we cannot advise you in that way. We have learned from our Guru Mahārāja that preaching is very, very important thing, and when one is actually an experienced preacher, then he is able to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without any offense. Before that, this so-called chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, you may practice without any offenses... And giving up all other business to make a show of a big Vaiṣṇava, that is not required. Thank you very much. (end)





760917SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.20-21

-

Vṛndāvana, September 17, 1976



Pradyumna:



athopaspṛśya salilaṁ

sandadhe tat samāhitaḥ

ajānann api saṁhāraṁ

prāṇa-kṛcchra upasthite

[SB 1.7.20]



"Since his life was in danger, he touched water in sanctity and concentrated upon the chanting of the hymns for throwing nuclear weapons, although he did not know how to withdraw such weapons."



tataḥ prāduṣkṛtaṁ tejaḥ

pracaṇḍaṁ sarvato diśam

prāṇāpadam abhiprekṣya

viṣṇuṁ jiṣṇur uvāca ha

[SB 1.7.21]



"Therefore a glaring light spread in all directions. It was so fierce that Arjuna thought his own life in danger, and so he began to address Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda:



athopaspṛśya salilaṁ

sandadhe tat samāhitaḥ

ajānann api saṁhāraṁ

prāṇa-kṛcchra upasthite

[SB 1.7.20]



tataḥ prāduṣkṛtaṁ tejaḥ

pracaṇḍaṁ sarvato diśam

prāṇāpadam abhiprekṣya

viṣṇuṁ jiṣṇur uvāca ha

[SB 1.7.21]



So necessity has no law. This brahma-bandhu, he knew how to create this brahmāstra. He learned it. But he knew it also that this weapon is not to be used generally. In very, very rare cases this should be used. As I explained, that atomic bomb, the nuclear weapon, is not used when there is fight between two dogs. It is not so insignificant. When the fight is very severe, just like your country used this nuclear bomb. When the Japanese people dared to attack your Pearl Harbor, at that time, your President was Mr. Truman. So it was not to be used, but he took little more precaution. Anyway, such weapon, deadly weapon, should not be used ordinarily. Therefore here it is said that prāṇa-kṛcchra upasthite. He knew that Arjuna was after him, and there is no escape. He would be killed. So whatever last resort he knew, he used that knowledge to throw brahmāstra so that the other party may be killed altogether. But ajānann api saṁhāram. He was not willing, but he did not know how to withdraw that. Formerly they used to know it. They could throw one brahmāstra, and if he likes he can withdraw. Or the other party he, can nullify it. This is warfare. But he did not know that. How to counteract it, he did not know that.



Another point is here. Athopaspṛśya salilam: this mantra weapon is so strong that it can be manufactured simply by touching water with mantra. Just like we take mantra, apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ sa bāhya. The same process. Do not think that it is some ritualistic external. No. It has got meaning. If you can chant the mantra properly, if you follow the rules and... You must be expert in chanting mantra. Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra we are chanting, and Haridāsa Ṭhākura is also chanting. So Haridāsa Ṭhākura, how advanced he was just imagine. He was a young man, and a very nice, beautiful prostitute came there at dead of night, wanted to enjoy his company, and he said simply, "Very good idea. Please sit down. Let me finish my Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." Is it possible for ordinary man? No. It is not possible. That means he was expert, he was advanced. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has advised, ihā haite sarva-siddhi haibe tomāra. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said, "Simply by chanting you'll get all success of life." Sarva-siddhi. It is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's blessing. Ihā haite sarva-siddhi haibe tomāra. By simply chanting one gets the highest perfection. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's blessing and gift. So we should be very careful and follow the regulative principles. Then automatically you'll be perfect. There is no doubt about it. Mantra... Just like sometimes the snake-charming mantra can be purchased in the market. But if you do not make yourself perfect about chanting the mantra, it will not be effective.

I'll give you one practical instance. It is not a story; it is a fact. It was spoken... Perhaps some of you know that my friend who came here, Dr. Ghosh. He told me when they were students, there was a case. In Lucknow University they were students. So there is a big building, and two, three snake-biting case happened. So some snake charmer was invited to find out the snake and take him. So he came. He came and took it away, the snake. Then this Dr. Gosh and his class friends, they were medical students. Naturally, the so-called modern scientist, they do not believe in all these things. So they became very inquisitive. All of them went to that snake charmer-he was a Muhammadan gentleman. So he knew that "These students, medical students, they have come to see the fun how the snakes are charmed." So he (they) inquired, "What is the matter? What is the magic that you can catch up snake and the snake cannot do any harm to you?" So he said it is possible by mantra. By mantra it can be done. So they challenged, "Oh, your snakes, I think they are poisonless and they cannot bite. There is no poison. The poison teeth, the fang, is taken away." "No, no. They have got everything." So he took one and showed that "Here is..." So to make a fun... He had many snakes. He let them all come out from the box. And immediately all over the courtyard, just like courtyard, they began to run over, and all these medical students, they became afraid. They were fleeing this side, that side, that side. So the charmer said, "Don't be afraid. So long I am here they'll not bite you."

So this was spoken by Dr. Ghosh, a personal experience. The mantra has got so much power. But not that you purchase the mantra and chant. That will not. You have to make it perfect. There is process, how to become perfect in chanting the mantra. Similarly... It is an ordinary, material mantra. This spiritual mantra... I have already explained. This Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is spiritual mantra. It is not material. Therefore I've already explained, golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. It is not ordinary sound vibration, material sound vibration, radio. No. Spiritual. Golokera prema-dhana. So if we actually chant this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra properly, without any offense, then once chanting is sufficient to make you free from the reaction of all sinful life. Once chanted. There is no question of chanting thousand times. It is said, eka hari-nāme jato pāpa hare, pāpī haya tato pāpa karibāre nare(?). Once chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra can vanquish so many, so much accumulated reaction of sinful life that a first-class pāpī or a very expert pāpī, he cannot commit so many pāpa. You see. It is so powerful. So if we chant it properly, this chanting, daśa-vidha, ten offenses, without offenses... Nāma-aparādha-śūnyam. Without any nāma-aparādha, if we chant according to the principle, then the mantra will act. Mantra will act in so nicely that the mantra will keep you always in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the power of mantra. Don't think it is a hobby or it is something superfluous. No. Actually, this mantra, Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Himself.

So if you are allowed to keep yourself constantly in company with Kṛṣṇa, then just imagine what is your position. If you keep yourself always near the fire, certainly you shall remain warm; there will be no attack of cold or anything like that. So if we constantly chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then we are not in this material world. But if we purposely again come to the material world... That independence we have got. But if we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra according to the instructions... Saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ. We have to practice. Because Gosvāmīs, they kept a number, a numerical strength. Haridāsa Ṭhākura kept the biggest. Others, they also kept, but not so big. But according... Because, just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, he had to write so many books, so he was not keeping such a big number as three lakhs. But there was some numerical... Similarly, we must have some numerical strength. And we have minimized. I know that you are coming from a different source, so according to time, according to circumstances... Even there, there is no limit. You can chant more than sixteen-sixteen hundred times. There is no... But practically we see that even chanting sixteen rounds becomes difficult. So don't try to imitate, but do it properly, what is advised by your spiritual master, without any offense. That mantra will save you from the dangers of māyā. That's a fact.

You see he manufactured this deadly weapon. It is material. Still, it is so deadly weapon, brahmāstra. He was not working in a laboratory, finding out so many chemicals to make an atomic nuclear weapon. Simply water. You see. Here it is said, atha upaspṛśya salilam. Just like we do, oṁ apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi. Then if we do it properly, then it has got immense potency. Immense potency. Don't think it is childish, it is formality. No. Just see here. Atha upaspṛśya salilaṁ sandadhe tat samāhitaḥ. This is wanted. Samāhita, completely in trance. This is the process. So these things are required, how to become samāhita, samādhi-stha, in trance. If we take it as childish play, formality, then it will act, but it will take long time. But if you do it properly, you'll be quickly successful. In one life you'll be successful. You don't require to wait. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that although this process is guaranteed, but don't wait for another life. Finish this business in this life. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā even though one falls immaturely, then yoga-bhraṣṭo..., śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. One who has not been successful, one is fallen from this bhakti-yoga, for him also there is guarantee nice. That guarantee, Kṛṣṇa says that śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate. Śucīnām. Then he's given the chance of taking birth in a very pious brāhmaṇa's family. Not ordinary: śucīnām. Śuci means brāhmaṇa, and śrīmatā, śrī means fortune, and mat means one possesses fortune-that means very rich man. Śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate. Even...

Therefore Nārada Muni has said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

[SB 1.5.17]



This verse is very important. He says that if one takes sentimentally this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, tyaktvā sva-dharmam... Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, you young men, young boys and girls, are coming. You had some engagement previously, undoubtedly. You may be you were a student, you may be businessman or so on, so on. Everyone has got... At least you had some business for LSD. So you have given up all this. Tyaktvā sva-dharmam. Somehow or other you were all engaged in some business. That is called sva-dharma. Sva-dharma means one has selected some business. That is his sva-dharma. Generally, if it is systematic, then sva-dharma means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. This is systematic, sva-dharma. Otherwise, everyone must have some engagement. Suppose a thief, he has taken the occupation or profession of stealing. That is also sva-dharma. But that is not systematic; that is whimsical. So anyone must have some engagement. That engagement is called sva-dharma, his own business occupation. Sva-karma or sva-dharma.



So if by chance somebody becomes attracted by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and gives up his profession, good profession or bad profession... There is no good profession in this material world. Everything is bad. That is... Here we have divided, "This is good, this is bad." This is mental concoction. It has no value, because material world is bad. I have given this example many times. Just like stool, the upside and downside. Downside is moist and upside is dry. If somebody says, "This side is very nice," what is this nonsense? It is stool. Why do you forget that the dry side is good and moist side is bad, but it is stool, this side or that side? Similarly, Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has said,

'dvaite' bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba-'manodharma'

'ei bhāla, ei manda'-ei saba 'bhrama'



Dvaite... In the material world, dvaite bhadrābhadra, "This is good, this is bad," it is all mental concoction. After all, it is material world. Either you become very expert in handling these material affairs, very big businessman, Mr. Ford, Mr. this and that, or so many things... [break] ...successful, what is the meaning of this "Successful, unsuccessful"? You have to die. You have to suffer from disease. Just like nowadays the flu is going on. Does it mean that a big man or a rich man will not suffer? When the disease is there, either you are big man or rich man or poor man or small man, everyone has to suffer. So long you will be in the material world, if you do not rectify yourself, śuddha-sattva... Tapo divyaṁ yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. If you don't rectify your existence, then this janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi will go on [Bg. 13.9]. Then what is the good? Actually, there is no good. 'Ei bhāla, ei manda'-ei saba 'bhrama'.. It is simply mental concoction. So in the material world, even you become very expert to deal with your business very nicely, it is all useless. Ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ. If one does not become Kṛṣṇa conscious, his so-called success in this material world or failure, they have no value. Rather, if by sentiment somebody comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and if for a few days he chants Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, their success, in future at least, guaranteed.



So it is so nice thing. If you neglectfully chant, still there is success, but it will take some time. And if you chant very carefully, following the rules and regulations, then your success in this life is guaranteed. So we can make our choice, because always Kṛṣṇa gives us the chance to make our choice. Yathecchasi tathā kuru: [Bg. 18.63] "Whatever you like, you can do." So my request... It is my duty because you have accepted me as your spiritual master. So I am repeating my spiritual master's order that "Don't wait for another life." That is a very risky, another life. Maybe I am given the chance of taking my birth in a good brāhmaṇa family or a rich family, but there is chance of again being spoiled. As we see, there are so many rich men's sons. They have got all the opportunity of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. They have no economic problem. Father's property, immense property he has got. So he can, he has no anxiety for economic problems. That is a chance. To take birth in a rich family means he has no economic problem. Because for economic problem we see nowadays people are pulling on ṭhelā, a rickshaw, for two breads.(?) Because he is condemned to take such life, to work like an ass, like an animal. We see, practically. So one who is born in rich family, he should think that Kṛṣṇa... But he has no knowledge, he has no good advisor, he has no guru. So he is, he thinks that "I have got this money for nothing. Let me enjoy wine and women. Let me..." He becomes spoiled. So although he was given the chance, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe [Bg. 6.41], janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. Although he was given the chance by nature's law, he spoils himself. Just like in America-I always say that you are born in a rich nation's family, your country is not poor, there is no scarcity, but you should take advantage of it. Don't spoil your life because you have got so much money for nothing or every enjoyable thing. You should always think, "It is all Kṛṣṇa's mercy that we have got this opportunity. We are honored as Americans." Now because the Americans, they have misused their opportunity, now they are degrading. To save your country, take this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and enlighten them. Enlighten them. That is your service, actually service of the country. Push this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. They have got good opportunity. And it will be very successful, materially and spiritually.

Thank you very much. (end)



760918SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.22

-

Vṛndāvana, September 18, 1976



Pradyumna:



arjuna uvāca

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-bāho

bhaktānām abhayaṅkara

tvam eko dahyamānānām

apavargo 'si saṁsṛteḥ

[SB 1.7.22]



"Arjuna said: O my Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You are the almighty Personality of Godhead. There is no limit to Your different energies. Therefore only You are competent to instill fearlessness in the hearts of Your devotee. Everyone in the flames of material miseries can find the path of liberation in You only."



Prabhupāda:



arjuna uvāca

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-bāho

bhaktānām abhayaṅkara

tvam eko dahyamānānām

apavargo 'si saṁsṛteḥ

[SB 1.7.22]



Saṁsṛteḥ, this material world is called saṁsṛti, continuously suffering. That we cannot understand. This is called ignorance. Continuously suffering. They are thinking, "We are very happy," but this material world means continuously suffering. So one living entity is dying, and his gross body is left and the subtle body, mind, intelligence, ego, carrying him in another body through the semina of the father to the womb of the mother. Then it is placed, and the body again forms, and when the body is formed, then he comes out. And within the womb of the mother there is so much suffering, we know that. Many times we have discussed. And coming, from the very moment the child is crying, there is inconveniences. So many things he cannot express. In this way, within the womb there is suffering, out of the womb there is suffering. Then growing, child or baby or boy, there are so many sufferings. Then young man-suppose he becomes family man-then earn for the family. That is also suffering. Then old man, disease, inability, many, many thoughts, that is also suffering. And again death is suffering. At the time of death nobody knows what will happen. Recently one of our Godbrothers has died. He was suffering that he... Some glucose food was being supplied through the nose, and with that, what is called? Taking out the...? That also another suffering. Forcibly taking out the urine, cannot speak anything. So this is suffering. This is called saṁsṛti. We are so foolish we do not know that this material existence is suffering. They are simply struggle for existence. Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. Simply a struggle. There is no happiness. But these foolish persons, they do not know that there is suffering and how to stop this suffering. That is real problem. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. Intelligent persons should always keep in view that "These are my real sufferings." Not that "Temporary I have got some misunderstanding with some friend, or temporary I do not get some nice food, and therefore suffering." These sufferings are extra, but real suffering is this-janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi.

So suffering and suff... Therefore material existence is called saṁsṛti. Saṁsāra. So therefore we read every day from the Gurvaṣṭaka, saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **. This saṁsāra, this material existence, is just like dāvānala. Dāvānala means forest fire. Forest, in the forest nobody goes to set fire, but it takes place automatically. Even if you don't want, it will come. This is saṁsāra. In your country, nice city, New York City, but every moment there is fire-dung-dung-dung-dung-dung-dung-dung-dung. Why? Very nice city, big city, big roads, big-but there is suffering. Who wants this fire? But government has to make arrangement for fire brigade, and because it is great nation, very prosperous nation, there is very constantly, very frequently there is fire. Frequently. You won't find such fire in India, at least. We have no such experience that every moment there is fire brigade. Is it not? I am exaggerating? Huh? You see. We have got so many cities in India, but we don't have such arrangement that constantly, twenty-four hours, dung-dung-dung-dung-dung-dung. At least we haven't got. Less suffering, because we are not so advanced. The more materially you become advanced, the more suffering. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14].

These rascals, they do not know. Saṁsṛti. Therefore here we see that tvam eko dahyamānānām apavargo 'si saṁsṛteḥ. This is Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna is mahājana. He is mahājana. He's directly Kṛṣṇa's friend. He knows what is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he submitted that, "Kṛṣṇa, it is perplexity. I do not like to fight, and You are asking me repeatedly to fight. So it is very awkward position. I cannot understand." Kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ. "I have been infected with kārpaṇya-doṣa, and (I'm) kṣatriya, I am in the battlefield. It is my duty to fight, but I am declining." That is kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ. "My nature, svabhāva, is to fight, but I am avoiding this. So therefore my position is not good, I can understand. Therefore śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. I accept You as my spiritual master. You... I am surrendered, prapannam. You kindly instruct, śādhi mām." This is beginning of Bhagavad-gītā. So Arjuna knows that for this saṁsṛti, for this suffering of the material world, only Kṛṣṇa is the savior. Only Kṛṣṇa. Tvam ekaḥ, "Only You. Not anybody else." Nobody can. And He also, Kṛṣṇa also says, mām ekam. "Rascal, mām ekam." This same eka. Arjuna says tvam ekaḥ and Kṛṣṇa says mām ekam. The same purpose. This is to be learned, that eka, "Only Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇaika-śaraṇam. That is wanted. Simply take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. That will save you from this saṁsṛti.

Apavarga. Pavarga and apavargo. A means "not," and pavarga is the process of suffering here in this material world. Different stages of suffering is called pavarga. The first thing is pa. This is pa pha ba bha ma, pa-varga. This is called pa-varga. There are five vargas in Sanskrit grammar: ka-varga, ca-varga, ṭa-varga, ta-varga, and pa-varga. Those who know, I mean to say, Sanskrit grammar, they will understand. So pa-varga means these five alphabets, pa pha ba bha ma. So our sufferings... First of all, labor, pariśrama. Pa. You cannot get anything in this material world without laboring. That is not possible. Just like we have got this nice temple. How we have got it? Laboring. We have to collect the stone, we have to collect this brick, we have to... If I cannot work personally, then I have to engage laborer. So this temple is not by accident, automatically, by chunk it has come. No. There must be labor. Pariśrama. That is pa. Then pha. Pha, in the English you can say frustration. Or in Sanskrit the phena, and English word is foam. When you work very hard, everyone, you know, there is foam. We have generally seen, in animals there is foam, in horse. The, hard labor, very hard labor, the foam comes. So first of all, pariśrama, hard labor, then foam. Pa pha. And ba. Ba means vyarthatā. Frustration. Despite so much hard labor, still frustration. Now our leaders are advertising that "Work hard. Work hard." "Sir, I am working so hard that I am working like an ass, like an animal, and I am tired. Still I have to work hard?" "Yes." This is saṁsṛti. They are not satisfied that human being, Indians are working just like an ass, pulling ṭhelā, rickshaw, and still they're requesting work hard.

So this is called vyarthatā. You work hard, hard, hard. Still you'll not be successful. You'll have to work hard. That is called pa, pha, ba. And bha, bha means fearfulness. Just like the animal is working so hard and still he's afraid. "The master may whip." "You are not working?" Phut! Phut! He has to work still. Bhaya. So that fearfulness is everywhere. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhir narāṇām. The ox and bull, they are afraid of the driver, and we are afraid of our leader, of our government, of our so-called master and so on, so on, so on. That you cannot avoid. That is not possible. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. Because we have accepted this material body, we have to be always remain in anxiety. You cannot avoid. So pa, pha, ba, bha, and at last, ma. Ma means mṛtyu. Frustration and die. And again pa, again begin with pa. This is going on. This is called Repeatedly, pa, pha, ba, bha, ma; pa, pha, ba, bha, ma.

So if you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then this pavarga-pa, pha, ba, bha, ma-will be counteracted. Not otherwise. Not otherwise. It is not possible. Therefore he says dahyamānānām. "We are suffering. Not that to this brahmāstra we are suffering, but the world is so made that there is suffering only." Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings, viṣaya-viṣānale dibā-niśi hiyā jwale. Jwale means this dahyamānānām. Jwale means ablaze, fire. So this saṁsāra-viṣānale, it is not ordinary fire. Viṣāna: fire from poison. It is more infectious. Poisonous fire. Just like the atomic energy. There is heat, but what is that heat? It is called... Radiation and... So many things. So viṣānale. Saṁsāra-dāvānala. Saṁsāra-dāvānala is dāvānala, and at the same time that anala, the fire is coming out of poison. Saṁsāra-viṣānale dibā-niśi hiyā jwale. We are always anxiety, full of anxiety. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām. Even big, big Vaiṣṇava kings they also retired. Just like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, he was always engaged in devotional service. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha [SB 9.4.18]-still, he retired. Still, he retired. After this incidence with Durvāsā, then he divided the property to his sons and he retired. Although he was the most exalted Vaiṣṇava, such a great Vaiṣṇava that because he was put into difficulty by Durvāsā Muni, Kṛṣṇa showed His brilliance and glories in such a way that Durvāsā Muni was attacked by sudarśana-cakra, and for fear of life... Even there is fear, Durvāsā Muni, a great yogi. There is no comparison of his yogic mystic power. Immediately, for the sake of his life, to protect his life, he went all over the universe for protection. And when he could not get the protection, he went to Lord Brahmā, "Kindly give me protection." He refused. "No, it is not possible. The Lord is angry with you, and He has sent the sudarśana-cakra. It is not in my power to give you protection." Then he went to Lord Śiva. He also refused. And at last he went to Viṣṇu. Just see how powerful yogi he was. He could go personally from this planet to the topmost planet, Brahmaloka, and there, from there, Śivaloka. Then from there, Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Just see his power, mystic power. But still, because he committed offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava, he could not be given any protection. Vaiṣṇava-aparādha is so severe. A person so powerful that by his will he could go anywhere, by yogic power he can do so. Yogic power, even there are many yogis, they take bathing in four places every morning. They take bathing at Jagannātha Purī, at Rāmeśvaram, at Hardwar, and Jagannātha Purī. Four dhāma, they take bathing. By four o'clock they finish. They can go. There are still such yogis. So similarly by the yogis, by their aṇimā-siddhi, laghimā-siddhi... They are called. They can go within a second. They can catch up the beams of the sun and go to the sun planet. This is yoga. Not that "Give me some dollars, I'll show you some yoga." They do not know what is yoga. Yoga is so powerful, yogic power.

So such a big yogi, Durvāsā Muni. Still, he was in trouble. Jñānīs, yogis, nobody is free from the trouble. Only the bhaktas. Take this, see the example. When Durvāsā Muni created a demon to kill the king, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, and he was coming to attack, but Ambarīṣa, although he was a devotee, he had no such yogic power to counteract. He thought, "All right, it is Kṛṣṇa's desire if some demon is coming to kill me. All right, let him kill." He stood fixed up in that position, because he's surrendered. Mārobi rākhobi jo icchā tohārā. That is surrender. "I have surrendered to You. If You like to kill me by this demon, that's all right. Welcome. Why not? Because I am culprit, so You want to kill me through this demon, let me kill. Let him kill." So he stood up. He was not afraid of his life. But Durvāsā Muni, when Viṣṇu sent this sudarśana-cakra, immediately the demon was killed and he was after Durvāsā Muni, such a great yogi. But he was afraid. "Oh, now there is no protection." He fled, here from here, here from there, there, there, then to Brahmā, to Lord Śiva. And at last to Viṣṇu. Just see how much he is afraid of his life.

And the Vaiṣṇava is not afraid of his life. There is no fearfulness. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. These things are problems of this material world. A Vaiṣṇava has no problem. He knows that "If Kṛṣṇa can give food to the elephant down to the ant, so Kṛṣṇa will give me food. So why shall I endeavor for? When Kṛṣṇa gives, I shall eat. That's all. If He does not give, I shall starve. What is the wrong there?" This is Vaiṣṇava. He's not afraid. He has no problem of āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. No. So far maithuna is concerned, it is completely rejected. Bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya apahinoti kāmam. This is Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava means as he makes progress in devotional service, these material lusty desires become vanquished. No more. Finished. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anya... [SB 11.2.42]. This is the sign. Yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde nava-nava-rasa-dhāmani... tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ. This is Vaiṣṇava. When one will spite of sex enjoyment, that means he has attained the Vaiṣṇava stage. Otherwise not yet. That is the test. Yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt, tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame. Because nārī-saṅgame, sex with nārī, that is the highest pleasure of this material world. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Very abominable happiness, maithunādi. It is kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha-duḥkham. It is entailed with so many sufferings. Either illicit or legal, there is suffering. So this is saṁsāra. This is the key of saṁsāra, to keep one packed up, compact in these material desires. So, so many things are there, apavarga. But Kṛṣṇa is the only means. When one is attracted by Kṛṣṇa, Madana-mohana... Madana means lusty desires. And Kṛṣṇa, Madana-mohana. He is so attractive that one forgets lusty desires. Therefore His name is Madana-mohana. So if you don't contact with Madana-mohana, then you'll be suffering madana-dahana. Dahana means this, dahyamānānām, always suffering the blazing fire of lusty desires. Unless you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, you'll have to suffer. Therefore it is said dahyamānānām apavargo 'si: "You are the apavarga."

So Arjuna is surrendered soul. When he felt that temperature of brahmāstra or radiation of the atomic weapon, nuclear weapon... So devotee has no other... Kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-bāho bhaktānām abhayaṅkara: "Our only shelter is Your lotus feet." Abhaya-caraṇāravinda re. Bhajahuṅ re mana śrī-nanda-nandana-abhaya-caraṇāravinda re. So if you take shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, then abhayaṅkara, no more fear. No more fear. And so long you do not do it, then saṁsṛti. Therefore Arjuna says tvam eko dahyamānānām apavargo 'si abhayaṅkara.

Thank you very much. (end)



760920SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.23

-

Vṛndāvana, September 20, 1976



Prabhupāda: What is that difficulty?



Hari-śauri: This was yesterday's verse, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: All right, just go on. What is that?



Devotee:



tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ sākṣād

īśvaraḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

māyāṁ vyudasya cic-chaktyā

kaivalye sthita ātmani

[SB 1.7.23]



"You are the original Personality of Godhead who expands Himself all over the creations and is transcendental to material energy. You have cast away the effects of the material energy by dint of Your spiritual potency. You are always situated in eternal bliss and transcendental knowledge."



Prabhupāda:



tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ sākṣād

īśvaraḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

māyāṁ vyudasya cic-chaktyā

kaivalye sthita ātmani



So, we have to know the Supreme Personality of Godhead through authority, not by speculation. Speculation is no use.



athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



The Supreme Personality of Godhead can be known by a person who has got a slight favor of the Lord upon him. This is the Vedic version. Nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo na medhayā na bahunā śrutena. Ātmā, the Supreme Absolute Truth, cannot be understood... Nāyam ātmā na pravacanena labhyaḥ... By becoming a great debater one can understand the Supreme-that's not possible. Nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo na bahunā śrutena. Nor by a person who is very vastly learned or by a great scientist or philosopher, na medhayā-in this way we cannot understand. But one who is surrendered, he can understand. Arjuna is surrendered. In every case he surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. As soon as there is any problem... Problem or no problem, he surrendered. Not that "When there is problem I am surrendered, and when there is no problem I am independent." No. Always surrendered. That is Arjuna's position.



So we have to follow. People are searching after God. They do not know God. They are asking this question, "Can you show me God?" So, so many questions are there about God, but here is God, pointed out by Arjuna, a mahājana. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Why should you not accept? That is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. "Why you are searching God. Here is God, as Arjuna says." Tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ: "You are the original person." Tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ. Puruṣa means enjoyer. God is not female. Sometimes they worship a female as God, like Durgā, Kālī, and so many others. But God is puruṣa. Everyone is prakṛti. Prakṛti means female. Everyone knows it. There are two things, prakṛti and puruṣa. The puruṣa is the enjoyer, and prakṛti is the enjoyed. Or, in other words, puruṣa is the predominator and prakṛti is predominated. So we are prakṛti. The Māyāvāda philosophy is that prakṛti wants to become puruṣa. And that is not possible. Suppose a woman, if she dresses like a man, does it mean that she has become a man? No. Or a man dresses like a woman, does it mean that he has become woman? Simply by outward dress? No. Puruṣa, the only puruṣa is Kṛṣṇa. That is very nicely explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta: ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Only Kṛṣṇa is puruṣa. He's the enjoyer. All others, they are servants. This is the position. Never try to become the puruṣa or the master. That is very dangerous. Always remain prakṛti. Prakṛti means to be controlled or controlled, and puruṣa means the controller. So here is the supreme controller: tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ sākṣāt. Not that "You were made by some means." Sākṣāt, directly. Sākṣāt. And īśvara. Sākṣād īśvaraḥ. Not artificial īśvara. Sākṣād īśvaraḥ.

So where is the difficulty to understand God, īśvara, or the puruṣa? There is no difficulty. Kṛṣṇa personally says that mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. So many things. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Everything is explained sākṣāt, directly. Where is the difficulty to find out God? They are searching after God, making research, all nonsense speculation. This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that "Why you are searching?" You say, "Can you show me God?" Why don't you see, "Here is God"? Why, just like the owl you have closed your eyes, not to see the sun? Sun is there. See. Open your eyes and see it. The whole world is going on that "There is no God" or "God is dead" or "Can you show me God?" And "I am God by meditation," "This way," "That way." This is going on. Whole world, especially at the present moment, it is a great disastrous condition, godless civilization. They won't accept the real God, and they'll create some artificial God and become God, "Everyone is God," like that. No.

Therefore if you want to be benefited, then you must take the shelter of mahājana, great personalities. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. If you are perplexed that "Who is mahājana? How can I find him?" that is also explained in the śāstra. Mahājana, dvādaśa-mahājana:

svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

[SB 6.3.20]



So where is the difficulty? Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. You follow the path of mahājana-Prahlāda Mahārāja, Janaka Mahārāja, Bhīṣma. There are gṛhasthas, there are brahmacārīs, sannyāsī. Brahmā, Lord Brahmā is mahājana; he's gṛhastha. Svayambhū, Nārada, he's brahmacārī. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ [SB 6.3.20]-Lord Śiva, he's also gṛhastha. Prahlāda Mahārāja, he's also gṛhastha. It doesn't matter whether you are gṛhastha or sannyāsī or brahmacārī. You must become actual representative of Kṛṣṇa. That is mahājana. And that is also not very difficult. How you can become representative of Kṛṣṇa? That is explained by Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



If you simply speak what Kṛṣṇa says, then you become His representative. Don't manufacture. Don't be over good at (indistinct) manufacturing. Simply to follow Kṛṣṇa and His representatives, then you become mahājana. Otherwise you are a nonsense. Mūḍha. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. That is the test. One should be very very careful to follow Caitanya Mahāprabhu's instruction. Caitanya Mahāprabhu never said that "I am directly servant of Kṛṣṇa." No. Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsa-dāsa-dasānudāsaḥ: "Servant of the servant of the servant of the..." The more you become servant of the servant, you are perfect [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. And as soon as you declare independence, you are rascal. This is the process. We should always remain most obedient servant of my master.



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



Then it will reveal. The whole thing is revelation. It is not by experience, by scholarship. No: revelation. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante. One who has surrendered proportionately, God reveals. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11].



So there is no difficulty to understand what is God. Here is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord-directly. I do not know why people are searching after God, why they do not know what is God. Just see. That means mūḍha. Although God is here, still, he'll not accept. That is mūḍha, narādhama. And why he's mūḍha? Because narādhama. He does not take the process. He wants to manufacture something. Don't do that. Here Arjuna is mahājana, he's Kṛṣṇa's friend, he's always with Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa recognizes him. Not that because one is always with Kṛṣṇa, therefore he knows Kṛṣṇa. No. That is not possible. Just like I have given this example many times, that I am sitting here, and the bug is also sitting here. That does not mean we are very confidential. No. Bug is different visions (business?), and my business different. And bug's business is biting. That kind of association will not help. Association means to develop love for the person. That is association.

dadāti pratigṛhṇāti

guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva

ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam



So we have to become associate of Kṛṣṇa, as Arjuna became. Always with Kṛṣṇa-eating with Kṛṣṇa, sitting with Kṛṣṇa, talking with Kṛṣṇa, joking with Kṛṣṇa, fighting with Kṛṣṇa-everything Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. Not a single moment. Therefore Kṛṣṇa certifies, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me: [Bg. 4.3] "My dear Arjuna, you are very dear to Me." Naturally if Arjuna is always with Kṛṣṇa, sitting with Kṛṣṇa, talking with Kṛṣṇa, consulting with Kṛṣṇa, joking with Kṛṣṇa, eating with Kṛṣṇa, so why he should not be very dear? Kṛṣṇa, does He remain with anyone unless he is very dear? So bhakto 'si priyo 'si me sakhā ceti. So we have to become, we have to establish some relation with Kṛṣṇa-as servant, as a friend, as a son, as a father, mother, or like the gopīs, mādhurya-rasa, friend. That is also... Conjugal love. Kṛṣṇa is ready to associate with you in any way you like. Somebody likes Kṛṣṇa as friend, somebody likes Kṛṣṇa as husband, somebody likes Kṛṣṇa as paramour. So Kṛṣṇa is ready. Somebody likes Kṛṣṇa as son. So any way, Kṛṣṇa is ready. We have got these five relations in this material world. There is no other relation. And there are other relationship also. Kṛṣṇa also ready to accept... If you want Kṛṣṇa as enemy, yes, Kṛṣṇa is ready. He'll kill you. But that is also good for you. If you want to fight with Kṛṣṇa, yes, Kṛṣṇa is ready-everything. Akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu. He can associate with you in any rasa, humor, you like. Kṛṣṇa's ready. Ready means that is natural. Because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, so the part and parcel must remain with Kṛṣṇa.



So you have to remain with Kṛṣṇa in some relationship. Here our relationship is through this external energy, māyā. The relationship is there. Although we have tried to give up our relationship with Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa has not given up. Kṛṣṇa is always with you. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. He is within your heart. Why? Just to give you association. Now we are rebelled. You want to do something independently. Kṛṣṇa also has agreed, "All right. You do independently. But it is not possible for you to live independently. That is not possible. So I'll give you sanction for independent living." Just see how Kṛṣṇa is friend. You cannot live independently. That is not possible. Because you are aṁśa. Aṁśa means part and parcel. Just like this finger. Finger is finger so long he's with the body; otherwise who cares his finger? Suppose a finger is cut and thrown in the street. Who cares for it? The finger is important so long it is with the body. Similarly, we are always with Kṛṣṇa indirectly or directly. But here Arjuna sees sākṣāt, directly. But we are forced to accept Kṛṣṇa indirectly, māyā. Arjuna is māyāṁ vyudasya. He has no intervention by māyā. And we have got intervention by māyā. Therefore we cannot see Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa is always there. Kṛṣṇa is always there.

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



This rascal, he wants to wander within this material world in different capacities. Sometime he's demigod, sometime he's dog, sometime he's tree, sometime he's fish, sometime he is president, sometime he's a nonsense. In this way, in different ways, he is suffering in this material world, and Kṛṣṇa is with him, trying to get him back. And whenever there is opportunity, He's asking, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam: [Bg. 18.66] "You rascal, why you are suffering in this way? You give up all this nonsense business. You simply surrender to Me." That is Kṛṣṇa's ambition, that "This rascal is suffering, so better give him good instruction."



Therefore Kṛṣṇa's coming. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. "These rascals have forgotten. All right, let Me go and convince them, try to bring them back." Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes: tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnām [Bg. 4.8]. Those who are sādhu, devotees, they became immediately relieved by getting Kṛṣṇa. And those who are rascals, they had to be killed. But that killing is also good for them. Just like father-to some son he gives directly rasagullā, and to other son, slaps. But father is father, either slapping or giving rasagullā, he's father. Similarly, we should not be sorry when the father gives slaps, and we should not be overjubilant when father gives his rasagullā. Any condition. That is devotion. A devotee is never disturbed when the father gives slap or the master gives slap. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam [SB 10.14.8]. So any way, Kṛṣṇa is always ready to help me and to give me knowledge and to understand. Where is the difficulty? This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. There is not at all difficulty. Simply because we do not take advice of Kṛṣṇa, we are suffering. This is the difficulty. This is the only difficulty. Where is the difficulty? No difficulty. Simply, if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa, you become advanced. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā [Bg. 6.47]. There is no expenditure, no loss. The gain is great. Simply if you think of Kṛṣṇa: man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Where is the difficulty?

But we are so rascal that we do not take advice of Kṛṣṇa, we manufacture our own ways, the suffering goes on. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti. This is māyā. He's thinking that he'll make his own plan and be happy. That will never be possible. The only plan you have to accept-what is that? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. That is the only plan. You have to get yourself relieved from all other engagements. Simply engage yourself... Not immediately. First of all, you must ready: "Kṛṣṇa, from this day, I am now ready. Whatever You'll say, I'll do." That's... Immediately you become liberated. Liberated. How liberated? Liberation is achieved after so many years tapasya? No. Immediately. As soon as you surrender to Kṛṣṇa. How? Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. If we are sincerely surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, immediately... Our, this material sufferings, why? Due to our sinful activities. Sinful activities mean anything you do without any purpose to serve to Kṛṣṇa, that is sinful. That is sinful. Not that "In the material calculation this is very good work, the opening of hospital or this or that, very good work. And Deity worship and going to the temple is bogus." You may think like that. But that, your opening of hospital is sinful. That is going on nowadays. One becomes very great philanthropist, rejecting... They say, "What is the use of this temple worship?" The daridra-nārāyaṇa-sevā. Nārāyaṇa has now become daridra. Formerly Nārāyaṇa was husband of the goddess of fortune. And now he has become daridra. So serve this Nārāyaṇa. This, they're manufacturing, concoction. This is not... That means sinful activities. Because he has manufactured something, that is sinful. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says plainly that "You rascal, you give up any other engagement, even if you think it is very pious activity, very philanthropic. You give up." Sarva-dharmān. Sarva means whatever you think pious and whatever you think impious, both of them should be given up. Because there are two kinds of activities: pious or impious. And sarva includes pious and impious.

So you have to give up everything. Simply you have to become ready. "My Lord, I am now fully surrendered. Whatever You ask me, I shall do it." Then you are liberated person. Īhā yasya harer dāsye. That is Rūpa Gosvāmī's instruction. Anyone who has determined like this that "I shall simply serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all." Īhā yasya harer dāsye karmaṇā manasā girā: by work, by mind, by body, or by words. One has decided like that, nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate: in any condition of life, he's liberated. Any condition of life. Because that īhā yasya harer dāsye. Simply he's thinking of how to serve Kṛṣṇa, how to serve Kṛṣṇa. He is liberated. So what is there wrong or what is there difficulty? If you simply think of man-manāḥ, always think of Kṛṣṇa: "What shall I do?" "Oh, yes. My representative is there. You take permission from him and do it." Where is the difficulty? There's no difficulty. But because we are mūḍha, narādhamas, we are manufacturing and suffering.

Thank you very much. (end)



760921SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.24

-

Vṛndāvana, September 21, 1976



Pradyumna:



sa eva jīva-lokasya

māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ

vidhatse svena vīryeṇa

śreyo dharmādi-lakṣaṇam

[SB 1.7.24]



"And yet, though You are beyond the purview of the material energy, You execute the four principles of liberation characterized by religion and so on for the ultimate good of the conditioned souls."



Prabhupāda:



sa eva jīva-lokasya

māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ

vidhatse svena vīryeṇa

śreyo dharmādi-lakṣaṇam

[SB 1.7.24]



So, saḥ, Kṛṣṇa, who is described in the previous verse, tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ, the original person... Original person, Absolute Truth, that is described in the Vedānta-sūtra, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Original person. Just like in our familywise, or guru-paramparā-wise, there is somebody, original person. So similarly, the whole creation, there is original person. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, aham āsam agre. Aham āsam agre. In the Vedic literature, eko nārāyaṇa āsīt. So eko nārāyaṇa āsīt, that is original person. And Kṛṣṇa says aham agre āsam. So He's the original person, ādyam. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān puruṣam ādyam [Bg. 10.12].



So Kṛṣṇa is the original person. And if somebody questions that "If Kṛṣṇa is the original person, who is the origin of Kṛṣṇa?"... Naturally, we can ask that because our experience is different-that answer is there in the Brahma-saṁhitā: īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ anādir ādiḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Anādir ādiḥ. He's ādi, ādyaṁ puruṣam. But if you question, "Who is the cause of Kṛṣṇa?" Anādi-He has no cause. That is God. You go on searching after, one after another. I am. My origin is my father, my father's origin is his father, his father's origin, his father, his father... In this way you go on researching. Then come to Brahmā. Brahmā is ādi-kavi. In this material world, in this universe, ādi-kavi. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. So he's the ādi, original, first created being. Then who is his ādi? Wherefrom Brahmā is coming? That is Kṛṣṇa. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. So in this way, when you come to Kṛṣṇa... Brahmā is coming from Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Svayambhū. He's born of the lotus flower. That Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is coming from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. And Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is coming from Saṅkarṣaṇa. Saṅkarṣaṇa is coming from Aniruddha; Aniruddha from Pradyumna, like that. Ultimately-Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is ādyam. And Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. There is no more. So that is God. You go on researching, researching, ādyam, ādyam, ādyam-when you come to a point, there is no more ādyam, that is God.

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



Sa eva, that ādi-puruṣa, that original person, He comes down, descends in this material world. Jīva-lokasya. This is called jīva-loka. This material world is called jīva-loka because here ātmā, the soul, is covered, conditioned. We have given the meaning, jīva-loka means when the ātmā is conditioned. That is called jīva-loka. There is no freedom. Just like there are so many planets. You have got airplane, but because you have got airplane you cannot go there. Conditioned. You cannot go. They're trying, one, two planets, moon planet or Mars planet. No. You cannot go there, what to speak of other planets. If you want to go there then you have to qualify yourself. Not that because you have got a machine, you can go there. No. That is not possible. Therefore conditioned. Conditioned means you have to fulfill the condition. Just like from here if I want to go to America, then I have to fulfill the condition: the visa condition, the passport condition, the health condition, the custom condition-so many conditions. You cannot go immediately. Or nobody can come from there also. In every respect we are conditioned. Every respect. This body is conditioned. You cannot enjoy this body unconditionally. No. That is not possible. You have to change. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]. The body has to be changed. A baby has to be changed to become a boy. A boy has to be changed to become a young man. A young man has to be changed to an old man. You cannot stop that. Therefore it is called jīva-loka, conditioned. Every one of us is conditioned. An animal is conditioned. He cannot... There are so many animals in the jungles. They are conditioned. They cannot come in the city or in the town. We are conditioned. We cannot go to the jungle. Conditioned. Every step there is condition.



So that is our bondage. We are mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Why you are conditioned? The condition is because māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. Māyā-mohita. They are bewildered by māyā. Māyā means "what is not." Mā-yā. So because we are under the clutches of māyā, this material world, therefore we have been conditioned. And what is that māyā? That māyā is forgetfulness of our relationship with God. That is māyā. Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. This jīva, when we forget Kṛṣṇa, our relationship with Kṛṣṇa... What is that relationship? Caitanya Mahāprabhu says jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. That is our relationship. We are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. When we forget this, and we want to be master of all I survey... "I am the monarch of all I survey." I think, "I shall become independent and I shall enjoy. I shall improve my economic condition, and I shall be very happy." This is called māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. He'll never be. Because he is conditioned. You cannot improve. That is not possible. That is called destiny. So the Western peoples, they say, "Why should we..." [break] ...any animal, take. You cannot improve the condition. Suppose the pig, he is conditioned to live in a very filthy place and eat stool, urine. You cannot improve that condition. By philanthropic mentality, if you want to improve his condition, not to live in filthy place, not to eat stool, if you try to give them halavā instead of stool, they cannot. That is not possible. This is called conditioned.

Therefore śāstra says that you are conditioned. You cannot change the condition. So there is no need of endeavoring for changing the condition. That is not possible. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14], Kṛṣṇa says. Māyā, mama māyā duratyayā. It is not that... Suppose if you are in the prisonhouse, you are shackled. You cannot improve your condition. You must be shackled. You are put in a cell, you must live there. Similarly, this is useless effort. The so-called māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ, the whole material world is like that. They're trying to improve the condition. But that is not possible. Therefore they're called māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. Simply he's thinking that "If I do like this, if I go a step forward, I shall improve my condition." No. That is not possible. Again and again.

That is described in another place:

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām. Gṛha-vratānāṁ matir na kṛṣṇe. Those who have taken it a vow, that "I shall remain in this family life and improve my condition," gṛha-vratānām... Gṛha-vrata. Gṛhastha and gṛha-vrata are different. Gṛhastha means gṛhastha-āśrama. A man is living with husband and wife or children, but the aim is how to improve spiritual life. That is gṛhastha-āśrama. And one who has no such aim, he simply wants to enjoy the senses, and for that purpose he's decorating the house, decorating the wife, children-that is called gṛha-vrata or gṛhamedhī. In Sanskrit there are different terms for different meaning. So those who are gṛha-vrata, they cannot be Kṛṣṇa conscious. Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā. Parataḥ means by the instruction of guru or instruction of authority, parataḥ. And svato vā. Svataḥ means automatically. And automatically is not possible even by instruction. Because his vow is that "I shall remain in this way." Gṛha-vratānām. Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā mitho 'bhipadyeta. Mithaḥ, not by conference, by meeting, by passing resolution, "If we want to become Kṛṣṇa conscious," that is not possible. It is all individual. I have to surrender to Kṛṣṇa individually. Just like when you go to the sky on airplane, it is all individual. If one airplane is in danger, other airplane cannot save him. That is not possible. Similarly, it is all individual. It is all parataḥ svato vā. One has to take it seriously, personally, that "Kṛṣṇa wants, so I'll surrender. Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], so I'll do it." Not that "When my father will do, then I shall do," or "My husband will do, then I shall do," or "My wife will do." No. It is all individual. It is all individual. And there is no restraint. There is no restraint. Ahaituky apratihatā. If you want to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, nobody can check you. Ahaituky apratihatā yayā ātmā suprasīdati. When you do that individually... If you... Collectively if it is done, it is good, but it has to be done individually.



So... Because every one of us are māyā-mohita-ceta... Māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. Prahlāda Mahārāja has described, vimukha-cetasaḥ. Māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ means averse to Kṛṣṇa. I want everything except Kṛṣṇa. That is māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. I want everything, but except Kṛṣṇa. That is my missing point. Because we are rascals, fools, we do not know what we should want. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. He does not know that his actual want is Kṛṣṇa. Just like a small child crying, and we are trying to pacify him, giving this, giving that. But he's crying, crying. Because his actual want is his mother. And as soon the mother comes, takes the child on the lap, immediately he stops. Similarly, we want Kṛṣṇa because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. That we want. Just like a part and parcel of a machine, if it is taken away from the machine, it has no... One screw. Suppose your typewriter machine, one screw is missing, and the machine is not working nicely. So without the machine that one screw has no value. If it is lying somewhere, one does not know what is the screw, nobody cares for it. It is no worth. But if you want to complete the machine, if you want to go to purchase in a mechanical shop, that very screw which has no value, you have to purchase at ten rupees. Because it is to be fit up. In this way, we are parcel and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. When we are along with Kṛṣṇa we have got value; otherwise no value. There are so many examples. This finger, when it is attached to the body, if there is any trouble you can spend thousands of rupees to cure the trouble. But if the finger is cut off, amputate, and thrown on the street, it has no value. No value. Similarly, so long we are māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ, out of Kṛṣṇa's touch, we have no value. No value. Valueless. Useless. That is our position. Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā mitho... The position is that adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisram [SB 7.5.30]. When you forget Kṛṣṇa... What is that forgetfulness? When you are interested in sense gratification. That is called forgetfulness.

Everyone is, even an animal, a small insect, everyone is interested in sense enjoyment. This morning I was reading in the Bhāgavatam, one Saubhari Muni, he was a great yogi, and within the water he was executing the yoga, mystic, and he saw that the two fishes are enjoying sex. So he became sexually inclined-old man, yogi. So he went to Māndhātā king, that "You give me one daughter, your daughter." So he was within the water, old man, and old man's bodily feature is not very good. The king knew that "This is a useless person, but he is a yogi. He has come to ask me for a daughter." So he said, "Yes, you are welcome. I have got my fifty daughters. So any one will like you. You can accept. I have no objection." So Saubhari Muni understood that "The king has tactfully avoided to give his daughter." So he was a yogi. So he made himself very beautiful young man. That yogi can do that. They can change. Because we are not this body, so body is old, it can be younger; younger body can be older. Nowadays in medical science, they are also doing. A man is woman, woman is man. So body can be changed. There is no difficulty if you know the process. So he changed to be a very nice, beautiful young man. So all the fifty daughters, they became attracted. They began to fight: "Oh, he is for me. He is not for you." So anyway, he accepted all the fifty daughters. In this way he became very elevated householder. But at some time he began to think, "What is my, this enjoyment? Simply by seeing the sex affairs of the fish... I was a yogi, I was a tapasvī, I've lost everything. Now I am a householder and pet husband of these women." So he came to his senses. Again he went to the forest for tapasya.

So this material life, however opulent it may be, it is māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. It has no value. It has no value. Why? Because in this life I may be very favorably situated by arrangement by improving my material condition. But after death-dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]-you do not know, we do not know what kind of body we are going to get. It may not be as comfortable. So karmīs, they, those who are little advanced than the ordinary foolish persons... There are... First of all, ordinary foolish person means animals. They are just like animals. And little above that, they are karmīs, and little above that, there are jñānīs. And little above that, there is yogis. And above all them is the bhakta. Therefore bhakta life is the summum bonum of life.

So Kṛṣṇa comes here, sa eva jīva-lokasya māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ vidhatse svena vīryeṇa. Kṛṣṇa comes down. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā also, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. The dharma is, "I am servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is my position." Dharma means characteristic. Just like sugar has to become sweet. That is dharma. A chili has to be hot. Sugar, if it is chili taste-useless. A chili's sweet taste-it is useless. So this taste of a particular thing is called dharma. So this dharma according to the body is developed in this material world. But the original dharma... Original is the spirit soul. That spirit soul is the part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and his duty is to serve Kṛṣṇa. That is original dharma. So in order to teach that original dharma, Kṛṣṇa comes. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. Glāni means discrepancies. When the conditioned soul is, by the influence of māyā, is engaged in sense gratification, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ. Yadā yadā hi... Just like nowadays nobody's interested. The so-called educated or advanced man, if we say that "You have to serve Kṛṣṇa. This is not your duty. You are going to the office and earning daily five thousand rupees. That is simply useless. Useless. It is simply a waste of energy," who will believe it? Nobody. "Oh, this is a nonsense proposal."

But śāstra says that,

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



You are doing your duty very nicely. Your dharma means your occupational duty. Suppose you are engineer. You are doing duty very nicely. Or a medical man, or a business man, or anyone-everyone has to do something. You cannot sit down idly and you'll get your livelihood. Even if you are a lion you have to work. Na hi suptasya siṁhasya praviśanti mukhe mṛgāḥ. This is... The material world is like that. Even if you are as powerful as a lion, you cannot sleep. If you think, "I am lion, I am the king of the forest. Let me sleep, and the animal will come and enter in my mouth." No, that is not possible. Even if you are animal, you have to catch up an animal. Then you'll be able to eat. Otherwise you'll have to starve. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, niyataṁ kuru karma tvaṁ karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥ. "You must do your duty." Śarīra-yātrāpi ca te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ. Don't think... The rascal says that "Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching people to escape. They've become..." No, that is not Kṛṣṇa's instruction. We do not allow any lazy man. He must be engaged. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That is Kṛṣṇa's order. Niyataṁ kuru karma. Arjuna was refusing to fight. He was trying to be nonviolent gentleman. Kṛṣṇa did not allow him. "No, no, you cannot do that. That is your weakness." Kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ viṣame samupasthitam: "You are proving yourself rascal. It is anārya-juṣṭam. This kind of proposal is for the anārya, uncivilized man. Don't do that." That is Kṛṣṇa's... So don't think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, they'll become lazy and imitate Haridāsa Ṭhākura. That is not Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means, as Kṛṣṇa instructs, you must be very, very busy, twenty-four hours. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not to become a lazy fellow, eat and sleep. No.



So this is dharmasya glāniḥ. But you have to change your angle of vision. In the material conditioned life your aim is how to satisfy your senses. And Kṛṣṇa consciousness means you have to work in the same spirit, same vigor, but you have to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is spiritual life. Not that to become lazy fellow. The difference is, as it is said by author, Kṛṣṇadāsa, ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā tāre bali 'kāma' [Cc. Ādi 4.165]. What is kāma? Kāma means when one desires to satisfy his own senses. That is kāma. Kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare 'prema' nāma. And what is prema? Prema means when you engage yourself for satisfying Kṛṣṇa's senses. Why gopīs are exalted? Because their only endeavor was to satisfy Kṛṣṇa's senses. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended, ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā. They had no other business. Vṛndāvana means, those who are in Vṛndāvana... If they actually want to live in Vṛndāvana, their business should be how to satisfy the senses of Kṛṣṇa. That is Vṛndāvana. Not that "I am living in Vṛndāvana and trying to satisfy my senses." That is not vṛndāvana-vāsī. That kind of living is... There are so many monkeys, dogs and hogs also; they are in Vṛndāvana. Do you mean to say that they are living in Vṛndāvana? No. Anyone who wants to satisfy senses in Vṛndāvana, their next life is dogs, hogs, and monkeys. You must know that. So one should not try to sense gratify in Vṛndāvana. That is a great sin. Simply try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa's senses.

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



That is bhakti. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam.



So in order to teach this lesson to us, the conditioned souls, jīva-loka, Kṛṣṇa, vidhatse svena vīryeṇa, by His own potency... Own potency means, if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, He has got such potency He can deliver you from this conditioned life, jīva-loka. He can make you purified, mukti. That is called mukti. When you are free from this conditioned stage, this bodily conception of life, then you become free-simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa.

janma karma ca me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna

[Bg. 4.9]



After giving up this body, he does not get any more this material body. Then what happens to him? Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa comes to call you back. So he comes back. If you take Kṛṣṇa's instruction, you go back to Kṛṣṇa. And again you become happy. Otherwise, māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ. You'll have to suffer life after life.



Thank you very much. (end)



760922SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.25

-

Vṛndāvana, September 22, 1976



Pradyumna:



tathāyaṁ cāvatāras te

bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā

svānāṁ cānanya-bhāvānām

anudhyānāya cāsakṛt

[SB 1.7.25]



"Thus You descend as an avatāra, incarnation, to remove the burden of the world and to benefit Your friends, especially those who are Your exclusive devotees and are rapt in meditation upon You."



Prabhupāda:



tathāyaṁ cāvatāras te

bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā

svānāṁ cānanya-bhāvānām

anudhyānāya cāsakṛt

[SB 1.7.25]



So, Kṛṣṇa, the original Personality of Godhead-sākṣāt, not imagination. Here it is said sa eva jīva-lokasya māyā sākṣād... Here, yes. Tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ sākṣād īśvaraḥ. Sākṣāt, directly. Not indirectly. Just like we are meeting face to face. It is not that I am imagining. Face to face, sākṣāt. Sa-akṣa. Akṣa means eyes or senses. With senses. Kṛṣṇa cannot be seen with these material senses. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. It is not possible to experience Kṛṣṇa by our, these material blunt senses. It is not possible. We have to make purified. How it is purified? Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When you engage yourself in the service of the Lord, sevonmukha-"Kṛṣṇa, I want to serve You"-this much wanted, qualification. No educational qualification, no Ph.D. degree, or to take birth in very high family or to become rich. Nothing. Simply a true feeling, desire: "Kṛṣṇa, so long I remained forgetting You. Now, somehow or other, I've come to the sense that You are everything. By hearing from my guru or the spiritual master or from the śāstra..." Sādhu-śāstra. Sat-saṅga-sādhu-śāstra. Lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya [Cc. Madhya 22.54].



Caitanya Mahāprabhu said,

'sādhu-saṅga', 'sādhu-saṅga'-sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.54]



It is required, sādhu-saṅga. Then if he meets sādhu... By one or two words from him, he can convince you about supremacy of the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, he'll take birth after birth, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. Therefore we have to make sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. Sādhu-saṅga is very essential. Sat-saṅga. Otherwise... There is another verse in the Brahma-saṁhitā, that vedeṣu durlabhaḥ. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa by studying Vedas, although Vedas means knowledge. And the ultimate knowledge-to understand Kṛṣṇa. So-called Vedanti..., you'll find so many Vedantists loitering on the street, but they do not understand Kṛṣṇa. This is their qualification. They interpret "Kṛṣṇa means this. Kṛṣ means this, ṇa means this," like that. When Vallabha Ācārya said to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "I have described Kṛṣṇa's meaning," Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately refused: "I do not know any meaning of Kṛṣṇa. I know Kṛṣṇa, Gopījana-vallabha, that's all. Gopījana-vallabha." What is the meaning of Kṛṣṇa? No interpretation, no imagination. Kṛṣṇa is Vṛndāvana-candra or Gopījana-vallabha, Giri-vara-dhārī, that's all. So we have to understand by sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Then we can see sākṣāt Kṛṣṇa.



Kṛṣṇa comes to convince us. There is no question of imagination. "See Me. Here I am." That is Kṛṣṇa. Why you are imagining? Kṛṣṇa therefore comes. Here it is said, tathāyaṁ ca avatāras te bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā. Avatāra does not mean a big beard or big hair. We do not like to see such ugly avatāra. We kick on their face, this avatāra. This is not avatāra. Avatāra must be mentioned in the śāstra. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was talking with Sanātana Gosvāmī, so Caitanya Mahāprabhu described about avatāra. So just to make a little joke, because they are personal devotees... So he knew that Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the avatāra. Still, he inquired from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, "How we shall know one avatāra?" So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "Why? It is all mentioned in the śāstra." So avatāra should be understood from the śāstra, not by jugglery or magic. This is rascal. As soon as one wants to establish his avatarship by jugglery and magic, kick him out, immediately on the face, directly. Kick him. Let the avatāra take steps. I don't mind. If he's avatāra, let him kill me, all right. But I shall kick him on his face. Not that avatāra.

Here, bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā. An avatāra comes to do some particular work. Just like Lord Rāmacandra came to punish Rāvaṇa. That is avatāra. And there are many avatāras, they are mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Matsya-avatāra, Vāmana-avatāra, Kūrma-avatāra, and Varāha-avatāra, Vāmana-avatāra, Nṛsiṁha-avatāra, and Paraśurāma-avatāra, Balarāma-avatāra, Buddha-avatāra. Buddha is also avatāra. Keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. We do not agree with Buddha philosophy. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, veda nā māniyā bauddha haya ta' nāstika. Buddha philosophy is atheism: "There is no God." He says "There is no God." So that is atheism. And especially... That there is no God, there is God-that is not the point. His point was to stop the animal-killing. Sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam. Kṛṣṇa became very, very, sympathetic with the poor animals. "Oh, in the name of yajña, these rascals, rogues, are killing so many animals." Therefore He came as Buddha-avatāra. Sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam. Keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. So Vaiṣṇava knows that "Here is Lord Buddha. He's Kṛṣṇa's avatāra," although we don't take his philosophy, because Buddha refused to accept Vedic authority. Nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātam. Śruti means Veda. Śruti-jātam. In the śruti, in the Vedas, there is mention of paśu sacrifice, animal sacrifice, there is. So they began to argue with Lord Buddha that "You are stopping yajña-vidhi, stopping animal-killing in the yajña. This is mentioned in the Vedas." But Lord Buddha knew, "These rascals simply talking of Vedas, he does not know what is Vedas. But what is the use of arguing?" Therefore he has to say, "I don't care for your Vedas. Stop animal killing." So nindasi yajña-vidheḥ. Yajña-vidhi, he wanted to stop. No more animal sacrifice in the yajña. Therefore he is denying the authority of Vedas. Nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātam. We cannot violate which is mentioned in the... Therefore he was taken... But he's avatāra. It was needed at that time.

As it is said here, bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā. When these rascals and fools increase, it becomes a burden to the earth. Just like a practical example: a child or a man, you weigh him. When he's alive you will find one weight, and when he's dead you will find another weight. That is practical. It will be heavier. Why heavier? Because there is no more spirit soul. So the more people will be materialistic, the world will be burdened. Therefore there must be war, pestilence, famine, to clear these rascals, clear out. You'll find these things. In Europe, every ten years, twenty years, there is a fight, war. It is the history. From the Greece history, Roman history and Seven Years War, Hundred Years War-wars. There must be war, because they are sinful. The same sinful, killing animals continually. So there is war, reaction. So what is that war? To lessen the burden. To lessen the burden. It becomes very heavy, unbearable by the earth. And to reduce the weight there is natural... And when there is still more power required, then Kṛṣṇa comes: "Arrange for a war in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra and bring all the rascals and finish within eighteen days." Within eighteen days sixty-four crores men died. This is... But why? It is Kṛṣṇa's arrangement.

When Arjuna wanted to become nonviolent, so He gave him instruction that "There is no question of nonviolence. You are talking like an anārya, uncivilized man." Kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ viṣame samupasthitam. "In warfield, and you are talking of nonviolence, rascal. There is no question of nonviolence. You have to fight." So he was still arguing. Then he finally said, "My dear Arjuna, you fight or don't fight. It doesn't matter. They are not going to return. They'll be finished here. That is My arrangement." He says, nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savyasācin: "They're not going to return." It is Kṛṣṇa's arrangement. He says,

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



When people become too much sinful, too much godless, the world becomes overburdened, and there must be some machine to kill. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ ahaṅkāra [Bg. 3.27]. They are thinking independently. No independence. As soon as you become sinful, there is reaction immediately. Immediately there will be war, pestilence, famine, flu, and so on, so on.



So here it is said, tathā ayaṁ ca avatāras te... Arjuna said that "You have descended to," I mean to say, "lessen the burden of this world." Bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā. There are many instances like that. When Pṛthu Mahārāja was the king, there was no production food production Because his father was a great sinful king, so on account of that there was no production. And Pṛthu Mahārāja wanted... He was a very good king. He is incarnation also. He asked the earth, "Why you are not producing? If you do not produce, I shall kill you." This is mentioned in the Fourth Canto. And mother earth said, "My dear King, why you are angry upon me? It is my duty. When the people become rākṣasas, I'll restrict my supply. Let them starve and die. I shall do that. This is my duty. Why you are angry with me?" The more people will be godless, there will be starvation, no supply. You cannot make by machine. Just like last time when I was in Europe, everything is now drying. It is yellow. What scientific method you have got? Bring water. Now they are thinking bringing, importing water. Is it possible to import water? That's not possible. So this will be punishment. In the Kali-yuga, the more people will be godless, and this punishment will be there: no water, no food supply. And over and above that, government taxation. You'll be harassed. Three things will go on.

That is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Anāvṛṣṭyā durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ [SB 12.2.9]. Now kara-pīḍita, taxation. This is śāstra. Five thousand years ago this Bhāgavata was written, and he has given, Vyāsadeva has given the symptoms of Kali-yuga. One of the symptoms is this, that in the Kali-yuga people will be so much embarrassed by three things. One thing there will be no rain, scarcity of rain. And naturally there will be scarcity of... Durbhikṣa. Durbhikṣa means you will not be able to get anything by begging also. Bhikṣa, bhikṣa means if I have no subsistence, I have no means to eat, I go to... [break] Even if I beg, I become a beggar, there will be no supplies. Especially these things will be no supply: rice, wheat, sugar, and other things, there are mentioned. It is all particularly mentioned. And we are experiencing. You were telling that rice is not available. Where it is? Huh? Poland. I have seen in Moscow, you cannot get any fruit, you cannot get rice, you cannot get wheat. You can get only flesh, meat. And milk is available. These things. So now already it has begun, and ultimately as the Kali-yuga advances and people become very much advanced in denying the existence of God, nirākāra, these things will come. Wait for that punishment. Durbhikṣa, anāvṛṣṭyā durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ [SB 12.2.9]. And as soon as there will be scarcity of food, the government men will take advantage of it: "Now we have to supply food." "Where is food?" "No, you give me money, we shall purchase from importer." The taxation. One side, I am suffering-no food; another side-whatever money I have got, it will be taken by taxation. Now see what is your position. The position will be people will become mad, so much troubled. Ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā gacchanti giri-kānanam. People will be so much harassed that voluntarily they'll give up their family, home, and go to the forest, hopeless. This will be done. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a joke, is a jugglery. It is the only remedy if you want to save yourself. Otherwise, you are doomed. Don't take it, I mean to say, as a joke. It is a fact.

So best thing is that kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ. There is one very nice opportunity. What is that opportunity? Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya... You cannot say any other-śivasya, kālīsya(?). No. Kṛṣṇasya. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. Not that any name, any, my whimsical name. No. Just like so many fools and rascals say that "You can chant any name." No. Śāstra says śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya. That is wanted. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet. If you take this process of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then you'll be free from all these disturbances. You'll be free. It is not pride, but it is a fact. Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we have got so much expenditure. In New York we are spending twelve lakhs of rupees alone per month. Now, we have got... This morning I was calculating. We have got 25 lakhs of rupees expenditure per month all over the world. But we have no anxiety. That is practical. We have no anxiety. One man who has got to spend 25 rupees, he has got anxiety. But we have to spend 25 lakhs of rupees, but we have no anxiety. Because we have taken shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Mā śucaḥ, Kṛṣṇa says. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja, ahaṁ tvāṁ mokṣayiṣyāmi sarva-pāpebhyaḥ [Bg. 18.66]. "Oh, Kṛṣṇa will take care of me in such a way?" "Yes." "Oh, let me consider." Mā śucaḥ. There is no consideration. You do it immediately. Mā śucaḥ. Why mā śucaḥ? If you... Kṛṣṇa is unable to feed you? Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). Why you talk of nonsense, population? There is no question of population. But if you are sinful, if you are godless, then however restrictive means you take... What is that? Sterilization? You have to starve. There is no question of diminishing the population. It is a question how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Otherwise, everything will be finished.

So don't take it very lightly. Take it seriously. Take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa has come, avatāra, and His instruction should be followed. Then we'll be happy. Everything is there in Kṛṣṇa's instruction for our benefit. But because we are rascals, mūḍha, duṣkṛtina, narādhama, we have no knowledge, we refuse to accept. This is our qualification.

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



Because we have become rākṣasas, asuras, we deny to surrender Kṛṣṇa, to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, and we must suffer the (con)sequence. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



Thank you very much. (end)



760923SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.26

-

Vṛndāvana, September 2, 1976



Pradyumna:



kim idaṁ svit kuto veti

deva-deva na vedmy aham

sarvato mukham āyāti

tejaḥ parama-dāruṇam

[SB 1.7.26]



"O Lord of lords, how is it that this dangerous effulgence is spreading all around? Where does it come from? I do not understand it."



Prabhupāda:



kim idaṁ svit kuto veti

deva-deva na vedmy aham

sarvato mukham āyāti

tejaḥ parama-dāruṇam

[SB 1.7.26]



So Aśvatthāmā's brahmāstra... We have discussed about brahmāstra. It is almost similar to the modern nuclear weapon or bomb. But it is made with chemicals, but this brahmāstra is made of mantra. That is the subtle way. Modern science has not reached to that point of subtle existence. Therefore they cannot understand how transmigration of the soul takes place. The modern science has no knowledge. Imperfect knowledge. They see the gross body, but they have no knowledge about the subtle body. But the subtle body is there. Just like we do not see your mind, but I know that you have got mind. You do not see my mind, but you know that I have got mind. Mind, intelligence and ego. My conception, identity, "I am," that conception is there. That is ego. And my intelligence and my mind, you cannot see. Neither I can see. Therefore how the mind, intelligence, and personal identity or egotism carries the soul to other body, they do not see it. They cannot see it. They see the gross body is stopped, everything is stopped. The gross body is burned into ashes. Therefore they think everything is finished. Bhasmī-bhūtasya dehasya kutaḥ punar āgamano bhaved The atheist class, they'll think like that. With poor fund of knowledge, they think that "I see the body is now burnt into ashes. Then where is the soul?" So "There is no soul, there is no God, it is all imagination." But that is not the fact, not that is the fact. The fact is that the gross body is finished, but the subtle body is there. Mano buddhir ahaṅkāraḥ. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca [Bg. 7.4]. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. So the action and reaction of the subtle thing, subtle matter... Mind is also matter, but subtle matter, very fine. Just like sky, ether. Ether is also matter, but it is very subtle, fine. And finer than the ether is the mind, and the-finer than the mind is the intelligence. And finer than the intelligence is my egotism: "I am," this conception.



So they have no knowledge. Therefore they can manufacture weapon or bomb with the gross things. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo-the chemicals, that is gross. But this brahmāstra is not gross. This is also material, but it is made of subtle things: mind, intelligence, and ego. Therefore Arjuna is asking Kṛṣṇa, "I do not know wherefrom it is coming, wherefrom this such high temperature is coming." It is stated here, tejaḥ parama-dāruṇam. The temperature is so high, intolerable. So we should ask the authority. Kṛṣṇa is the best authority. So Arjuna is asking from Him, kim idaṁ svit kuto veti: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, wherefrom this temperature is coming?" Kim idam. Deva-deva. Why he's asking to Kṛṣṇa? Because Kṛṣṇa is the deva-deva. Here we have got many millions of different varieties of life, 8,400,000 varieties of life. Out of them, we human form of life, and above this, the demigods in the higher planetary system, their standard of living, their duration of life is many, many times higher, superior than ours. Just like our standard of life, we are human being, it is better than the uncivilized man. And the uncivilized man's standard of life is better than the animal life. Phalgūni tatra mahatāṁ jīvo jīvasya jīvanam. The uncivilized man, they cannot produce food; therefore they kill animal. In the forest they live, and they kill some animals and eat. They cannot... They have no such knowledge that the forest can be cleared and we can till the ground and we can get very nice foodstuff, foodgrains, vegetables, so many things. Kṛṣi, agriculture. So the land is there, but this uncivilized man does not know how to get the necessities of life from land. They do not know. Otherwise, in the land everything is there. It is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, sarva-dughā mahī. Sarva-dughā. No. Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. Kāma, kāma means the necessities. We can get all the necessities of our life from the land. The land is so important. But the uncivilized man, they do not know how to utilize the land. Therefore they commit sinful activities for their existence. Instead of utilizing land for the necessities of life, unnecessarily... Although they are civilized-they should not have done so-they are killing animals.

The animal killing is for the uncivilized man, one who cannot get the necessities of life by intelligence. Just like modern civilized man, they are getting, suppose, so many machines, say, motorcar, a very useful vehicle. But wherefrom it is obtained? From the land. What is the motorcar ingredients? It is a combination of matter: earth, water, air, fire. You get iron, put into the fire and melt it, and then get the wheel. Similarly so many things. Tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ vinimayaḥ. Material civilization means tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ vinimayaḥ-exchange of fire, water, and earth-that's all. It is just like you see nice doll. What is this nice doll? Tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ vinimayaḥ. There is earth, water, fire. You mix the earth with water, and make it a nice doll, and put it into the fire and then color it. It will appear just like a very, very beautiful girl. But it is not the fact. Similarly the whole material world is nothing but an imitation of the spiritual world by intermixture of earth, water, and fire-and nothing else.

But because we are not beyond this material existence, we are in the material..., I am identifying with this body, therefore I am thinking that after the finish of this body everything is finished. This is rascaldom, atheism. No. But Kṛṣṇa gives information, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This is right information. Kṛṣṇa, the supreme authority, gives you the information that don't think that this body is finished, therefore everything is finished. No. Not everything finished. The soul is being carried by the subtle body." The example is given just like when the air passes through the rose garden and you smell very nice fragrance. You cannot see what is that fragrance, but you experience that there is some fragrance. Wherefrom? Sometimes we inquire "Wherefrom this fragrance coming?" You cannot see. Similarly, the soul is very, very small, a small particle of the same ingredient as Kṛṣṇa. Mamaivāṁśa. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. Jīva is very small particle of the same ingredient as Kṛṣṇa's body. Sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. So we have got our vigraha, very small. That is also stated in the śāstra. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca: [Cc. Madhya 19.140] one ten-thousandth part of the tip of the hair. We cannot even imagine what is the length and breadth of the hair, but the soul is one ten-thousandth part. So how you can see the soul? That small particle is being carried by the subtle body-mind, intelligence, and ego. And it is pushed through the semina of the father into the womb of the mother, and another body is manufactured in due course of time, and it comes out and works. This is called transmigration of the soul-from one body to another. That body is given by superior examination, Yamarāja. Yamarāja fixes up what kind of body this soul will get. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1] [SB 3.31.1]. Just like in the court, there is case, and the magistrate decides what kind of punishment this criminal should be awarded. So similarly, here in this material world, we are simply engaged in sinful activities. Here the so-called pious and impious, that is simply imagination. Really, if I am actually pious, I should not get this material body. Just like to remain in the prison house means criminal. You may be a first-class prisoner, it doesn't matter, but you are a prisoner. You are a criminal. Sometimes the big, big politicians, they are put into the jail and they're given all comforts. But that does not mean he's not a criminal. He's a criminal. Either he may be Gandhi or anyone, because he's put into the jail he's a criminal. Similarly, anyone who is enwrapped with this material body, he's a criminal. He's a criminal. Either he may be in the heavenly planet or in this earthly planet or in the cats' and dogs' life or insect or aquatics. There are varieties of life. Every one of us, as long as we are put into this material body, it is to be understood that we are all criminal.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa said,

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



The kṛṣṇa-bhajana is not so easy thing. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpam. One who is completely free from the reaction of pāpa, he cannot (can) take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But in the ordinary way, karma... According to karma... Just like you are working to earn some money, businessman, karma. So ordinary way you have to work very hard day and night to get some money. Suppose if you want one lakh of rupees or one crore of rupees, you have to work for it. But there is another way. Suppose one rich man gives you, that "You haven't got to work. Take this one lakh of rupees or one crore of rupees. You take it." That is another way. Ordinary way to accumulate crores of rupees, it may not be possible in your life. But if some friend or some rich man becomes kind upon you and delivers you, "Take it," you can get it immediately, without any hard labor. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa, the supreme rich man, supreme rich being, is offering you, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām... [Bg. 18.66]. "You haven't got to do anything. Come on. You surrender unto Me, and I give you immediately liberation." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ. There is no anxiety.



So that is Kṛṣṇa. He can give you immediately liberation. Simply you have to surrender. Therefore He's deva-deva. Sometimes we go to this demigod, to that demigod for some material perfection or ultimate liberation. But Kṛṣṇa can give you liberation within a second. That is Kṛṣṇa. Within a second. Otherwise, it is not very easy. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. The jñānīs, they are trying for liberation and undergoing very severe type of austerity and penances. Kṛcchreṇa. Kṛcchreṇa means very severe type of austerities they undergo. But still they fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. One who does not understand Kṛṣṇa, then his knowledge, his so-called jñāna... Maybe to some extent it is perfect, but it is not completely perfect. Completely perfect will be possible when you understand Kṛṣṇa.

So if you go on the ordinary way, from the karma platform to jñāna platform, from jñāna platform to yoga platform, but ultimately you have to come to the bhakti platform. If you do not come to the bhakti platform, then there is no question of liberation. That is not possible. You can get better position by karma, jñāna, yoga. Suppose a yogi, he can achieve many wonderful things. Suppose we can fly in the sky by airplane. Many hundreds of miles we can. But a yogi, within a second he can reach even the sun planet. That yogic perfection is there. Prāpti-siddhi. It is called prāpti-siddhi. A perfect yogi, simply by catching the beam of sunlight, he can go to the sun planet. He can go to the moon planet. Within a second. That is called yoga-siddhi. But even if you go to the sun planet or moon planet by yoga-siddhi or material science, what is the profit? There is no profit. Kṛṣṇa says, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] "Even if you approach the topmost planet, Brahmaloka, you have to come back again." Again come back, again become grass and again be eaten by cows, and again somebody drinks milk, and he gets the semina, again gives you birth in the womb of woman. These subtle laws they do not know, how things are happening in the subtle ways.

Therefore Arjuna knows, but for our education he's asking Kṛṣṇa that "Wherefrom this high temperature is coming?" Kim idaṁ svit kuto veti deva-deva na vedmi. We cannot understand. It is not possible. So many things are there even in this material world we cannot understand. We cannot get full information. But if we take Kṛṣṇa's instruction... He's giving personally the instruction in the Bhagavad-gītā. If we take care of them, then we can understand everything very easily. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice that simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, you can understand everything. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. So this is the all-perfect knowledge, perfect culture, perfect advancement of civilization. So everyone should take to it and all questions should be, is answered by Kṛṣṇa. You take it and become a perfect man.

Thank you very much. (end)



760924SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.27

-

Vṛndāvana, September 24, 1976



Pradyumna:



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

vetthedaṁ droṇa-putrasya

brāhmam astraṁ pradarśitam

naivāsau veda saṁhāraṁ

prāṇa-bādha upasthite

[SB 1.7.27]



"The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Know from Me that this is the act of the son of Droṇa. He has thrown the hymns of nuclear energy (brahmāstra), and he does not know how to retract the glare. He has helplessly done this, being afraid of imminent death."



Prabhupāda:



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

vetthedaṁ droṇa-putrasya

brāhmam astraṁ pradarśitam

naivāsau veda saṁhāraṁ

prāṇa-bādha upasthite



So Vyāsadeva... This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, mahā-muni-kṛte. It is not written by ordinary person. In the beginning it is said, śrīmad-bhāgavate mahā-muni-kṛte. Not only muni, but mahā-muni. Kim anyaiḥ śāstraiḥ: under the instruction of his spiritual master, Vyāsadeva, revealed the scripture by spiritual experience. Bhakti-yogena, praṇihite amale. Bhakti-yoga, he could realize. Nārada Muni asked him to write simply on the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He had written so many books-all the Vedas, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas. But he was not feeling satisfied even after writing the Vedānta-sūtra. So at that time Nārada Muni happened to come to him, and he chastised him that "You have written so many books, but they're not very useful." Because people are generally attracted to dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. They're attracted. Those who are civilized men, they are attracted with some sort of religion, system. It doesn't matter whether he's Hindu or Muslim or Christian. They have some sort of religious practice. That is the beginning of human civilization. When there is no religious practice, that is not civilized man. Just like in the jungle, aborigines, or the animals, they have no religious system. In the human society there is some religious system. Therefore when the human society becomes without any religious understanding, dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ, immediately they're animals. They're not human beings. In civilized world...



Now, at the present moment, especially the famous movement, Communist movement, they are after completely driving out religious system. This is the misfortune of this age. So they are not in fault in one sense, because the guardians of the religious system, they are fallen. Just like immediately our Śubhavilāsa Prabhu was asking me that "We have seen so many temples. Why they are so neglected?" Is it not your question? And why they should not neglect it? The, mostly, the temples, they have become the means of livelihood. That is the defect. Temple is not meant for means of livelihood. Then it will deteriorate. How long you can falsely worship Deity and make show of ārati? You cannot go on very long time. That is not possible. You'll be disgusted. Unless there is feeling, bhāva, that "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has very kindly come here to receive, to take, accept my humble service. He's so great that He cannot be approached by a person like me." Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān.

Suppose for the impersonalist, virāḍ-rūpa, the sky is the head of the Personality of Godhead. They think like that. And the big, big mountains are the bones, and big, big oceans are the holes of the body, and the trees, they are... In one sense, it is all right. But if you take the virāḍ-rūpa, how you can capture? It is impossible. He has virāḍ-rūpa. He has shown virāḍ-rūpa to Kṛṣṇa (Arjuna), but you cannot capture that virāḍ-rūpa. You are tiny. Therefore He is so kind that He has appeared before you in this temple so that you can touch Him actually, you can serve Him, you can dress Him, you can offer Him eatables. It is... Therefore, if we think like that... Not think. It is a fact. Because God is not only very big. Mahato mahīyān aṇor aṇīyān. He can become smaller than the smallest. That is God. Brahman does not means simply big so that you cannot capture. That is omnipotency. Whatever He likes, He can become. He can put all the universes within His mouth. When Yaśodāmāyi challenged that "Kṛṣṇa, You are eating earth. Your friends are complaining," "No, mother, I did not. They are telling false." "Now Your elder brother, Balarāma, also is saying." "No, He has... This morning He is angry with Me; therefore He has joined with them." "I want to see Your face." So He opened the mouth and the mother saw that millions of Yaśodā and millions of universes are within the mouth. Then she thought, "Maybe something... All right, don't do it." That's all. Finish with this (?). Now Kṛṣṇa, millions of universes within the mouth, He's being punished by Yaśodāmāyi. This is Kṛṣṇa. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. This is Kṛṣṇa.

So when Kṛṣṇa comes, you cannot see Kṛṣṇa. You cannot capture Kṛṣṇa, mahato mahīyān. When He comes before you, arcā-mūrti, arcā-vigraha... This is arcā-vigraha, Deity. Arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīḥ. Kṛṣṇa has appeared. Just like the same thing: Kṛṣṇa... Yaśodāmāyi wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead as his (her) son, for which hundreds of years he (she) undergone, or she undergone austerities. And when the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared before him, before her, both the husband and wife: "What do you want?" "Now we want a son like You." So Kṛṣṇa said, "There is no second one beyond Me, so I shall become your son." So He became son. So He must play perfectly, that Yaśodāmāyi may not understand that "Here is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Then the feelings of mother and son will disappear. Kṛṣṇa is playing exactly like a little child. So that is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. This is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Similarly, to us. We are not so elevated like Nanda Mahārāja or Yaśodā Mahārāja (māyi). We're just beginners. So we do not know what is Kṛṣṇa. We cannot see Kṛṣṇa, either His virāḍ-mūrti or this mūrti. So what we can see? We can see stone, wood, or material things. So when Kṛṣṇa appears to be seen by you and He appears like a stone statue, He's not stone statue. Don't think. Therefore we must learn how to see Kṛṣṇa. So we should not think that "Here is a stone statue." As soon as we think of stone statue, then our, this feeling, bhāva, will be lost. So the answer is that if we establish some temple and Deity and take it as a means of livelihood... [break]

So at least we Indians we are trained up like that. Not only trained up, we are born devotees. Anyone who has taken birth in India, that is special facility. In their previous birth, they had performed many austerities, much austerities. Even the demigods, they desire also to take birth in India to get this opportunity. So India... Don't think... India means this planet, Bhāratavarṣa. There is good opportunity. So we should not think. If we think that "Here is a stone statue," then it will not prolong many days. It will not... Galagraha. No more vigraha, but galagraha. Suppose I have established this temple. Now under my direction, my disciples are worshiping vigraha. Vigraha means the form of the Lord, rūpa. But if there is no following of the regulative principles, then after my death it will be galagraha, a burden, that "Our rascal Guru Mahārāja established this temple, and we have to worship, early rise in the morning, all botheration." This will be... That is called galagraha, a burden, "He has left with us a burden." This is the risk. Then this, such a big temple will be mismanaged, and you'll find that "This is breaking" and "This is unclean," and there is no attention. This will be our... That is called galagraha. "The rascal has given us a burden."

So it is very difficult. If we lost, if we have lost that feeling that "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Here is a chance to serve Him..." Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ... Not that. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. As soon as... Therefore we are very much vigilant, "Why you did not this? Why you do not this? Why...?" As soon as the feeling of devotional service will be lost, this temple will be a burden. This is the way. It will be such a big temple. To manage, it will be a great burden. So they are feeling burden. Therefore they don't mind if somewhere is broken sometimes. "All right, let us, whatever money we have got, let us eat first of all." This is the position. Vigraha and galagraha. You should understand. If we forget that "Here is Kṛṣṇa personally present. We have to receive Him very nicely. We have to give Him nice food, nice dress, nice..." Then it is service. And as soon as the feeling comes that "Here is a stone idol..." They say sometimes "idol worship." "And we have been instructed to dress Him, to give Him..., all botheration." Then finished. Finished. That has come everywhere. I have seen in Nasik in many, many big temples there is no pūjārī, and the dogs are passing stool. Not only they're breaking. In Western countries also the churches are being closed-big, big churches. In London I have seen, very big, big churches, but they're closed. When there is meeting on Sunday, the caretaker, two, three men, and some old lady, they come. Nobody comes. And we are purchasing. We have purchased several churches. Because it is now useless. It is useless. In our Los Angeles we have purchased and several others. In Toronto. That recently we have purchased. Big, big churches. But they would not sell us. One church, the priest said that "I shall set fire in this church, still I shall not give to Bhaktivedanta Swami." (laughter) This Toronto church was like that also. And in Melbourne, the condition was, sale condition was, that you have to dismantle this church building. We said, "Why?" He said, "Utilize as temple now, then we shall not give you." They refused. You know that? So they do not like that "This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement will purchase our churches and install Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deity." They do not like that. But it is not(?) going on.

So not only the churches in the Western countries, here also. As soon as you will lose the spirit of service, this temple will become a big go-down, that's all. No more temple. So we have to maintain that service spirit. Therefore we are so much particular-"Why fresh flower is not there?" If you think, "Here is a stone statue. What is the meaning of fresh flower or old flower? We have to give some flower. That's all." But no feeling, that "Here is Kṛṣṇa. We must give fresh flower." Just like I'm a living man, if you give me a fresh flower, and if you bring some garbage, and if you give me, shall I be pleased? Do you think? So this feeling is losing even in the beginning, that "We shall satisfy this statue with some rubbish, garbage flowers. He's not going to protest." Yes, He'll not protest. But your life will be finished. The protest will come like that. As soon as you lost the feeling, bhāva, budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Who can worship Kṛṣṇa? When there is bhāva. Sthāyi-bhāva. This has been discussed in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, what is bhāva. But if you have no bhāva, then you are on the material, kaniṣṭha-adhikārī. Simply show. A show cannot go on many days. Show will be finished very soon.

So if you do not keep the bhāva... Bhāva means... That is on the liberation side. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. First of all, you come to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Some of you, not all. Śraddhā: "Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is very good. Let us see how it is," or "Let us join." So first of all śraddhā. Many people come out of śraddhā. Śraddhā means little faith. But according to our Gosvāmī literature, that faith is not little faith. That faith is also very strong. Then the beginning is there. Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā has described about this faith. He describes... Faith means śraddhā. English word "faith," and Sanskrit word is śraddhā, "respectful." Śraddadhānā. So this śraddhā, ādau śraddhā... The beginning is śraddhā, faith. So this śraddhā is defined by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī,

'śraddhā'-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.62]



This is śraddhā. According to our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, this is śraddhā. What is that? Kṛṣṇa is asking, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. He's asking, demanding. So when we have faith in the words of Kṛṣṇa: "Yes, Kṛṣṇa says sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. Yes, I shall do," then śraddhā begins. Otherwise, there is no śraddhā. That is the beginning of śraddhā. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. If you have got faith in these words of Kṛṣṇa, that "Yes, whatever Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... [Bg. 18.66], accept it," then śraddhā begins. Otherwise there is no śraddhā. Ordinary śraddhā is..., they are going this temple or another Kālī's temple or Durgā's temple. They say that "Everyone is all right." Yata mata tata patha: "Whatever you like." That is not śraddhā; that is whims. And śraddhā means when you firmly believe on the words of Kṛṣṇa, that Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Therefore Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī said, śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya [Cc. Madhya 22.62]. Kṛṣṇa said that "Give up everything, I shall give you..." "Yes, it is fact. Why shall I bother with..." That is śraddhā. Viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya. Sudṛḍha means very firm faith. Not flickering faith.



When you have got this kind of śraddhā, naturally, the next stage will be "How to keep my śraddhā, firm faith in Kṛṣṇa?" Then you have to mix with devotees who are keeping constantly in Kṛṣṇa's service. Therefore this temple is required, that devotees will always be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, and those who have got śraddhā, they will come and see how the devotees are engaged, how they have sacrificed their life only for serving Kṛṣṇa. That is sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Therefore we have constructed this big house. Why? The people, the ignorant, the rascals, they may, if they have little faith, they may come, live here, take whatever prasāda is available, and mix with these devotees. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ. And if he mixes with the devotees, gradually his bad habits, anartha... No: bhajana-kriyā. Next stage is that, "The devotees are serving Kṛṣṇa, they are also shaven-head, they have got neckbeads, and they're chanting. Why not myself?" This is called bhajana-kriyā.

Then they approach, "Sir, why not initiate me?" "No, we put some regulative principles. If you accept..." This is bhajana-kriyā. Then automatically, anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. All nonsense habits, which are not required, anartha... Just like smoking: anartha, unnecessary. Does it mean that if one does not smoke he'll die? But you'll see in the whole world, millions and trillions of dollars' cigarette is selling. Anartha. Unnecessary. Does it mean that if I do not eat meat I shall die? I have seen in the Western countries-I observe everything-they eat meat very little. But because everyone is eating little meat, big, big slaughterhouses are being maintained. They can give up. A little piece of meat very easily he can give up. He can take this panir. But the rascal will not do that, because he's a rascal. He'll eat meat, and for this eating meat you have to maintain thousands and thousands of, what is called, organized slaughterhouse. And you have to kill. Killing means he's being implicated in sinful activities. Anartha, unnecessary. So we restrict this. Sex life is all right, required. Be a gentleman, get yourself married, live husband and wife peacefully. Have two and three children. Now they're making forcefully that you cannot have more than two children-sterilize. This is rascaldom. Teach him that he'll not have sex life more than twice or thrice in life. But no. Tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇā bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ [SB 7.9.45]. The sex life is so strong that one has produced one child and he has suffered... The child has to be taken at night, it is crying, and then you have to give him milk, and so on, so on, so on. He has suffered, but he has no sense, "Why again child?" The answer, tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇā bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ. He knows that after this sex life, illegal or legal, there are so much troubles. Therefore a brahmacārī is a very safe life. No trouble. But those who are not trained up, they are suffering. But they do not know how to stop this suffering because he's not trained up as brahmacārī. "All right, make it sterilized." Contraceptive method. Kill the child. More and more and more and more implicated. Bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ. He does not know, or she does not know, "By killing the child what a risk I am going to take." Bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ. Behind this killing of child so much trouble is there. But he's rascal, he does not know, either the mother or the father.

So in this way, if we do not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness we'll be more and more implicated. You cannot avoid. That is not possible. The God's nature is working so nicely. I have given you several times the example that if you infect some disease, it must develop and you must have to suffer. There is no excuse. Similarly, if you are associating with the modes of ignorance and you are committing some sins, the effect you must have to suffer. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu [Bg. 13.22]. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Prakṛteḥ, the nature, God's machine, is working so perfectly that it will act. You cannot avoid. Therefore we should be very careful how anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. For our spiritual advancement of life we must have the sense that "Why we should accept unnecessary things which is not at all important?" The four things are restricted. No illicit sex, no meat-eating, no gambling, no intoxication. Nobody dies. But it is a habit. It is a habit.

So in this way we have to mold our life, and the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the best process. Therefore those who are sinful, those who are atheist, they have become a little afraid of this movement. Therefore we have got so many enemies, and now in India especially the papers are criticizing us in so many ways. In other countries also. So we have to face this danger. It is not danger. We don't care for their criticism. But if we remain sincere in our actions, there will be no obstacles. Ahaituky apratihatā. It is ascertained that Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, apratihatā. It cannot be checked provided if you remain to the principles. What is that principle? Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. If you stick to the principle of bhakti-yogam then ahaituky apratihatā. Nobody can check you. You'll make progress.

Thank you very much. (end)



760925SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.28-29

-

Vṛndāvana, September 25, 1976



Pradyumna: "O Arjuna, only another brahmāstra can counteract this weapon. Since you are expert in the military science, subdue this weapon's glare with the power of your own weapon.



"Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: Hearing this from the Personality of Godhead, Arjuna touched water for purification, and after circumambulating Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he cast his brahmāstra weapon to counteract the other one."

Prabhupāda:



na hy asyānyatamaṁ kiñcid

astraṁ pratyavakarśanam

jahy astra-teja unnaddham

astra-jño hy astra-tejasā

[SB 1.7.28]



sūta uvāca

śrutvā bhagavatā proktaṁ

phālgunaḥ para-vīra-hā

spṛṣṭvāpas taṁ parikramya

brāhmaṁ brāhmāstraṁ sandadhe

[SB 1.7.29]



So counteraction. This is military science. Sāma Veda, Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda. And military science also, one of the part of the Vedas, Dhanur Veda. It is called Dhanur Veda-how to utilize dhanuḥ. Dhanuḥ means bow and arrows. Similarly Āyur Veda. Āyur Veda means medical science, how to protect the āyuḥ. Because the body is perishable, so in the Vedic knowledge, everything is there to guide the human society. It is stated in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3]. Nigama means Veda, and that is kalpa-taru. Nigama kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam. It is compared with the tree. What kind of tree? Desire tree. Nigama-kalpa-taroḥ. Kalpa-taru. The kalpa-taru can be found in the spiritual world, not in this material world. The spiritual world is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā. What is that? Kalpa-taru, cintāmaṇi kalpa-taru. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-taru. In the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana, it is described that the houses, palaces, in that land, spiritual land, Goloka Vṛndāvana, is made of cintāmaṇi, cintāmaṇi kalpa-taru.



cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]



So kalpa-taru means whatever you want you can get from that tree. Because everything is spiritual. For example, he can give you... Just like you are a spiritual being, I am also a spiritual being. If I say, "Bring me a glass of water." You'll bring. "Give me some fruit." You'll give me. "Bring this." You'll bring. Because you are spirit soul, you can supply me whatever I want. This is the spiritual idea. Not that I wanted a glass of water, you can supply me a glass of water only. If I want other things, you can supply me also. This is an example, crude example.



So when there is no material obstacles, then the spiritual world can be utilized for any purpose. Here, because we are covered with the material body... There are two energies, it is described in the Bhagavad-gītā: material energy and spiritual energy. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca [Bg. 7.4]. This is material energy. And Kṛṣṇa says apareyam; this is inferior. Aparā. Itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. There is another, superior energy. What is that superior energy? Living. It is not dead. Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. Without spiritual energy, this whole universe is useless, anywhere you go. The modern scientists, they are going to-so-called-they are going to this planet, that planet. And they do not find any spiritual energy. They simply see the material energy-sand and rocks. That cannot be. Because... They can bluff because people are not aware of the whole science. They can bluff. In this material world there are two energies working: material and spiritual. There cannot be only material. There must be spiritual energy. So they say that there is no life, that means there is no spiritual energy. It cannot be accepted. It cannot be. It is out of question. Because here we find jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. There must be living entity who is conducting this material energy. This body is very beautiful, very useful. Why? Because the spiritual energy, the soul, is there. Otherwise, it has no value. So when there is a planet, when there are other things, how it has developed? This is a reasoning. This is sense. Because the material energy cannot develop without spiritual energy. Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat. There cannot be anything material without spiritual energy. What is this body? How this body came into existence? Because the spiritual energy, the soul, is there. A dead child born, it will not grow because the spiritual energy is not there. So it has to be concluded that as soon as there is material, a manifestation of the material energy, there must be spiritual energy. It cannot...

In the Bhagavad-gītā it is clearly said that this whole cosmic manifestation is combination of material energy and spiritual energy. So therefore in the Vedas... Veda means knowledge, vetti veda vido jñāne. In the Sanskrit verb vid, vid-dhātu. Vid-dhātu means knowledge, "to know." Vetti veda vido jñāne vinte vid vicaraṇa(?). Labhe vindati vindate. So vid-dhātu. From vid-dhātu the Veda has come. Veda means knowledge. So from the Vedas you can have all different types of knowledge, namely material knowledge and spiritual knowledge, both, perfectly. Because we have now forgotten our spiritual energy, we do not cultivate spiritual energy; therefore the Veda is there. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, in simple Bengali language, it is said, anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gela, ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa karila [Cc. Madhya 20.117]. Because these rascals, anādi-bahirmukha, do not know. (bird chirping in background) Just like this bird chirping, but he does not know what he is, wherefrom he is coming, where to go-nothing. That is low-grade life. So we are now forgetful of our spiritual energy, and because we do not know spiritual energy. Therefore we have no knowledge of God. This is our position, and it is coming since very, very, very, very, long time. Time immemorial. Therefore the Vedas are there. Anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gela, ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa karila(?)

So we have to utilize the Veda-purāṇa. The Veda-purāṇa is here in India. It is not for India; it is meant for the whole universe. But still, it is available in India. That is India's special position. Indian civilization is not very much interested with the four-wheel civilization. India is interested in spiritual cultivation, Veda-purāṇa. So this science as it is mentioned here, unnaddham astra-jñaḥ, so Arjuna was expert in military science, and still, he was a devotee. It is not that only a brāhmaṇa with very clean cloth and clean habit, satya-śaucābhyām... Brāhmaṇa's first qualification is truthfulness and cleanliness, satya-śaucābhyām. This is the first qualification. Śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. Tyāgena satya-śaucābhyāṁ yamena niyamena vā. So this is brahminical qualification. But there are others also. A kṣatriya, he is expert in the military science, how to kill. So the killing art is there. You cannot make it null and void by advocating nonviolence. No. That is required. Violence is also a part of the society. Just like here is some itching sensation. This is violence. That is required for the comfort. So similarly, Arjuna was kṣatriya. He knew the art of killing, and still, Kṛṣṇa is... Kṛṣṇa also, He appeared as a kṣatriya in the dynasty of kṣatriyas. Vāsudeva, son of Vasudeva. He also knew the art of killing. That is also one of the part of His business. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7], paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. So vināśa-requires violence.

So we cannot decry violence. That is also required. Kṛṣṇa was speaking Bhagavad-gītā, the science of God, in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. We cannot condemn violence. That is not possible. But there is no violence in the spiritual world. That is a fact. Violence is only in the material world. Therefore when Kṛṣṇa desired to fight... Because all desires are coming from Him, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Anything that we have got experience, everything is there in God. Therefore He's God. Not that minus something. Nothing minus. Everything. Akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Raso vai saḥ. These are the Vedic injunctions. He is the reservoir of all rasa, humor or mellow. So this is also a mellow. Sometimes cruel men, they take pleasure by killing. I've seen it. One hotel man was cutting the throat of one chicken, half-cut, and it was throbbing, jumping. His child was crying because he could not see such horrible thing. And the man, the hotel man, he was laughing and pacifying the child, "Why you are crying? Just see how he's throbbing, how he's jumping." So one subject matter, the rasa is different. Humor is different. He's one, (?) enjoying one rasa, the father, and the child is crying. That is also another rasa. So the whole world is full of rasa. Ādi-rasa. The sex life is called ādi-rasa. There is bībhatsa-rasa, hāsya-rasa, karuṇa-rasa, mādhurya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa, sākhya-rasa, śānta-rasa. There are so many rasas-twelve rasas. Anaya(?) vyatireka, ādi-rasa. So janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has described this ādi from ādi-rasa. Ādi-rasa means the conjugal love. That is called ādi-rasa. So janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Wherefrom the ādi-rasa comes? The attraction between man and woman, that is a fact. The attraction is there in everywhere, either human society or animal society or bird society, bee society, the attraction is there. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. This whole world is existing on mithunī-bhāva, sex. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. These things are there. So wherefrom it comes, this ādi-rasa? Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has described in his comment on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the beginning, that Kṛṣṇa is the origin of ādi-rasa, janmādy asya [SB 1.1.1]. From there, this ādi-rasa is generated. That is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. So everything is there. Otherwise, imperfectness. So as there is ādi-rasa, Kṛṣṇa is enjoying with the gopīs and Rādhārāṇī. Similarly, He enjoys with bībhatsa-rasa, vīra-rasa, killing. Killing is also vīra-rasa. Because He is the reservoir of all rasas. So janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. So do not think that this violence or fighting is bad. No. Nothing is bad when it is utilized for Kṛṣṇa. And nothing is good when it is utilized for your sense gratification. Everything is bad.

So here Kṛṣṇa ordered that this is brahmāstra. He could not understand that intolerable temperature, heat, and Arjuna inquired, "Wherefrom the heat is coming?" So Kṛṣṇa informed him that "This is due to brahmāstra released by Aśvatthāmā. This rascal does not know how to counteract it." Naivāsau veda saṁhāram. "He does not know." Formerly, in the military science, you have released one kind of arrow. If I am expert, then I can release another arrow which will counteract your arrow. Naivāsau veda saṁhāram. It is called saṁhāram. So Aśvatthāmā released that brahmāstra. Now Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna that "You release this saṁhārāstra," how to counteract. Unnaddham astra-jñaḥ. Unnaddham: "You know better than him how to counteract." Hy astra-tejasā: "By another..." [break] ...different astras are released by different expert military men. So that science is not yet discovered. By mantra. Just like here it is said that he took water, āpaḥ. Spṛṣṭvāpas taṁ parikramya. Āpaḥ. Just like we take, oṁ apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāsvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā. Similarly, mantra and water can be utilized for very, very important purpose. Simply mantra and water. So this is the science. This is called subtle science, not gross. They have discovered this atomic weapon-they require so many chemicals. But when you come to the higher stage, subtle, then mantra and water will do. Nothing more. No more chemicals. Simply mantra and water. That is yet you have to learn.

But these things are there in the Vedas. If you are a serious student of Veda you can also learn, you can also fight like Arjuna. There is no difficulty. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says astra-jñaḥ. Unnaddham astra-jñaḥ. You can also become learned in the higher science of military art. You can also utilize. But that requires brain, good brain. That is not possible now, because the culture is lost. Now everyone is śūdra. Nobody is kṣatriya, nobody is brāhmaṇa. By the time... Kalau śūdra sambhava. The śūdras cannot learn all these veda. Because śūdras have no right to understand Vedic knowledge. It is meant for the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas. Even not for the vaiśyas. Striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ. They are rejected, woman and vaiśya and śūdra. Kṛṣṇa says. Striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ. But Kṛṣṇa says te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim: "Even woman, and śūdra and vaiśyas, low grade, they can also get parāṁ gatim, promotion to the transcendental world." How? Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. If you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then even these low-grade born persons, beginning from striya śūdra vaiśya, and down, caṇḍālas... Caṇḍālas means less than the caṇḍāla. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśāḥ. They are caṇḍālas. Kirāta means the black clan, or the Africans. So they are called kirāta. Hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ [SB 2.4.18]. Yavanas, khasādaya, Mongolians, without any moustaches. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ ye 'nye ca pāpāḥ. "Even there are still more low-grade, sinful society," ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ, "if he takes the shelter of a pure devotee, śudhyanti, becomes purified." Becomes purified. How? Śudhyanti? Because prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ. Lord Viṣṇu has got so exalted power that through His devotee He can purify anyone. Never mind, even one happens to be caṇḍāla, and what to speak of others. Kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā [Bg. 9.33]. If they can be delivered, then what to speak those who are brāhmaṇas. Brāhmaṇa means puṇya. Without having background of pious activities, nobody can take birth in rich family, in brāhmaṇa family. Nobody can become highly learned person, nobody can become beautiful. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. They're the action, reaction of puṇya. And just the opposite is pāpa. So everyone-there is no question of pāpī or puṇya-if anyone takes shelter of Kṛṣṇa, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32], it doesn't matter. Everyone can be elevated to the transcendental position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So this movement is there. Take advantage of it and elevate your life and finish the material trouble. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. It is only simply full of miseries and temporary. This business must be stopped. And yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama: [Bg. 15.6] simply by going back to home, back to Godhead, your all problems of life will be solved.

Thank you very much. (end)



760926SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.30-31

-

Vṛndāvana, September 26, 1976



Pradyumna: "When the rays of the two brahmāstras combined, a great circle of fire, like the disc of the sun, covered all outer space and the whole firmament of planets. All the population of the three worlds was scorched by the combined heat of the weapons. Everyone was reminded of the sāṁvartaka fire, which takes place at the time of annihilation."



Prabhupāda:



saṁhatyānyonyam ubhayos

tejasī śara-saṁvṛte

āvṛtya rodasī khaṁ ca

vavṛdhāte 'rka-vahnivat

[SB 1.7.30]



dṛṣṭvāstra-tejas tu tayos

trīl lokān pradahan mahat

dahyamānāḥ prajāḥ sarvāḥ

sāṁvartakam amaṁsata

[SB 1.7.31]



So the heat increased. Radiation heat increased. One weapon was released by Aśvatthāmā, another by Arjuna to counteract, and the heat was so terrible that dahyamānāḥ prajāḥ sarvāḥ, all the inhabitants of different planets, they felt the great heat produced by two brahmāstras. And sāṁvartakam amaṁsata. The sāṁvartaka fire is explained in the śāstra, that in the Kali-yuga... At the last there will be Kali-yuga. In the Kali-yuga there will be no rainfall. So everything will dry. Not this Kali-yuga, but at the end of the universal life there will be great fire all over the universe. That is called sāṁvartaka. And everything will be ablaze. This fire will take place on account of the heat increase of the sun. It is said that the present temperature of the sun will be increased twelve times, so naturally there will be fire. As we know, sometimes there is forest fire. Similarly, the fire will take place, and everything will be burned into ashes. Then there will be rain. After heat... You have got experience when the atmosphere is too hot, then the rain falls. Same process. When everything will be burned into ashes there will be rain, torrents of rain, and it is said just like the trunk of the elephant, the rainfall will be like that. So everything will be covered with water. That is annihilation. Pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedam **. Then there will be pralaya, and by the grace of the Lord the Vedas will be saved. Keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare.



This is the process, going on. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. This material world, in this way, sometimes it is manifested and sometimes it is not manifested. The energy is there, but the material world means the energy sometimes manifested, sometimes not manifested. So we are in this material world. Not only. We are changing our body, one after another after some years... That is also according to our different forms of life. In one small insect, it may live for few minutes; some of them for few hours, some of them for few days, and some of them for few months, some of them for few years. And this yearly, we live, we human being, we live for a hundred years, and the demigods, they live for ten thousands of years. But wherever you live, either as insect or as demigod, there is no rescue from the process of janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. That you cannot escape. Either you become a small insect or you become as powerful as Lord Brahmā, you have to die. There is no escape. Brahmā, he has the greatest amount of years to live. His life is... We have calculation in the Bhagavad-gītā, that sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. Sahasra-yuga. One yuga means forty-three lakhs of years multiplied by one thousand. That is the one daytime duration of Brahmā. Ahar rātri means morning to evening. Morning to evening, that is sahasra-yuga, one thousand times of forty-three lakhs of years. Similarly night. Then day and night becomes one day. Similarly one month, and then twelve months, a year-such hundred years. So there is difference between our hundred years and his hundred years. Similarly, ant's hundred years and my hundred years different.

The modern science admits that everything is relative. Relative world. According to the body, according to the time. Relative world, not absolute. The absolute world is different. Where there is no relativity. Everyone is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is oneness. Not that one has become as powerful as the Supreme Lord. No. Maybe as powerful. Still, they're individual. They're not amalgamation. That is wrong theory. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that in the past we were all individuals. He says that "It is not that in the past we did not exist, and it is not that in the future we shall not exist. We shall exist." Nityaḥ śāśvato yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. So we are eternal. We existed in the past, we are existing now, and we shall continue to exist. And individual. Kṛṣṇa says, "You, Me, and all these soldiers and kings, they are all individual, and they existed as individual in the past, and we are existing now as individuals, and we shall continue to exist as individuals." So there are three phases of time: past, present, and future. So there is no question of being amalgamated at any time. They remain always individuals. And this is in the material..., either material world or spiritual world, the individuality is there. It never ceases. Nitya-yuktā upāsate. Here, we have got temporary life. Therefore we cannot be nitya-yukta. This life will be finished, and the next life we do not know what kind of life we shall have. It may be human form of life or it may be dog's form of life. You have to change this body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Kṛṣṇa does not say that a man after death becomes a man. No. There is no guarantee. He says tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. There will be change of body. And so far the body is concerned, there are 8,400,000 of different bodies. So any one of them you have to accept. There is no guarantee. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ.

So I, as spirit soul, I am individual, existing. I shall continue to exist as individual in this material world either as human being or as an animal or as demigod, or a tree, plants, fish, aquatics-so many. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. So this is going on. This is material world. And if you go to the spiritual world, yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. The difference... What is the difference between the spiritual world and the material world? The difference is that if you go to the spiritual world, then you will not return again in this material world. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. Spiritual life means punar janma naiti. Punar janma means this material world. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. One janma, then death, again janma, again death. And between the death and birth or birth and death there is disease and old age. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha [Bg. 13.9]. This is our real problem.

So the modern scientists, they do not know what is real problem. They are thinking advancement. Another point is here, that trīl lokān pradahan mahat and dahyamānāḥ prajāḥ sarvāḥ. Prajā. Prajā means living entities. Prajāyate: one who takes his birth. So in the three worlds... Three worlds means these upper, middle, and lower planetary systems in this universe. Trīl loka. Trīl lokān. So everywhere there is prajā, there is living entities. Otherwise, how it is said trīl lokān? It is a foolish theory that there is no life in other planets. A rascal theory. It has no meaning. Trīl lokān. We have got many evidences. I do not know why these rascal scientists say that there is no life in other planet. Why? The other planet is also made of the pañca-bhūta, pṛthvī-ap-tejas-vāyu-ākāśa. They are not different. Maybe something is very prominent. Just like in the sun globe, the fire is prominent. Fire is also one of the five elements: pṛthvī-ap-tejas. That does not mean there is no life. There must be. Otherwise, how Kṛṣṇa talked with the sun-god, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]? And the living entity, nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ. The living entity is not burned by the fire. It is not dried up, it is not moistened. This is stated. So why there will be no life in the sun globe? There must be. Because nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ, fire cannot burn the living being. So there are germs in the fire also, agni-pa(?).

So we are being misled by the so-called scientists and the math... That is not perfect knowledge. The perfect knowledge is in the Vedas. Therefore it is advised, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. You should go to a guru who has complete knowledge from the śruti. Śruti means Vedas. Ācāryavān puruṣo veda. Veda means you have to approach ācārya. He knows everything. Unless he is not followers of the Vedas, śruti, he's a rascal. What is the use of going there? What is the... What you'll get by approaching a so-called rascal guru, one who does not know śruti? Therefore Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has forbidden. And Sanātana Gosvāmī has forbidden. Avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam, śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. Because śravaṇam, śruti... To go to guru means to hear from him, to inquire from him.

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

[MU 1.2.12]



You have to approach such guru. And who is that guru? Vaiṣṇava. Not any ordinary person. Therefore anyone who is not Vaiṣṇava, you should not approach. It is false knowledge. Its knowledge has no value. Sanātana Gosvāmī has strictly forbidden: avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam, śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. Don't hear. You'll be spoiled. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said, māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa [Cc. Madhya 6.169]. If you hear from a Māyāvādī impersonalist, then your spiritual progress is doomed, finished. No more spiritual progress. Māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile. Māyāvādī haya kṛṣṇe aparādhī. The Māyāvādīs, they are offenders to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person, and the Māyāvādī wants to make Him imperson; therefore they are offenders.



So what is the use of approaching a guru who is offender to Kṛṣṇa? Tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu [Bg. 16.19]-those who are envious... Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and the Māyāvādīs always trying to make Him handless, legless, headless, earless, and this-less, that-less, less, less, less. Then what is remaining? Say zero. Why don't you say zero? No. They are very careful. These śūnyavādīs, the Buddhists, they clearly say there is no God. Zero. Śūnyavādī. So we can understand their position, and the Māyāvādīs, they're so dangerous that they will not say that God is zero. They will say, "Yes, there is God, but He's handless, legless, eyeless, this-less, that-less, that less." What is the meaning? Say zero. We can understand. But why you say indirectly zero? Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that veda nā māniyā bauddha haya ta' nāstika. Nāstika means one who does not believe in the statement of the Vedas. He's nāstika, atheist. Just like here, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Kṛṣṇa is person. This is Vedic literature. Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa is person, aham. Always He says. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. He's person.

So the Māyāvādī will always try to explain in the impersonal way. Therefore they're offender. Kṛṣṇa personally presents. Why Kṛṣṇa comes? So that the misunderstanding whether the Absolute Truth, God, is a person or imperson, to mitigate this trouble, this misunderstanding, He comes as person. He presents Himself, "Here is I am. I am person. Why do you make Me imperson?" He's person. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. Why you are taking so much trouble? Avyaktāsakta-cetasām. Kleśaḥ adhikataras teṣām. Simply you are taking unnecessary trouble. Kleśaḥ adhikataraḥ. And if you take to bhakti, directly personal... And you cannot understand God or Kṛṣṇa by any other means except bhakti. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know Absolute Truth, God, then you have to take to bhakti. And what does it mean bhakti? Bhakti means there must be Bhagavān. Otherwise, what is the meaning of bhakti? If I want... Bhakti means to render service. So if the master is not there, then where is the question of bhakti and service? It is all bogus. Bhakti means three things: bhakta, Bhagavān, and the service. That is bhakti. They're individual. Bhagavān is individual, bhakta is individual, and the reciprocation of dealings between two individuals, it is called bhakti. That is bhakti.

Bhakti, bhakti is described in so many places. Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī defines bhakti:

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



That is first-class bhakti. And bhakti means there is activity. Ānukūlyena: favorably. Kṛṣṇānuśīlanam: to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Anuśīlanam means culture. The culture means there is activity. Bhakti does not mean zero. That is another thing. Zero, nirvāṇa, means make these material activities zero. That hint is given by Śaṅkarācārya. Lord Buddha said that everything is zero, and Śaṅkarācārya gave further improvement that "It is not zero. Brahman is fact. Brahma satyam. Not zero. Jagan mithyā. This world is mithyā, zero. Not Brahman." Because those who understood this zero philosophy, they're rascals, atheists. They cannot understand more. Therefore further improvement was given by Śaṅkara because he was preaching. The whole world became Buddhist, and he wanted to establish Vedic principles. So they have already made zero. So how Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya can say, "No, it is not zero. It is fact." They'll not understand. He said in a different way, that "Zero is this material world." Brahma satyam. But brahma is fact. This is zero.



Now how the fact is working, that is given by the Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, especially Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. Dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90] is all cheating, all cheating. Up to mokṣa. The aspiration to become one with the Supreme, mokṣa, that is kaitava, cheating. That is the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. When you understand that the so-called monism, to become one with the Supreme, it is cheating... That is not fact. Because you cannot remain in the zero. That is not possible. We are part and parcel of God. God is ānandamaya, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). By nature, God is ānandamaya. So if you are part and parcel of God, how you can be nirānandamaya? You are also ānandamaya. That quality is there. But do you enjoy alone? You sit down in a room alone for three hours, you'll feel disturbed, immediately. And what to speak of eternally. It is impossible to remain alone. And for want of ānanda you'll again fall down in this material world. The impersonalists who think that "I have become one with the Supreme..." One with the Supreme means that is eternity, fact, sat. Sat cit ānanda. Simply by becoming sat, eternal, you don't get ānanda. That is not possible. Therefore,

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.37]



So you have to go to the ānandamaya. Yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. We have to approach in that way. Otherwise, if we remain in the material world, this will be the result-dahyamānāḥ prajāḥ sarvāḥ. One after another, one after another, dahyamānāḥ. You'll simply burn into ashes. So therefore the Vedas say, asato mā sad gama. Don't remain here. Go to Kṛṣṇa and enjoy with Him life.



Thank you very much. (end)



760927SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.32-33

-

Vṛndāvana, September 27, 1976



Pradyumna: "Thus seeing the disturbance of the general populace and the imminent destruction of the planets, Arjuna at once retracted both brahmāstra weapons, as Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa desired. Arjuna, his eyes blazing in anger like two red balls of copper, dexterously arrested the son of Gautamī and bound him with ropes, like an animal."



Prabhupāda:



prajopadravam ālakṣya

loka-vyatikaraṁ ca tam

mataṁ ca vāsudevasya

sañjahārārjuno dvayam

[SB 1.7.32]



tata āsādya tarasā

dāruṇaṁ gautamī-sutam

babandhāmarṣa-tāmrākṣaḥ

paśuṁ raśanayā yathā

[SB 1.7.33]



Prajopadravam ālakṣya. This is the duty of the king or the government-to see that the citizens are in peaceful condition. So two brahmāstra weapons released, one by Aśvatthāmā and by Arjuna, it created a havoc, catastrophe. And the people were suffering. So this is the duty of the government, to see that everyone is in peaceful condition. During Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time they were so happy that it is stated that there was not even scorching heat and pinching cold also. Neither people were in anxiety for their livelihood. This is government: to see that people are in good atmosphere in everything. That is the first duty of the government. Of course, we have seen at the present moment also, in some of the European government they have got very good arrangement. In England I have seen, although they have lost their empire, still, people get free education, free medical treatment. And England does not produce practically anything except potato. They, the government imports so many eatables so that people may not suffer for want of food. So that is the way of good government from the time immemorial.



So according to Vedic system, the government has to look after about the ultimate goal of life also. The modern government, they are anxious to give material comforts, but formerly the aim was to, how to educate people for spiritual advancement of life. Therefore the society was divided into four higher and lower divisions: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. You cannot make one class of men. That is not very good arrangement. There must be different departments according to capacity. You cannot engage a śūdra in a brāhmaṇa's position, neither you can engage a brāhmaṇa in the śūdra's position. But every one of them should be cooperating. Not that everyone has got the same capacity. Combinedly, they should make progress, and that progress is yajña. Yajña. Yajña means how to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu. Lord Viṣṇu's another name is Yajña-pati, Yajñeśvara. So in the Bhagavad-gītā it is clearly stated... (coughs strongly) Water. Hmm. Another rascal. While drinking water they have to take. Yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. People have to be trained up to work for Yajña. Yajñārtha. If you do not act for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, yajñārthe, yajñārthe karma, otherwise karma-bandhanaḥ: you become bound up or conditioned by your work.

So these things are there, and it is the duty of the government to see how things are going on. But it is simply now dream. People are also not interested what is the aim of life, what is the mission of this human form of life; neither there is guidance. There are so many upadravas. That is Kali-yuga. Kali-yuga means that people will be more and more unhappy. Prāyeṇa alpāyuṣaḥ kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ. The first thing is that the duration of life will decrease, alpa-āyuṣa. And manda, all bad men. Hardly we'll find any good men. Manda. Manda means bad and slow. Both the meanings can be manda. Manda-gati. They're not interested in progressive life. That is also manda. Manda matayaḥ. And they have got their own opinions. They do not follow the standard path, and it is confirmed by the so-called leaders, yata mata tata patha, you can manufacture your own way of life. These are the situation of upadrava. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. And this Kali-yuga, everyone is unfortunate, manda-bhāgyāḥ. Even in family... There is no family life. It is now increasing. They cannot live even peacefully in family. Family means husband, wife, children, father, mother. Generally, this is family. So in the family also there are enemies. This is prominent nowadays. The family is...

How in the family one become enemy? Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has analyzed how in the family we can become enemies of one another. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatruḥ: "A father in debts to others is enemy." Ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatruḥ. Because according to Manu-saṁhitā, the son inherits the property of the father. That is everywhere. So Manu-saṁhitā also makes responsible the son for the father's debt. Nowadays, if my father is debtor, I am not responsible. But according to the Vedic laws, the son is responsible the father's debt. Because he inherits the property, why he shall not inherit the debts of the father? According to Manu-saṁhitā law he is obliged to pay the debts of the father. We have seen one very practical example. Even fifty years ago, in Calcutta there was a very big barrister. He was a political leader. He was Mr. C.R. Das. So his father died insolvent. His father was also very respectable man, but later on he became so much debtor that he died insolvent. Declared... This Mr. C. R. Das, he did not get any property from the father, but by his practice as a barrister he became very rich man. In those days his monthly income was fifty thousand rupees. So he called all the creditors of his father and paid paisa to paisa, that "My father died in debtor. Now I have got money, you can take." So this is the duty of the son. But if one is poor man, he cannot pay. So he becomes a subject matter of criticism. Under the circumstances the father becomes the enemy. So therefore the Cāṇakya Paṇḍita's enunciation, ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatruḥ. And mātā śatrur vyabhicāriṇī. And if the mother, either she becomes prostitute or marries for the second time in the presence of elderly children, she is enemy. Ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatrur mātā śatrur vyabhicāriṇī. And Cāṇakya Paṇḍita had very bad experience with his wife. So he says, rūpavatī bhāryā śatruḥ: "If the wife is very beautiful, she is enemy." And putraḥ śatrur apaṇḍitaḥ: "And if the son is a rascal, no education, he is enemy." So these are the family enemies.

So everything is there in the Vedic literature, instruction how family should be maintained, how the aim of life should be fulfilled. Everything is, guidance is there. As I have repeatedly said, that veda-purāṇa, the aim of life being forgotten, kṛṣṇa bhuli' anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gela [Cc. Madhya 20.117]. Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa karila(?). So the Vedas, Purāṇas are there. The instructions are there. Just like here is instruction: mataṁ ca vāsudevasya. Matam. The opinion should be taken from Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. That opinion is already there in the Bhagavad-gītā, Vāsudeva personally giving instruction, but we neither take moral instruction, neither Vāsudeva's instruction, neither we have got any intelligence. This is Kali-yuga. Mūḍha. Generally, we are mūḍha, especially in the Kali-yuga. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. Here it is said, prajopadravam. So many upadravas. Actually, we are very much harassed on account of the time, place, circumstances, so on, so on. It is a very hopeless condition. Therefore śāstra has recommended that "You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." It is very hopeless condition. Harer nāma. Harer nāma harer nāma eva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. Three. Three times. When you speak three times anything, it means I am giving stress, "You do this, you do this, you do this." So it is like that, that in order to stop so many inconveniences of the present day life, Kali-yuga... Kali means quarrel, simply creating quarrel, misunderstanding. This is Kali. So śāstra has given us... Kali-yuga is very dangerous to... One cannot make his life's mission fulfilled. One is not very happy. There are so many obstacles in the peaceful way of life. Even in the family, in the society, politically, nationally, internationally-so many difficulties. Everyone has got the experience. Therefore the recommendation of the śāstra, harer nāma harer nāma harer nāma eva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. Kevalam. You cannot rectify all these difficulties, because this is the age for all these difficulties. You must know it. They are trying to mitigate all these difficulties in different ways, but śāstra says that it is not possible. Only, it is possible only by chanting the harer nāma, the holy name of the Lord. The holy name of the Lord is Kṛṣṇa, Rāma. Other names are there, but they are subordinate. Not subordinate. There is no question of "superior" or "inferior" in the holy name of the Lord. But we have to pick up the order of the śāstras. Tasmād śāstra-vidhānokta As the śāstra gives regulative, we have to accept that. And if we do not accept that, yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ [Bg. 16.23], if we do whimsically, then na siddhiṁ sāvāpnoti, you cannot get any perfection of life, na sukham, neither you'll be happy.

So it is the injunction of the śāstra, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu also inaugurated this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement for the benefit of the whole world. And it is being accepted practically. So this is the only way to save us from all kinds of difficulties, upadrava. Upadrutāḥ. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. There will be upadruta, so many times. So we should accept, mataṁ ca vāsudevasya. We should accept the instruction given by Vāsudeva and the śāstra, sādhu. Sādhu, śāstra, guru, they'll speak the same thing. Guru means who speaks on the basis of śāstra; otherwise he's not guru. And śāstra means the opinion of the great authorities. Just like Vyāsadeva, Parāśara Muni, Nārada Muni, modern ācāryas. We do not neglect. We may differ from the philosophical point of view-just like Buddha, Śaṅkarācārya. Vaiṣṇavas, they do not accept the philosophy of Buddha or Śaṅkarācārya. Buddha's philosophy: zero, śūnyavādi; and Śaṅkara's philosophy: nirviśeṣa-vādi, impersonal. So we defy these, nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi. But we have got all respect for them. Don't think that we disrespect. Keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. And the Vaiṣṇavas know Śaṅkarācārya. Śaṅkara, svayaṁ śaṅkara, he is incarnation of Lord Śiva, and Lord Buddha is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. So they come for particular purpose, to benefit the whole world. But that is for the time being. That is not permanent. The permanent solution is mataṁ ca vāsudevasya. That is permanent. Mataṁ ca vāsudevasya. That is permanent.

So vāsudevasya matam? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is vāsudevasya. "You simply surrender unto Me." That is real mata. Everyone is surrendered. Even Śaṅkarācārya says bhagavad-gītā kiñcid adhita(?). If you read little, a portion of Bhagavad-gītā, your life will be successful. That is the recommendation given by... Sva bhagavān svayaṁ kṛṣṇa vāsudeva devakī-vasudevasya nandana(?). He has admitted. Nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ avyaktāt. Actually nirviśeṣa-vāda is for this material world because it is mithyā. They say, the Shankarites, they say mithyā. We Vaiṣṇavas, we don't say mithyā, because mithyā it cannot be. If the Absolute Truth is true, how mithyā can come from the paraṁ satyam? Brahma satyam. If Brahman is truth, how... Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], everything is born from Brahman. How something can be untruth? No. That is not. Truth is there, but when we misunderstand the truth or misuse the truth, then we are in trouble. That is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. We have to find out what is the truth in everything. And that can be understood when you are advanced. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Here is truth. Nothing can be mithyā; everything is truth. We have to find out the truth.

So what is that truth? The truth is that īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1], everything is God's creation. And Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, God says, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. He is the proprietor, but we do not understand that, that truth, that He is the proprietor. We are creating our proprietorship. That is untruth. That is untruth. That is mithyā. Jagan mithyā. Jagat is not mithyā, but our behavior with the jagat, or the world, is mithyā. Jagat is not mithyā. How it can be mithyā? Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. It is coming, emanating from the Absolute Truth. It is truth. Therefore we have to find out the truth, what is that truth. That is described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:

prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate



If we give up everything as mithyā, prāpañcikatayā, material... Hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ. Because everything is in connection with Hari, His energy. So do not reject things as jagan mithyā. Do not reject. Prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ. Do not reject, but utilize it properly. That is wanted.



So if we actually follow mataṁ ca vāsudevasya, and if we want to stop the upadrava, the disturbances of this material world, as Arjuna is following under the instruction of Kṛṣṇa... He's doing everything under the instruction of Kṛṣṇa. But he's doing political, he's counteracting with this brahmāstra another brahmāstra. As a military man, he's doing his duty, but he's doing everything under the instruction of Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. That is truth. Don't do anything thinking yourself as independent. You cannot be independent. If you don't accept mataṁ ca vāsudevasya, then by the ear you'll be pulled by the māyā to do something. You'll be obliged to do something. You are not independent. As soon as we forget this principle, we become fool enough to consider as independent: "I am as good as... I am God." That is rascaldom. That is rascaldom. So 'ham. So 'ham, that does not mean that "I am as good as. I am God." No. I cannot be God because I am under the obligation of the laws of nature.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



You cannot be independent. You are not independent. If you falsely think that you are as good as God or you are independent, that is ahaṅkāra-vimūḍha. Ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā.



So following the mahājanas, the principles, as Arjuna is doing, we must follow the instructions of Kṛṣṇa. That is fully explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. And surrender unto Him. And then our life will be successful. There will be no disturbances. Otherwise, if we declare independence, that is troublesome. It will create simply trouble. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. That is māyā. To think oneself independent is māyā. We are not independent. We are completely under the control. So, so long we declare independence we suffer. And if we remain fully dependent on the will of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, then we are happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



760928SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.34-35

-

Vṛndāvana, September 28, 1976



Pradyumna: "After binding Aśvatthāmā, Arjuna wanted to take him to the military camp. The Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa, looking on with His lotus eyes, spoke to angry Arjuna. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa said: O Arjuna, you should not show mercy by releasing this relative of a brāhmaṇa (brahma-bandhu), for he has killed innocent boys in their sleep."



Prabhupāda:



śibirāya ninīṣantaṁ

rajjvā baddhvā ripuṁ balāt

prāhārjunaṁ prakupito

bhagavān ambujekṣaṇaḥ

[SB 1.7.34]



mainaṁ pārthārhasi trātuṁ

brahma-bandhum imaṁ jahi

yo 'sāv anāgasaḥ suptān

avadhīn niśi bālakān

[SB 1.7.35]



So bhagavān ambujekṣaṇaḥ. Ambuja means lotus flower. Bhagavān is described in many places as ambujekṣa-lotus-eyed, lotus feet, lotus navel, in so many ways, lotus palms. So ambujekṣaṇa, very beautiful eyes like the petals of a padma, lotus flower. But at the same time, prakupita, He's angry. He's angry. Still, ambujekṣaṇa. Not that as the Māyāvādīs think, that "God is kind. Why He should be angry?" But here it is said, prakupita. Pra means "specifically." Prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa kupitaḥ, "very angry." Prakupita. And He was, rather, glad that this Aśvatthāmā, who happens to be the son of a brāhmaṇa... Still, He was angry. He asked him not to excuse this rascal. Not to excuse. It is next verse, it is said, mainaṁ pārthārhasi trātuṁ brahma-bandhum imaṁ jahi. He's brahma-bandhu. He's not a brāhmaṇa. He's brahma-bandhu. Everyone can say, "I am the son of a brāhmaṇa." That is brahma-bandhu. Or a friend of a brāhmaṇa. That does not mean he is a brāhmaṇa. This is the idea. Brāhmaṇa is not the body. Brāhmaṇa is the quality. If the brāhmaṇa is body, then when a brāhmaṇa is dead the sons take the dead body to the crematorium place and burn the body. Then if the body is brāhmaṇa, then the sons are committing sins by brahma-hatyā. No. That is not brahma-hatyā. Brāhmaṇa is the quality. That quality is gone. With the departure of the soul, that quality is gone. Now this body is simply a lump of matter, so there is no shame when the body is burnt into ashes.



The idea is that, as described in the śāstra, who is a brāhmaṇa, who is a śūdra, who is a kṣatriya, who is a vaiśya... It is all described in the Bhagavad-gītā. So satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. Karma, guṇa and karma. Here Aśvatthāmā, although he's born of a brāhmaṇa father, he did not possess the quality of a brāhmaṇa, neither the work of a brāhmaṇa. He degraded himself. First of all, he was engaged as a soldier to assist, to flatter Duryodhana. He wanted to please Duryodhana by killing the Pāṇḍavas. But he was such a fool, instead of killing the Pāṇḍavas, he killed the five sleeping sons of the Pāṇḍavas. How much abominable he is, just imagine. Here it is said, suptān avadhīn niśi bālakān. First of all, they were minor aged, and they were sleeping, and they were killed at night. Just see. What kind of brāhmaṇa he is! A brāhmaṇa's business is not to kill. Even brāhmaṇa can kill, he doesn't require even sword or any other weapon. Simply by cursing he can kill-brāhmaṇa was so powerful. But still, it is not the business of a brāhmaṇa. When killing is required, it is done by the kṣatriyas, not by the brāhmaṇas. Just like Viśvāmitra Muni, he was disturbed by the Tāḍakā rākṣasī. He was quite powerful. Even by cursing he could kill this Tāḍakā rākṣasī in the forest, but he did not do so. For killing the rākṣasī he approached Mahārāja Daśaratha. Because he is kṣatriya, he is the king. His business is to give protection to the disturbed citizens. Just like we apply to the magistrate, similarly the king is responsible. So he did not kill. Viśvāmitra formerly was kṣatriya, but since he became brāhmaṇa... By his endeavor in lifetime, he became a brāhmaṇa, a great sage, ṛṣi. So since he became brāhmaṇa, he was not interested in killing anyone. That is not brāhmaṇa's business. Brāhmaṇa's business is śamo damas titikṣā. Even if he is disturbed by somebody, titikṣā, he tolerates. Kāma-rūpa-tapasvin. He does not become... And when it is intolerable, he approaches the kṣatriya.

So in considering all angles of vision, this Aśvatthāmā was not a brāhmaṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa personally advised him, mā enaṁ pārtha arhasi trātum: "Don't excuse him. Kill him, this brahma-bandhu. He has done wrong, now he deserves to be killed." It is clearly said. So does it mean that Kṛṣṇa is advising brahma-hatyā? No. Kṛṣṇa cannot do that. He is the teacher, world teacher. How He can advise somebody, especially His friend Arjuna? Bhakto 'si priyo 'si me [Bg. 4.3]. Can you advise anything adversely to your friend? To your son? No. I must give very good advice. So Kṛṣṇa is advising Arjuna, "Don't excuse this rascal brahma-bandhu. Don't excuse." This is Kṛṣṇa's advice. But it does not mean that we can do anything and everything under the pretext of Kṛṣṇa's advice. You must be first of all a confidential friend or servant of Kṛṣṇa. You must receive direct order from Kṛṣṇa. Then you can do it. Otherwise not. Otherwise not. Under the pretext that "Kṛṣṇa said," "My spiritual master has said," "Prabhupāda has said," we manufacture something. Don't do that. Unless you are directly ordered, you cannot do at least such things as to chastise a brahma-bandhu. This should not be done. Here is direct order.

So bhagavān ambujekṣaṇaḥ. Although He's angry, although He's the Supreme Lord, Bhagavān... He's not so-called nonviolent. How nonviolent? Nonviolent or violent. Violence is also one of the qualifications of God. Especially in political matters, when the kṣatriyas are dealing, there is always violence. Without violence, kṣatriya has no meaning. Kṣat, kṣat means injury. Trāyate. Kṣatriya's duty is to save the citizen from being injured by others. That is kṣatriya. Even an animal. Animal..., just like this Kali was trying to kill cow. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was on his tour. He saw that a black man was trying to kill a cow. So immediately he took his sword, "Who are you, rascal? You are trying to kill a cow in my kingdom?" That is kṣatriya's duty. Kṣatriya's duty is to give protection from injury for the safety of the citizen. The citizen must feel safety, that "We have got such a nice king. There is no fear of anything." It is said in the Bhāgavatam there was no anxiety. The citizens should feel so much safe, that "We have such a nice king that we have no danger at all. Not being injured, not our property being stolen or injustice given." That is the real government-when the citizens will feel completely safe. That requires kṣatriya. Not these cāmāra, bhangis, and śūdras voted and become the president and minister. That will not be successful. That is not possible. There must be trained-up kṣatriyas, then there will be good government. Trained.

They should be trained means they should be advised by the brāhmaṇas. Therefore four divisions required. The brāhmaṇas have no interest or they have no time. Even a brāhmaṇa is made king... It is not his business. He may do it for some time, temporarily. Just like Viśvāmitra also did. But it is not his business. The brāhmaṇa should give advice to the ministers or the legislators. They should be all qualified brāhmaṇas, not paid man. Paid man has nothing to do... Even during the time of Mahārāja Candragupta, emperor, he had a brāhmaṇa minister, prime minister, Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. He was not taking a single farthing as salary. When once explanation was called for from Cāṇakya Paṇḍita by Candragupta, immediately he resigned. "You cannot call any explanation. Then I resign." And he was living in a cottage, not that palatial building. He was living in a cottage. That was the system. Brāhmaṇa lived very humbly. He was not poor. Not that they are poor men. They were so rich that when Viśvāmitra approached Mahārāja Daśaratha, immediately he vacated his seat and welcomed, "Sir, sit down here." So respectful. This is Vedic culture. The brāhmaṇas would not accept any comfort, but the kṣatriyas would be very, very glad to give all comforts to the brāhmaṇas. In our śāstra, brāhmaṇa-bhojana, it is recommended that brāhmaṇas should be invited to take prasāda. Now they have manufactured daridra-bhojana or daridra-nārāyaṇa-bhojana. They have made daridra-nārāyaṇa. But that is not Vedic culture. Vedic culture is to find out qualified brāhmaṇa, sages, sannyāsīs. They would refuse, but still they'll fall down, "Please come, take some prasāda." This is Vedic culture. Brāhmaṇa's position is very, very exalted. Now, since after the battle of Kurukṣetra, they have become brahma-bandhus. The example is here, brahma-bandhu.

So we should not become brahma-bandhu. We should become actually brāhmaṇa. And brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ. One who knows Brahman, he is brāhmaṇa. And one who knows Parabrahman, he is Vaiṣṇava. Brahman and Parabrahman. So Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahman. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam [Bg. 10.12]. So to realize Brahman realization... That is also spiritual. That is not material. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. That is spiritual. But that is the first appreciation of the Absolute Truth. That is not complete appreciation or complete knowledge. Complete knowledge is when one understands the paraṁ brahma. That is complete understanding. Not simply Brahman: Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. The Absolute Truth, vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. Tattvam means Absolute Truth. What is that Absolute? Advaya-jñānam. One. Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. They are not different. Advayam, the same Absolute. But it is due to my position, angle of vision, He's realized in three different features-Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. That one tattva-vastu, Absolute Truth. So to understand even Brahman, one requires to become brāhmaṇa. Brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ. Brahman, understands Brahman, that is the first step. Then you have to make further progress. The example we have given many times, that we are in the sunshine. Now there is sunshine, that is also Brahman, or heat and light. But the heat and light here, ninety-three millions miles away from the sun, and the heat and light in the sun-a difference. That temperature is different. So when you go to the sun-god, that position, and to enjoy heat and light from ninety-three millions miles away, that is also difference. Although heat and light is there in the sun globe and heat and light in the sunshine, but still, sunshine is not the sun globe. Sun globe is not the sun-god. Similarly... This is a crude example. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy is acintya-bhedābheda-tattva: everything is God, and everything is not God. Bheda-abheda. Bheda means not, different, and abheda means one. Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. Acintya... For us, how we can adjust, at the same time one and different? Therefore it is acintya. Not cintya, cintanīya. In our present sense it is difficult to adjust things how we are one and different with the Supreme Absolute Truth. Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva.

So in this way we have to understand. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Through paramparā system. Just as Arjuna is in the paramparā system, Arjuna was being taught directly by Kṛṣṇa, so you should learn from Arjuna. That is paramparā system. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Then you will understand. If you take the words of Arjuna, how he appreciated Bhagavad-gītā and how he appreciated Kṛṣṇa, then your knowledge is perfect. If you manufacture meaning and manufacture idea by your concocted, poor fund of knowledge. Acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet. Which is beyond your sense perception... Adhokṣaja. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is called adhokṣaja. Adhah-kṛtaṁ akṣajaṁ indriya-jñānaṁ yena. Adhah-kṛta, subdued. You cannot approach Kṛṣṇa by material sense perception. It is not possible. Therefore His name is adhokṣaja. Still you have to offer your service to the Supreme. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. Adhokṣaje. This is the idea, that unless we approach the adhokṣaja, Kṛṣṇa... And Kṛṣṇa... Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. Those who are trying to study Kṛṣṇa by these blunt senses, they'll never understand Kṛṣṇa. They'll never understand.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa is regretting, that "This rascal, they consider Me as human being." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. They have been described as rascals. One who estimates Kṛṣṇa from material point of view, material vision, he is mūḍha. Therefore he cannot surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Lowest of the mankind, narādhama. Why lowest? Sinful? Duṣkṛtina? These things are there. If we want to understand Kṛṣṇa, then we should take the prescription of Kṛṣṇa. What Kṛṣṇa said? Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] "One can understand Me by the process of bhakti." Never said, Kṛṣṇa, that "Yogi can understand Me," or "The jñānīs can understand Me" or "The karmīs can understand." Never. Nāhaṁ tiṣṭhāmi yogināṁ hṛdayeṣu. Although yogis are trying to see Kṛṣṇa always within the heart... Yaṁ brahmā varuṇendra-rudra-marutaḥ stunvanti dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ... [SB 12.13.1]. Those who are perfect yogis, they see always Kṛṣṇa within the core of the heart. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. That is perfect yogi. That is... Kṛṣṇa admits,

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



That is first-class yogi, one who is thinking of Kṛṣṇa always within the core of the heart. So yogis, jñānīs, karmīs, bhaktas... So when you become bhakta, then you are perfect karmī, you are perfect yogi, you are perfect jñānī. Unless you are perfect jñānī, how you can surrender to Kṛṣṇa? Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births cultivating knowledge, when he's actually wise-jñānavān. Then what is the symptom? Māṁ prapadyate: he surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. Why? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. He understands that Kṛṣṇa is everything. That is real knowledge. Otherwise, it is not knowledge, it is speculation.



So speculation will not help us. We must have perfect knowledge, and that knowledge is given by Kṛṣṇa. You take it and follow mahājana like Arjuna and other devotees, then you understand Kṛṣṇa. And as soon as you understand Kṛṣṇa, you are immediately liberated. Immediately.

janma karma ca me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti...

[Bg. 4.9]



That is liberation. So simple thing, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī [Bg. 18.65]. Simply think of Kṛṣṇa, chant Kṛṣṇa's name, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and be honest, and liberation is guaranteed.



Thank you very much. (end)



760929SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.36-37

-

Vṛndāvana, September 29, 1976



Pradyumna: "A person who knows the principles of religion does not kill an enemy who is careless, intoxicated, insane, asleep, afraid, or devoid of his chariot. Nor does he kill a boy, a woman, a foolish creature or a surrendered soul. A cruel and wretched person who maintains his existence at the cost of others' lives deserve to be killed for his own well-being; otherwise he will go down by his own actions."



Prabhupāda:



mattaṁ pramattam unmattaṁ

suptaṁ bālaṁ striyaṁ jaḍam

prapannaṁ virathaṁ bhītaṁ

na ripuṁ hanti dharma-vit

[SB 1.7.36]



sva-prāṇān yaḥ para-prāṇaiḥ

prapuṣṇāty aghṛṇaḥ khalaḥ

tad-vadhas tasya hi śreyo

yad-doṣād yāty adhaḥ pumān

[SB 1.7.37]



So kṣatriya's fight, it is not ordinary fight like cats and dogs. The cats and dogs also fight and the kṣatriyas in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra, under the guidance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are not the same. Sometimes in the foreign countries, they do not know. They simply know fight means cats' and dogs' fight. No. Therefore they question that why Kṛṣṇa induced Arjuna to fight? Certainly they do not know there is fight on the principle of religion. That is real fight. Otherwise fight whimsically, that is animals' fight, cats' and dogs' fight.



So when there is fight on religious principle, there are different rules and regulations. One has to observe these rules and regulations. Just like striking the enemy, it should not come down the waist. You can strike the enemy from head to the waist, not below that. That is illegal. Similarly, when the enemy is like this, mattaṁ pramattam unmattam, one after another... Matta means careless, inattentive. So if by chance, by inattentiveness, one does something wrong, he should not be considered as enemy. He's careless. He should be chastised, but not... Even if he's enemy, he's not subjected to being killed. No. Similarly, pramatta. Pramatta means constitutionally he's not mad, but by some external influence one has become madlike. He's called pramatta.

Just like in this material world almost everyone, 99.9 percent, they are all pramattas. For example, pramattaḥ tasya nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. In the Bhāgavata it is said that we are depending, we are thinking, "I am sure." Why? "Now I have got very good wife. I am sure to live very peacefully or happily," or "I shall not die because I have got very good wife, faithful wife." Similarly, "I have got very good husband or very good friend," or "I am born in a very big nation." So on, so on. Security. Because security is a problem. Everyone in this material world, they have got four problems: how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex, and how to become secure. Security. The animal is also working very hard for these four principles, and the man is also working very hard. That is common. But that is not security. "Because I have got very good means of living, very good means of sleeping, nice house, and very good wife and very good bank balance and good government, therefore I am secure." That is nonsense. Pramatta. That is called pramatta. Means he does not know that at any moment Yamarāja can come and kick him out from this position. At any moment. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham. Yamarāja is the representative of Kṛṣṇa, a servant of Kṛṣṇa. He is Vaiṣṇava. Yamarāja, we are very much afraid of Yamarāja, but he Vaiṣṇava. Not only Vaiṣṇava, but he's one of the mahājanas. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. He's mahājana in this sense: All the sinful living entities are brought before him, and according to the gravity of criminality, sinful action, he punishes. Just like magistrate. Magistrate, before the magistrate all criminals are brought in, and he considers the gravity of the case, and according to the case, somebody is hanged, somebody is put into the jail for three years, somebody for six years, somebody for six months. That is Yamarāja's duty. So that is... He's also dharma-vit. His name is Dharmarāja. Not that because he is punishing... Simply his only business is to punish. But still he's Dharmarāja, dharma-vit. He knows how to punish a person on religious principles.

So we are, in this material world, we are pramatta. We are thinking "These material conditions will save me." That is pramatta, half-mad, crazy. Pramatta. We are thinking, dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4]. I am thinking "I am very strong body..." [break] ...cannot achieve self-realization. Now some of our big sannyāsīs, he took it that unless you become very strong and stout by eating meat and exercise, gymnastics, you cannot understand spiritual life. This is their interpretation. But that is not the fact. Bala, bala means Balarāma. Do you think that because you are very strong and stout, a big wrestler with muscles, you'll live? No. For Yamarāja there is no consideration that "Here is a weak person, lean and thin, and here is a very strong person; therefore the strong person should be left over and the lean and thin will be taken to Yamarāja." No. When the time will come, the lean and thin may be spared, but the strong man may be immediately taken. So this rascaldom, that by exercise... People are very much attached to the body. We have seen everywhere, especially in European, they are very much attached to make the body stout and strong. And in the morning you'll find... Here also you'll find. They're running to make the body... As if the strong body will save him from death. This is rascaldom. Therefore pramatta. Crazy. We do not say that you remain very weak and lean and thin. No. You should maintain this body properly, but not that that is my only business, how to maintain this body. That is pramatta. These are some of the examples of pramatta. He does not know. Pramatta. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4]. Deha, body. One is feeling secure, "I have got very strong body. I shall live forever." Rascal. Pramatta. That is not possible. Deha and apatya. Apatya means sons. "Oh, I have got so many nice sons, very earning, very obedient; therefore Yamarāja will not touch me." No, no. That is not possible. There is a very joking story in Bengal, gaye gum akale jam care na(?). Gu means stool. So one intelligent person, he thought, "I shall be free from the touch of Yamarāja by one tactics." What is that? "Stool is very obnoxious. Nobody comes to stool. So let me smear my body, whole body with stool so that Yamarāja will not come and touch me." Gaya muk gum akale jam care na(?). This is another pramatta. That crazy fellow, that he is thinking "By keeping myself dirty and obnoxious, Yamarāja is gentleman, he'll not come and touch me." This is another pramatta.

So deha apatya kalatra. Kalatra means wife. "Oh, I have got such a nice wife, and she'll pray to Yamarāja, 'Please excuse my husband.' " Just like Nala-Damayantī. Not... What is that? Sāvitrī-Satyavān. The Sāvitrī saved her husband from the hands of Yamarāja. That's a long story. It will take much time. So therefore "I have got such a nice chaste wife, she will save me from the Yamarāja hands." Then I can speak shortly that Sāvitrī-Satyavān... Satyavān was to die on the marriage day. But Sāvitrī was attached to Satyavān, so her father, mother said that "You don't marry this boy. He'll die on the very day of his marriage." So love is blind. She said, "Still I shall marry him." So she married, and the husband died. So Yamarāja came. So she pleased the Yamarāja, and Yamarāja, being pleased, said, "My dear girl, you'll have a very good son"-because every girl expects some son. So Yamarāja gave her the benediction that "You will have very nice son." Then the husband was dead... No, she prayed for a good son, yes. And Yamarāja gave her benediction, "Yes, you'll have good son." First of all she pleased Yamarāja by prayers, and then Yamarāja asked, "What do you want?" "A very good son." "All right, you'll have a good son." So then the Yamarāja was taking her husband, and she was going behind. Then Yamarāja said, "Your husband cannot be returned. He is dead. And it is my duty, I am taking. Why you are coming, following me?" "Now, you said that I will have a son. So if you are taking my husband, how he will have son?" So Yamarāja came to his senses that "I have done a mistake." Then "All right, take your husband."

So these are rare instances. But don't think that because you are very clever and..., you'll be untouched by Yamarāja. No, no, no. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu asatsu [SB 2.1.4]. Asat. Nobody will stay. Asat. This material world is like that. Asat means temporary, everything. This body is temporary. Your body is temporary, this life is temporary. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13], Kṛṣṇa says you'll have to change this body. It may be for fifty years, sixty years, utmost hundred years. But still, you have to change this body. Therefore asat. Asato mā sad gama. This is Vedic instruction. Don't be attached to this asat, temporary things. That is called vairāgya. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. If one wants to learn how to become vairāgī, no attachment for this material world, then he must take to devotional service. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam. That is, bhakti-yoga means vairāgya, no attachment for this material world. One who is actually attached to Kṛṣṇa, he must be no attachment for this material world. That is the sign. Automatically. The jñānīs, the yogis, or the karmīs, they do not want this no attachment. They want more and more attachment. The jñānīs, they want brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā-detachment. But bhakta, without any endeavor, because he develops attachment for Kṛṣṇa, he automatically gives up attachment for this material world. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. This is the symptom how one has become attached with this material world. If I am trying under the, I mean to say, cover of becoming bhakta and trying to gather some material profit, that is not bhakti. That is very dangerous. So in this way there are so many things in the material world we take it for acceptance that these things will save me. He's a pramatta. Pramatta means crazy, half-mad. And full mad is unmatta, full mad. He becomes naked. That is one of the symptoms of unmatta-he'll remain naked. So these men, mattaṁ pramattam unmattam... Just see how the rules and regulations are there. So this pramatta:

dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



Pramatta, that word is used. Pramattaḥ tasya nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. He is seeing every day that "This gentleman had a very good wife, this gentleman had very nice son, very good family-but they are dying." So who will protect him? He's thinking that "My children, my wife, my friends will save me," but they have died. So how he will be protected?



So nobody can protect anyone. That is not possible. Everyone has to take care of himself. This world is like that. Don't depend. Only Kṛṣṇa can protect you-nobody else. If you know this, then you are not pramatta. And if you do not know this, if you are a rascal, then you are pramatta. Only Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa therefore said, He gives assurance, that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām: [Bg. 5.29] "I am the friend of everyone. I can give you protection." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. So you have to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, otherwise you are a pramatta, rascal, mūḍha. Kṛṣṇa is giving advice that "Do this." But we are rascals, pramatta. We think that "My son will give me protection, my wife will give protection, my friend will give me protection, my government will give protection." All these are nonsense, pramatta. This is the meaning of pramatta. Just try to understand. Pramattaḥ tasya nidhanaṁ paśyann api.

Another pramatta is that those who are mad after sense gratification. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. There is another verse, nūnaṁ pramattaḥ. Those who are pramatta, those who have no responsibility of life, sometimes unnecessarily stealing and doing some, so many wrong things... Vikarma. Why? Now pramatta, he is also crazy. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. And why he is taking risk of being punished? Suppose one man is stealing. He'll be punished. Either by the law of the state or by the laws of nature or God, he'll be punished. He can escape the laws of the state, but he cannot escape the laws of nature or God. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi [Bg. 3.27]. It is not possible. Just like the laws of nature. If you infect some disease, so you'll have to be punished. You'll suffer from that disease. That is punishment. You cannot escape. Similarly, anything you do, kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. If you live like a cat and dog, that is infection, guṇa, the modes of ignorance. Then your next life you become a dog. You must be punished. This is law of nature.

So therefore one who does not know all these laws, he commits so many sinful activities. Vikarma. Karma, vikarma, akarma. Karma means what is prescribed. Guṇa-karma. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Karma means, as it is in the śāstra, as you have developed a certain type of modes of nature, your karma is according to that: brāhmaṇa-karma, kṣatriya-karma, vaiśya-karma. So if you follow... That is the duty of the spiritual master and śāstra, to designate when he's brahmacārī, that "You work like this." "You work like a brāhmaṇa," "You work like a kṣatriya," "You work like a vaiśya," and others, "Śūdra." So this division is made by the spiritual master. How? Yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam. The spiritual master will say that "You work like this." So that should be determined. That is karma, guṇa-karma. Spiritual master sees that he has these qualities. That is natural. Just like in the school, college, somebody is being trained up as a scientist, somebody is trained up as an engineer, as a medical man, as a lawyer. According to the tendency, practical psychology of the student, he is advised that "You take this line." Similarly, these four divisions of the society, it is very scientific. So by the instruction of the guru, when he's in the gurukula, he will be specified a particular type of duty, and if he does it faithfully... Sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya [Bg. 18.46]. The real purpose is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And according to his guṇa and karma he's engaged in a particular occupational duty.

Nothing is bad provided it is meant for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. The varṇāśrama-vibhāga must be there. But what is the aim of varṇāśrama? Simply by becoming a brāhmaṇa he's successful? No. Nobody can become successful unless he satisfies Kṛṣṇa. That is real success. Just like Arjuna did. By the military art, he satisfied Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, by your vaiśya-vṛtti, kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyam [Bg. 18.44], you can satisfy Kṛṣṇa. By your brāhmaṇa-vṛtti you can satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Even by your śūdra-vṛtti you can satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That possibility is here, that Kṛṣṇa says sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya. The aim should be how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Doesn't matter whether you are a brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya. Kṛṣṇa confirms it, api cet su-durācāraḥ... No. Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. Pāpa-yoni means below the vaiśyas, the śūdras, they are pāpa-yonis. Vaiśyas also. Striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. So there is no impediment to approach Kṛṣṇa because you are a śūdra, or caṇḍāla or woman or vaiśya. No. Everyone can... That facility is there. Therefore our duty should be, "Never mind in whichever position I am posted. Let me satisfy Kṛṣṇa." It is not that... Suppose we are worshiping Deity. That is the duty of brāhmaṇa; but somebody is called that "You cleanse this floor." So he should not think that "I am cleansing the floor; therefore I am lower than the person directly worshiping the Deity." No. Kṛṣṇa's pleasure wanted. If Kṛṣṇa sees that by washing the floor you are doing very nicely, Kṛṣṇa is pleased: "Oh, you are nice." Similarly, one man is decorating Kṛṣṇa with garland and... If Kṛṣṇa is pleased, that is the main point. Not that because you are on the Deity room you are very elevated, and the other man who is cleansing the door, he is not elevated. No. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. They are all equal. In whichever position you are, simply your endeavor should be how to please Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. Sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya [Bg. 18.46].

Also it is said, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Because generally we take divisions, varṇa and āśrama. So Sūta Gosvāmī says in the meeting of Naimiṣāraṇya, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. They are all big, big, very learned scholars and brāhmaṇas, so they were addressing, dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Dvija means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya. One who has got the right to take the sacred thread, they are called dvijas. But out of the three, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, the brāhmaṇa is called dvija-śreṣṭha. Therefore he addressed,

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



Saṁsiddhi. Never mind what you are. Either you may be sannyāsī or may be gṛhastha or may be brahmacārī or a brāhmaṇa, a kṣatriya, or vaiśya, śūdra. Never mind. Try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Try to please Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful. Otherwise, you are pramatta, mad. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. So long you shall remain a pramatta, you shall act just opposite function, and you'll be entangled. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, yajñārthe karmaṇaḥ anyatra karma-bandhanaḥ. If you do not work for pleasing Kṛṣṇa, then that work will entangle you in the cycle of birth and death.



Thank you very much. (end)



760930SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.38-39

-

Vṛndāvana, September 30, 1976



Pradyumna: "Furthermore, I have personally heard you promise Draupadī that you would bring forth the head of the killer of her sons. This man is an assassin and murderer of your own family members. Not only that, but he has also dissatisfied his master. He is but the burnt remnants of his family. Kill him immediately."



Prabhupāda:



pratiśrutaṁ ca bhavatā

pāñcālyai śṛṇvato mama

āhariṣye śiras tasya

yas te mānini putra-hā

[SB 1.7.38]



tad asau vadhyatāṁ pāpa

ātatāyy ātma-bandhu-hā

bhartuś ca vipriyaṁ vīra

kṛtavān kula-pāṁsanaḥ

[SB 1.7.39]



So Kṛṣṇa is encouraging Arjuna to kill Aśvatthāmā on so many grounds. First of all, he has killed the boys who were sleeping at night. And another very important point is that ātatāyī. Ātatāyī means the enemy aggressor. Unnecessarily one who attacks, he is called ātatāyī. One who sets fire in your house, one who kidnaps your wife or somebody in the family, and one who gives poison, and they are so many, a list of ascertaining an ātatāyī. So He described, Kṛṣṇa described the Aśvatthāmā as ātatāyī. He's not a brave soldier, so he should be killed. So many faults Kṛṣṇa found in his behavior. And bhartuś ca vipriyaṁ vīra. He could not satisfy his master also. Sometimes the servants do something abominable for pleasing the master. But he could not please even the master. He wanted to please Duryodhana, his master, promising him that he would kill all the five brothers, the Pāṇḍavas. But instead of killing the Pāṇḍavas, he killed their sons. Duryodhana did not like that, because he knew that the whole Kuru family practically was killed. Only the five brothers. And Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in the womb of his mother. They survived. So Duryodhana did not like. Duryodhana, whatever he may be, he was a kṣatriya and he fought bravely. So he did not like the Kuru dynasty should be finished. He did not like it. But when he understood that the five sons of Pāṇḍavas were also killed, he became very much disappointed because the Kuru dynasty is finished. So he could not satisfy his master. Bhartuś ca vipriyam. So whatever he had done, all abominable. Not to the rules and regulations-neither as a brāhmaṇa or as a kṣatriya. Nor even a brave soldier. "He has done things like a śūdra, or less than a śūdra, without any religious principle. So he should be killed. There is no excuse. And it is for his good."



In the śāstra it is said that one who is a criminal, he should be killed. Therefore in every country, up to date, a murderer is killed, is hanged. That is good for him. If a murderer is killed in this life, punished by the state, government, then his sinful activities and the resultant action is also finished. He's giving his own life. Otherwise, if he escapes, in next life he'll suffer so many troubles. That is, I think they have described in the previous verse. Tad-vadhas tasya hi śreyaḥ. In the verse number 37 it is explained by Kṛṣṇa that to kill this person, it is for his good. Because he has done so many criminal activities, so by killing him he'll be saved from serious types of sufferings in the next life. Śreya. Tad-vadhas tasya hi śreyo yad-doṣād yāty adhaḥ pumān. Prāyaścitta, it is called prāyaścitta. Prāyaścitta, in the śāstras prāyaścitta is described. In every religion there is prāyaścitta, atonement. In Christian religion the prāyaścitta is also advised. The sinner has to admit that he has committed sin, then he is excused by Christ or God. But not that "Purposefully I'll go on committing sins, and then I shall admit, and I'll go on with this business and I'll be excused." No. That is not. It is quite natural that if you have done something criminal by mistake, then you can be excused by the authorities. But not that because by your admission you were once excused, and you'll go on committing all kinds of sinful activities, and you'll be excused simply by admission. No. That is not possible. The Christians they do like that. On Sunday they go to the church, and they admit their sinful activities of the week, and pay something fine to the priest, and they become free from the sinful activities, reactions. And from Monday, again he begins. And then again on Sunday, he admits.

There was a movement, Moral Re-armament Movement, MRM. So just like we say that by saṅkīrtana one is freed from all sinful reaction, this moral re-armament movement also preached that by your admission you become free from all sinful reaction. But this should not be... Either hari-nāma or the Christian method of atonement should not be taken as profession. This is once or twice you can be excused, but not that you take it as a profession. That is great sinful. We have got also nāma-aparādha. Daśa-vidha-nāma-aparādha-ten kinds of offenses. If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra with offenses, then it will not be effective. You must avoid the offenses. You know ten kinds of offenses-guror avajñā śruti-śāstra-nindanam. There are so many offenses, and one of the offenses is nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. He is greatest offender, one who thinks that "By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, I become free from reaction of sinful life. So the whole day I shall go on committing all kinds of sinful activities, and at night or sometime I shall chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa-everything will be finished," this is the greatest sin. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. He's never excused. He is condemned. Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepts a sinful man like Jagāi and Mādhāi on the condition that he does not commit any more any sinful activities. On this condition. Not that "I have become a Vaiṣṇava. I'm chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, so I can go on committing all kinds of sinful activities. There will be no reaction." This kind of conviction is the greatest offense. You should remember. Not like that, the Christian atonement.

So we should be very careful about this, nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. Factually, we should not take hari-nāma as a matter of atonement or śubha-kriyā. Śubha-kriyā. Just like there are many śubha-kriyā, auspicious activities. We should not take chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra as some auspicious activity. It is certainly auspicious, but generally people perform some auspicious activities, śubha-kriyā, to counteract their impious activities. This should not be done. This is also another offense. You cannot utilize hari-nāma for any material purposes. Material purpose is... Just like generally, people go to a guru for benefit of some material purpose. "Sir, I have got some cholic pain within my abdomen. Kindly give me your blessing." The materialistic persons, they are after blessing for some material benefit. They are not after Kṛṣṇa. That is another offense. Therefore to go to guru or to accept a guru, there should not be any material purpose. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. One should go to a guru for spiritual advancement of life, not as a fashion. People go to a guru as a fashion. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that "Don't make a guru just like you keep a dog, as a fashion." Nowadays it has become a fashion to keep a dog. In the European, American countries it is a compulsory fashion to have a dog. Everyone keeps a dog. And they love dog very much, more than anything. (laughter) So now we are also imitating, because India is imitator. Since the Britishers came here, we have become first-class imitator. When the 1914, the war was going on. So it is understood that in high-court, Calcutta high-court, there is leisure hour, tiffin hour. So all the judges were sitting. So one English judge, he asked Sir Asutosh Mukherji, "Mr. Mukherji, now the Germans are coming, and if so, what you are going to do?" Mr. Mukherji, Sir Asutosh Mukherji, he replied, "Yes, as soon as the Germans will come, we shall offer our respect in this way, 'Come on sir.' " "So you'll not counteract? Why?" "You have taught us to make like this, so we shall do that. Because you have simply taught us this, how to obey your orders. So anyone who will come, we shall do this." The idea is the slave mentality... The Englishmen, in an organized way, they taught the Indians how to become servant of the Englishmen. We have seen. It is Gandhi's movement that he dismantled this idea of white prestige. Otherwise, we were taught like that. So this imitation of Englishmen... Formerly, in our childhood, it was the advancement of civilization if one could imitate the English fashion. That was. So we should not make that a fashion. Guru is not a fashion.

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in Bhagavad-gītā, in all Vedic literature... Who requires a guru? That is described. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. He requires a guru. Jijñāsuḥ. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. That is human life. One who is interested in inquiring about Brahman, he requires a guru. One who has no business for understanding Brahman, simply to make a fashion that "I have a guru," this is useless. It has no value. One must be very much inquisitive to understand the spiritual science. He requires a guru. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ [SB 11.3.21]. Jijñāsuḥ means inquisitive.

catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

[Bg. 7.16]



Jñānī jijñāsur ārtaḥ arthārthī. The gṛhasthas, they are ārta, distressed. So if he's pious, so in his distressed condition he approaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead, "My Lord, I am very much distressed. Kindly give me Your favor." "Give me." There is "give me." And jijñāsuḥ, jñānī, they do not want anything "Give me," but jijñāsuḥ: "Actually, what is God? What is the Absolute Truth?" That is the difference. One is going to God for asking something, and jijñāsuḥ, jñānī, is eulogized because they do not ask anything. To ask anything from God is not higher standard of bhakti. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. This is pure devotion. People generally go to Kṛṣṇa, God, "O God, give us our daily bread." This is not bhakti, but it is piety because he goes to God. Therefore sukṛtina. He's not the sinful man. He's pious man. At least, he has approached God. And those who are sinful, they do not approach even. They do not go even in the temple to ask something. They say, "What is this nonsense? We don't require. We shall work hard." Nowadays it is going on. "Why you go to temple? Why you give credit to God for your success? You work hard..." There is a philosophy, karma-mīmāṁsā. It is like that. "You work hard and you get the profit. Why you should give credit to God?" This is going on. They are duṣkṛtina. They do not know that without God's mercy you cannot get anything. Otherwise, simply by working hard, anyone could become a big man? No. That is not possible. Without Kṛṣṇa's desire, without sanction, it cannot be done. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Everyone is under the obligation of nature and karma. One cannot surpass. There are many instances in the śāstras.



So we are discussing the point, "Who requires a guru?" If you are actually serious about understanding the spiritual subject matter, brahma-jijñāsā... Not this market value. If you are interested about brahma-jijñāsā... Just like the merchant association, they inquire, "What is the value of this share? What is the value of this commodity? What is the val...?" No. Not that kind of inquiries. But śreya-uttamam. Jijñāsuḥ śreya-uttamam. There are two kinds of objective: śreya and preya. Preya means immediately sense gratification. Just like a child. Child wants to play because it gives him immediately some sense gratification, satisfaction. He does not like to go to a school or to study or to take lesson. He does not like. That is actually preya (śreya). Preya... That is śreya, future benefit. So the parents, the guardians, engage him for future benefit. "You must take education. Otherwise, in future you'll suffer without education." So this is called śreya. Similarly, our human life is meant for śreya, not for preya. The modern civilization, they are interested in preya: immediate some sense gratification. That is not wanted. Therefore śāstra said śreya, not preya. The modern civilization is that "Eat, drink, be merry and enjoy. Do not care for what is future life." That is condemned civilization. We should know that there is future life, there is birth after death, and we must be prepared. As it is advised in the Bhagavad-gītā,

yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām

[Bg. 9.25]



So you can achieve this success of life, mad-yājino 'pi yānti mam. There are many kinds of future benefit. Yānti deva-vratā devān. You can be elevated to the higher planetary system. In the heavenly planets you get long duration of life, higher standard of life, that you can get. But that also is not śreya. That is preya. The same material happiness in higher standard. Śreya is mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām. If you practice yājinaḥ, worshiping Kṛṣṇa as Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī, mad-yājinaḥ [Bg. 18.65], the same thing. If you practice, that is your śreya. Otherwise, anything you do, considering it is very nice, you are being entangled. Yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. If you try to advance in devotional service even a little bit, it can save you from the greatest danger. And if you do not do that, if you are entangled, if you are enamored by immediate sense satisfaction, you become karma-bandhana.



Therefore guru is required who can save you from the karma-bandhana process. Karma-mukta. Karma-mukta. That is required. Not karma-bandhana. Karma-mukta. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. If you are trained up to devotional service,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



That is sa guṇān samatītyaitān, that is mukti. Baddha, conditioned, means we are under the three modes of material nature. That is conditioned. And mukti means you are not under the obligation of the three modes of material nature. That is karma-mukta. So Kṛṣṇa can make you immediately mukta. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. That is Kṛṣṇa's power. Prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ. He can make the lowest class of men... Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ ye 'nye ca pāpāḥ [SB 2.4.18]. They are considered as the most sinful, less than the śūdras, caṇḍālas. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā... Or more sinful, śudhyanti. They can be purified by the mercy, by the power, prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ. Viṣṇu has got so much power. So that power you can have the benefit if you surrender to Viṣṇu. Therefore Kṛṣṇa personally comes and requests you,



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



So here is Kṛṣṇa's direction. You take always Kṛṣṇa's direction, then that is bhakti, and you remain brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. [Bg. 14.26] You are always immune from the sinful reactions of this material world. It does not mean... You cannot manufacture. Actually you have to follow the orders of Kṛṣṇa. Just like Arjuna is being advised. You simply follow Kṛṣṇa. Not that whimsically he was going to punish Aśvatthāmā. Under direction of Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, in every step of your life, if you take Kṛṣṇa's direction or His representative's direction, then you are safe.



Thank you very much. (end)



761001SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.40

-

Vṛndāvana, October 1, 1976



Pradyumna: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: Dispite being instructed in his duty and encouraged to kill the son of Droṇācārya, Arjuna, a great soul, did not like the idea of killing him, although he was a heinous murderer of his family members."



Prabhupāda:



sūta uvāca

evaṁ parīkṣatā dharmaṁ

pārthaḥ kṛṣṇena coditaḥ

naicchad dhantuṁ guru-sutaṁ

yadyapy ātma-hanaṁ mahān

[SB 1.7.40]



So Kṛṣṇa, as an impartial observer, He advised Arjuna to kill Aśvatthāmā on the ground of so many offenses. He was also trying to see how Arjuna decides. But Arjuna's decision was very right. Arjuna's decision was right because, naicchad dhantuṁ guru-sutam. He thought that "Although Aśvatthāmā is criminal, he should be killed. But I am going to kill him on account of my sons's or our sons' being killed by him. We are so much aggrieved. So if I kill Aśvatthāmā, then his mother is there. She would be very much unhappy." For the sake of the spiritual master and teacher... Droṇācārya was dead in the fight, but his wife was living. So Arjuna and Draupadī, considering the grief of the wife of Droṇācārya... There were many instances like that. Not that "The person is criminal," but "What will be the effect of killing him?" That is to be considered.



I think I have told you one story about Shah Jahan, the emperor of India. A, one great drama writer, Mr. P.L. Raya, he wrote one book by the name, title, Shah Jahan. But the activities of the whole book was the nefarious actions of Aurangzeb. He was killing his brothers, arresting father and so many. So one friend of Mr. Raya asked him that "Your book Shah Jahan, in the activities, the actual hero is Aurangzeb. Why you have named Shah Jahan?" So he replied that although Shah Jahan is silent, but the effect is going to him. When Aurangzeb killed his elder brother, Dara, then the effect was suffered by Shah Jahan. So all the activities, nefarious activities of Aurangzeb, was suffered by Shah Jahan. Therefore he said, "He's the hero." Similarly, here is the same instance, that "If I kill Aśvatthāmā-it is right, I should kill him-but the effect would go to his mother. His mother, she is innocent, and in the absence of her husband, our guru, it is our duty to look after her comforts. Now, if I kill Aśvatthāmā, then she will suffer in old age." Therefore na aicchad dhantuṁ guru-sutam. He did not... Although Kṛṣṇa advised him "You kill him," he did not like it. Guru-sutam. This is consciousness. Even there is duty, we have to see what will be the effect of the duty. Not everything should be done very blindly. Arjuna... This is devotee. Devotee means he's not blind. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. Bhagavad-bhakta means he will act in such a way that all qualified, nobody can criticize him. That is bhagavad-bhakta. Sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ.

We have got many instances. That Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he was very rich zamindar's son, and there was a trouble between the minister of the state and his father and uncle. They were zamindars. They were raising revenues to the extent of twelve lakhs, and the tax was going to the Nawab only four lakhs. So this is the business. So the minister arrested the father and uncle of Raghunātha, and they fled away from home. So the minister arrested Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. At that time he was not Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī; he was gṛhastha, young man, Raghunātha. So he handled the matter in such a nice way that the matter was settled between the minister and his father. The idea is although he was a Vaiṣṇava, he was not a fool how to manage a state. It does not mean that a Vaiṣṇava will be fool and rascal because he's Vaiṣṇava. No. Vaiṣṇava, twenty-six qualifications. One of the qualifications is dakṣa: he must be very expert in doing things very nicely. Not that because one is Vaiṣṇava he'll be callous in the worldly things. No. Therefore I repeatedly request the management that you must be very expert in managing these temple affairs. Everything to the right point. Not a single farthing should be wasted. A Vaiṣṇava must be dakṣa, expert in everything. This is no excuse, that "I have become a devotee. Therefore I am callous to all material things." What material things? Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. Anything in relationship with Kṛṣṇa, that is not material; that is spiritual. I have several times explained that this temple, don't think it is ordinary building. It is Vaikuṇṭha. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu. Kṛṣṇa has His house, prakara-sadmasu. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu. Sadma. Sadma means house. So we should take very, very careful attention that this temple is kept very nicely, managed very nicely. Not that "I have become Vaiṣṇava. Let everything be stolen or spoiled or broken. I have become Vaiṣṇava. I cannot take care. That is not my consideration."

Because I have several times pressed on this point that everything in relationship with Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the advaya-jñāna. Absolute Truth. Kṛṣṇa and His name, His house, His devotees-His everything. Nāma rūpa guṇa līlā parikara vaiśiṣṭa, everything. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says... Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy, it is said by Viśvanātha Cakravartī, ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanaya tad-dhāma vṛndāvanam. Vrajeśa-tanaya, Vrajendra-nandana Hari, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is very much pleased when He is addressed as Vrajendra-nandana, Yaśodānandana, Pārtha-sārathi. Added with the, with His devotee's name. Just to establish that He's not nirviśeṣa. He's always saviśeṣa. So this addition... Kṛṣṇa is everyone's father. Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]. Who can be His father? Nobody can become His father. Still, He accepts a father, and He likes that He should be called by His father's name. Who is that father? His devotee. Vrajendra-nandana Hari. Ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa... Bhagavān. He is addressed as Bhagavān. Bhagavān means the Supreme Person, Supreme Being. Who can be His father? Still, it is said, ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayaḥ. Vrajeśa-tanaya. He's son of Mahārāja Nanda, ārādhyo bhagavān, Yaśomatī-nandana.

So Kṛṣṇa and His father... Although he's not Kṛṣṇa, he's nitya-mukta. There are different types of living entities: Nitya-mukta, nitya-baddha, sādhana-siddha, kṛpā-siddha. These things are very nicely discussed in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Nitya-siddha. This father, mother of Kṛṣṇa, they are nitya-siddhas. Although they are living entities, they are not Bhagavān, not viṣṇu-tattva. Jīva-tattva. But nitya-siddha. Those who are in the spiritual world, they are nitya-siddha. Nitya-mukta. Nitya-mukta means they never come in this material world. Just like Kṛṣṇa is nitya-mukta śuddha. Similarly, the associates of Kṛṣṇa who come with Him... Just like the gopīs or the cowherd boys, and so..., the cows, calves, they are all nitya-siddha, nitya-mukta. They come with Kṛṣṇa. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. They are in the spiritual form, ānanda-cinmaya-rasa, enjoying always spiritual bliss in the association of Kṛṣṇa. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ. That is also expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Just like Brahmā, when he stolen Kṛṣṇa's friends, cowherd boys, and the cows and calves, Brahmā saw that Kṛṣṇa is playing with the same cowherd boys, cows, calves, and he was astonished. He went, came to test that "It is being advertised that one boy is now born, is there in Vṛndāvana, and He's being accepted as Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality, my Lord." So he played some tricks. He stolen away. But the next moment he saw. Next moment means one year. He saw that Kṛṣṇa has expanded Himself in so many living entities. And later on he saw that everyone is Viṣṇu. Everyone is Viṣṇu. Dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya dīpāyate [Bs. 5.46]. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's aṁśa. He expands just like candle. One candle is lit up by another candle, another candle. In this way, first, second, third, fourth, fifth, in the hundreds of times. But each candle is as powerful as the first one. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yaḥ [Bs. 5.39]. He has got extensive, innumerable expansions. In the Bhāgavata it is said that Kṛṣṇa's expansion is so great, just like the waves of the ocean, you cannot count. It is not possible. If you sit down on the sea beach and go on counting how many waves, day and night, there is no limit. So Kṛṣṇa's expansion is unlimited. He's unlimited, His expansions are unlimited. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33].

So everything belonging to Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Nothing should be neglected. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Everything should be... Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. Every corner of this temple should be considered "Here is Kṛṣṇa." Then Kṛṣṇa conscious. Not that "Only in the temple Kṛṣṇa is there, not in the gate. Let it be open and thief may come and steal." No. Very, very careful. The idea is that devotee must be expert in understanding things very clearly. Just like Arjuna. Kṛṣṇa is requesting him. Therefore it is said, evaṁ parīkṣatā. Kṛṣṇa is trying to see how Arjuna is Kṛṣṇa conscious. "I am requesting you, 'Kill him.' " And what does he decide? Kṛṣṇa knew everything. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart. So what Arjuna was thinking of, Kṛṣṇa knew it that he was thinking rightly not to kill this man. Still, He was parīkṣatā, He was examining how Arjuna decides. So he passed the examination.

So devotee is expected to pass all kinds of examinations. That is devotee. Not one-sided. Therefore śāstra says yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā [SB 5.18.12]. Akiñcana-bhakti. Kiñcana. Kiñcana means "something." So akiñcana means "no something." That is akiñcana. "I have nothing to do except Kṛṣṇa's service." That is called akiñcana. He has no other duty. Only duty is how to please Kṛṣṇa. That is śuddha-bhakti. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11]. So long you're on the platform of jñāna or karma... There are different stages. Karma is the lowest stage, and jñāna is higher. Koṭi-karma-niṣṭha-madhye eka jñānī śreṣṭha. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said, out of many millions of karmīs, one jñānī is good, śreṣṭha. And out of millions of jñānīs... Simply jñāna, theoretical knowledge, is not good. It must be practical. Jñāna, the result of jñāna is to become liberated, mukti. Simply I am very jñānī and I am doing all nonsense, this is not jñāna. He must be liberated from material attachment. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. This is the stage of perfection of jñāna. Na śocati na kāṅkṣati. He has nothing to do with the material world. That is jñānī. Therefore the karmīs, they are very much attached to the material activities, and jñānī is not attached-not attached neither interested. That is real jñānī. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said koṭi-karma-niṣṭha-madhye eka jñānī śreṣṭha. Out of millions of karmīs, one jñānī is śreṣṭha. We sometimes differ with the Māyāvādī philosophers. But they are jñānīs. They are better than the karmīs. There is no doubt. Koṭi-karma-niṣṭha-madhye eka jñānī śreṣṭha.

But it does not mean because one has got some theoretical knowledge, therefore he is mukta. That is another stage. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, koṭi-jñānī-madhye haya eka mukta śreṣṭha. And so far bhakta, koṭi-mukta-madhye durlabha eka kṛṣṇa-bhakta. Sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. That is another thing. Koṭi-mukta-madhye. Koṭisyapi mahā-mune(?). So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, fully devoted, anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], it is very, very difficult, the highest position. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān [Bg. 7.19]. The jñāna, after jñāna, there is the stage of bhakti. Without jñāna, bhakti is kaniṣṭha-adhikārī. With jñāna he is uttama-adhikārī. These are described by Caitanya, in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. So the idea is that if one is advanced devotee, then all the good qualities will be visible in him. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā [SB 5.18.12]. He has no other desire. Akiñcana-bhakti. If he has got any other desire to fulfill, then it is mixed. It is not śuddha-bhakti; it is vaidhī-bhakti. Karma-miśra-bhakti, jñāna-miśra-bhakti, yoga-miśra-bhakti. Bhakti must be there. Otherwise, karma, jñāna, yoga, nothing is successful. Bhakti must be there. But when karma, jñāna, yoga, everything is without contamination, simply bhakti... Jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. That stage is ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. Simply to satisfy.

Now here Kṛṣṇa is advising. So ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. There is a... Parīkṣatā, as Kṛṣṇa is examining, similarly, Arjuna also very intelligently acting. He knew that although Kṛṣṇa was encouraging him to kill Aśvatthāmā, "He wanted to see me, how I deal with the matter." This is also... So there is competition between bhaktas. Duye lagye hura huri(?). It is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is being enlivened by seeing Rādhārāṇī, and Rādhārāṇī is becoming more beautiful by seeing Kṛṣṇa. Duye lagye hura huri. The competition. This is described in the fourth chapter of Caitanya-caritāmṛta. So it is transcendental sporting between the devotee and the Lord. It is not nirviśeṣa-vāda. The Lord wants to see "How he is My pure devotee." And the devotee wants to see that "I'll not accept anything from Kṛṣṇa. I shall sacrifice everything for Kṛṣṇa." That is duye lagye hura huri. That is devotee, and that is Kṛṣṇa.

So here is Arjuna. He's being examined by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa wants to examine His devotees, how staunch devotee he is. Just like the Pāṇḍavas. They were put into so many troubles. They lost their kingdom, they lost their wife-insulted. The wife was endeavored to become naked. Never..., the Pāṇḍavas never said that "Kṛṣṇa, You are our friend. Why we are suffering so many troubles?" Never. Never. This is pure devotee. Kṛṣṇa is always with him. Kṛṣṇa could do anything, but still they never requested. Neither Kuntī nor Pāṇḍavas. This is pure devotion. A pure devotee will never try to take anything from Kṛṣṇa. He will try to give everything to Kṛṣṇa. So duye lagye hura huri. So here is a trial between the devotee and Lord Kṛṣṇa, and Arjuna has passed the examination. Therefore it is said, evaṁ parīkṣatā dharmaṁ pārthaḥ kṛṣṇena coditaḥ. He's being examined by kṛṣṇena, not ordinary person. But he passed the examination. Why? Naicchad dhantuṁ guru-sutam. In spite of Kṛṣṇa's, I mean to say, injection, that "Do it," he did not like to. Naicchad dhantuṁ guru-sutaṁ yadyapy ātma-hanaṁ mahān. Although he is the greatest criminal.

Thank you very much. (end)



761002SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.41-42

-

Vṛndāvana, October 2, 1976



Devotee: "After reaching his own camp, Arjuna, along with his dear friend and charioteer (Śrī Kṛṣṇa), entrusted the murderer unto his dear wife, who was lamenting for her murdered sons.



"Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: Draupadī then saw Aśvatthāmā, who was bound with ropes like an animal and silent for having enacted the most inglorious murder. Due to her female nature, and due to her being naturally good and well-behaved, she showed him due respects as a brāhmaṇa."

Prabhupāda: You read the purport also.



Pradyumna: Both verses?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Pradyumna: (Pradyumna reads purport)



athopetya sva-śibiraṁ

govinda-priya-sārathiḥ

nyavedayat taṁ priyāyai

śocantyā ātma-jān hatān

[SB 1.7.41]



tathāhṛtaṁ paśuvat pāśa-baddham

avāṅ-mukhaṁ karma-jugupsitena

nirīkṣya kṛṣṇāpakṛtaṁ guroḥ sutaṁ

vāma-svabhāvā kṛpayā nanāma ca

[SB 1.7.42]



Prabhupāda: So this is already explained in the purport that woman's nature is very mild, and man's nature very strong. That is the difference. Therefore according to Vedic civilization, the woman must be protected because they are very simple. They can be led to goodness also very easily, and they can be polluted also very easily. By nature, they are very simple. Therefore śāstra says that... Just like child. If you mold the character of a child from the very beginning, then he can become a great man. Similarly, if you train woman from the very beginning how to become chaste and faithful to the husband, they can become a very good mother, very good asset in the family.



So there is sufficient information in the Vedic literatures how a man should be trained up, a boy should be trained up, a girl should be trained up, so that in future they may become happy. The ultimate aim of life is how to become connected with Kṛṣṇa. That is the ultimate. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. If I say to anybody that "Your ultimate goal of life is to understand Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu," naturally there will be inquiries: "Who is Kṛṣṇa? What is Kṛṣṇa? What does He do?" So many questions. That question is recommended in the Vedānta-sūtra, athāto brahma jijñāsā. That is life. So the boys and girls should be trained up how to inquire about the ultimate goal of life, Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. That they do not know in the modern civilization. That they do not know. Not merely in the modern civilization. In the past also, those who were entrapped by the modes of material nature, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā, the material conception of life, false ego... Ahaṅkāra this is called... Ahaṅkāra there is. But when we are in a false ahaṅkāra, that is our cause of all trouble, miseries. Ahaṅkāra, ahaṅ... If we become entrapped in false ahaṅkāra, then we are vimūḍhātmā, entrapped by nature. That is the difficulty.

So what is that false ahaṅkāra? The false ahaṅkāra is that "I am this body." This is false ahaṅkāra. "I am this body." "I am Indian." "I am American." "I am brāhmaṇa." "I am kṣatriya." "I am sannyāsī." "I am brahmacārī." And so on, so on, so on, so on. All designation of this body. This is false ahaṅkāra. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught us how to become free from the false ahaṅkāra. He said that nāhaṁ vipro na yatir vā: "I am not a brāhmaṇa. I am not a sannyāsī. I am not a gṛhastha. I am not a vānaprastha. I am not this. I am not that." All material designations He refused, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. "I am not this, I am not this, I am not this." Even if I am very much proud of becoming a brāhmaṇa or I become very much proud of becoming a sannyāsī... That is the highest stage of human status, to become a brāhmaṇa or sannyāsī. Sannyāsī is supposed to be the guru of everyone. There are four varṇas and four āśramas. Brāh... [break] ...and kṣatriya. And in the spiritual order, the sannyāsī is guru of all, even of the brāhmaṇa. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "I am neither brāhmaṇa nor sannyāsī." He refused. Nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir na yatir vā. Yati means sannyāsī. So He refused.

So this is false. Even if you become very much proud that you are a very learned brāhmaṇa or very advanced sannyāsī, that is not your freedom. You are not yet liberated. You are still in conditional life. Then? When you become liberated? That is stated by Caitanya Mahāprabhu, gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. This is liberation. Gopī-bhartuḥ, the maintainer of the gopīs, Gopījana-vallabha. Kṛṣṇa's business is how to please the gopīs, the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana. Yaśodā-nandana vraja-jana-rañjana. As the vṛndāvana-vāsīs, they have no other business than to love Kṛṣṇa, similarly, Kṛṣṇa has no other business than to please the gopīs and the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana. Gopījana-vallabha. So how...? Why Kṛṣṇa is so much attached to vṛndāvana-vāsīs? As soon as there was some difficulty-we read it from Bhāgavatam-as soon as there is some fire... The vṛndāvana-vāsīs, they do not know anyone but Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa devours the fire. As soon as there is torrents of rain, Vṛndāvana was going to be overflooded, Kṛṣṇa immediately came to their rescue and lifted the Govardhana Hill: "Come under Me." That is Gopī-jana-vallabha. They do not know anything. They do not know even that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But they do not like to love anybody than Kṛṣṇa. This is their only qualification. They did not love Kṛṣṇa understanding that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma [Bg. 10.12]. They did not know this. But they did not like to love even Viṣṇu than Kṛṣṇa. That is their qualification. Gopī-jana-vallabha.

So when we come to that stage, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching, the gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayoḥ. He's also bringing the reference of the gopīs because Kṛṣṇa is completely under gopīs. He's so much indebted to the gopīs that He said that "I cannot repay your debts. It is not possible." Kṛṣṇa, the all-powerful, all-opulences, but He had no means to repay the debts of the gopīs. This is the position of the gopīs. Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends, ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā. There is no other better shape of worshiping Kṛṣṇa than it was planned by the gopīs. Ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā. This is the highest. In the same say, He says, gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa... Gopī-jana-vallabha. Gopī-jana-vallabha is Kṛṣṇa; pada-kamalayoḥ, one who has taken shelter. Don't try to become gopīs. No. Rather try to become the dust of the lotus feet of the gopīs. Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. Just like Uddhava. Uddhava wanted to become one grass in Vṛndāvana because the gopīs will trample over it. This is the highest perfection. So liberation... Liberation means gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ. The more you become servant of the servant, servant of Vaiṣṇava, then your perfection is there [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. That is perfection. Our, the Vedic injunction is just try to understand yourself, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. That is a fact.

But if I simply try to become ahaṁ brahmāsmi without knowing the full philosophy, then I shall be fallen again, that "I am equal to God." Ahaṁ brahmāsmi means "I am the Supreme God," as the Māyāvādīs, they think that liberation means "I become one with God." No. That is not your position. You cannot become... That is another māyā. That is the last dictation of māyā: "Why you shall become the servant of gopī-bhartuḥ? You become God." That is māyā. That is the last snare of māyā. Therefore they fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Anādṛta. With great austerity, penances and vairāgya, they can go up to the paraṁ padam. Paraṁ padam means Brahman. Nirviśeṣa-brahman. Not in the material existence, but in the spiritual existence. Āruhya. They can rise up to that. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi: to understand that "I am not this matter, I am Brahman." But unless one takes shelter of the gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa, he'll fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. Because one does not know, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches, that gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. He falls down. He has no shelter. Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ.

So we must always remember that if we want to be recognized by Kṛṣṇa, if we want to become inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, then we must take this lesson given by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ. So to endeavor to become gopīs, that is also Māyāvādī, that "I shall become gopīs." No. You have to become the servant of the servant of the servant of gopīs. That is... Otherwise, the same ahaṅkāra. Ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate [Bg. 3.27]. Then again we'll be misled. This is material disease. Everyone is full of some ahaṅkāra: "I am this," "I am this," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am a sannyāsī," "I am lord," "I am this." So many things. So long this mentality will continue, then that is māyā. Ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate [Bg. 3.27]. Actually, he is not that position. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches from the very beginning, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Unless you come to that point, that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa,"... That is real knowledge. This knowledge is achieved bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. Ante. Ante means at the end of many, many births' endeavor. Jñānavān. Not foolish rascals, but jñānavān. Then bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate. This gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. After many, many births.

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches from this point, that you are dāsa. Give up this idea that you are independent master, or one with God, or so many rascal ideas. That is not good. It begins with this point. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches that jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches from the point when Bhagavad-gītā ends. Bhagavad-gītā says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is the relationship. We are trying to become master here, everyone. Kṛṣṇa says, "You give up this idea. You are planning so many things, to become master of the world, 'I am the monarch of all I survey.' Give up this idea. Then you'll be in proper position." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. That means "I am master. If you want to be peaceful, then accept this proposition that I am master; you are servant." Therefore Yāmunācārya said, kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ praharṣayiṣyāmi sanātha-jīvitam: "I have troubled myself in so many lives, therefore," bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ. He's praying, "My Lord, when I shall be constantly Your servant?" Bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ. Nirantara means "always." Praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ. We are being conducted by the mental speculation. So completely śānta, no more mental speculation. Bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ. Kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ. "When I shall become the most attentive servant," aikāntika, "no other business?" Kadāham aikāntika-nitya... Praharṣayiṣyāmi: "I shall become engladdened," praharṣayiṣyāmi. Sanātha-jīvitam. Sanātha. Those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, they are anātha. Anātha, just you know anātha. Anātha means no father, mother, no protection. That is called anātha. And he's aspiring to become sanātha. Sanātha means, "Yes, I have got my protector. Kṛṣṇa will protect me." Prakṣiṣyati iti viśvāsa-pālanam(?). "Yes, I am surrendered to Kṛṣṇa and He'll give me protection." This is surrender. Śaraṇāgati means... This is one of the item of śaraṇāgati, that "I have surrendered to Kṛṣṇa fully. So Kṛṣṇa says ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. Then I am fully protected. He'll give me protection." To believe in this word of Kṛṣṇa, that is fully surrender.

So it is not theoretical-practical. Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, even in America they inquire, these, our devotees, "How is that you do not work? You simply dance and you get big, big buildings, and you have got so many cars, and you eat nicely." They are surprised. Why surprising? Sanātha-jīvitam. We are under Kṛṣṇa's protection. Why shall I live poverty poorly? No. Kṛṣṇa's servant must have the whole opulence. Because sanātha-jīvitam. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So don't forget this philosophy. If you surrender fully to Kṛṣṇa... And Kṛṣṇa is always anxious, Gopī-jana-vallabha, Vraja-jana-rañjana. So to love Kṛṣṇa, to be fully under Kṛṣṇa's control, that is gopī-jana-vallabha, that is gopī-jana. And He's always anxious. Sanātha-jīvitam. In all respect, you simply remain under the control of Kṛṣṇa, fully under the shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then all happiness will be available without any endeavor. That is svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ [SB 2.10.6]. That is called mukti. Mukti means to live in this condition, that "I am Kṛṣṇa's eternal servant. He will give me all protection. My only business is to carry out His order." This is called mukti.

Thank you very much. (end)



761003SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.43

-

Vṛndāvana, October 3, 1976



Pradyumna: "She could not tolerate Aśvatthāmā's being bound by ropes, and being a devoted lady, she said: 'Release him, for he is a brāhmaṇa, our spiritual master.' "



Prabhupāda:



uvāca cāsahanty asya

bandhanānayanaṁ satī

mucyatāṁ mucyatām eṣa

brāhmaṇo nitarāṁ guruḥ

[SB 1.7.43]



So Draupadī, in the previous verse it has been described, vāma-svabhāvā kṛpayā nanāma ca. Vāma-svabhāvā. Vāma, woman. Women, they are very soft-hearted, vāma-svabhāvā. So although Aśvatthāmā killed her sons very mercilessly, and he was arrested and Kṛṣṇa ordered him to be killed, and Arjuna was just preparing to punish him, but vāma-svabhāvā, woman, being very soft-hearted, without any consideration, she immediately offered her respect, nanāma. Not only she offered her respect to Aśvatthāmā being the son of a brāhmaṇa, especially of Droṇācārya, their teacher... So she immediately ordered Arjuna, mucyatāṁ mucyatām: "Release him immediately. You have arrested a brāhmaṇa." Mucyatāṁ mucyatām eṣa brāhmaṇo nitarāṁ guruḥ. "Brāhmaṇa is always our guru. Although he has killed my sons, still, he stands to be my guru, your guru."



So this is Vedic culture, that they know how to offer respect to the proper persons. But Arjuna, he also decided that although Kṛṣṇa ordered him to kill Aśvatthāmā, he's guru's son, although he's not brāhmaṇa; he's brahma-bandhu. He has been described as brahma-bandhu, not brāhmaṇa. But Draupadī, being woman, vāma-svabhāvā, very soft-hearted, she did not consider whether he's actually a brāhmaṇa. The son of a brāhmaṇa, that much she knew. This is the difference, how to calculate whether one is brāhmaṇa or not brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa and brahma-bandhu, these two words are there. Just like if you are the son of a high-court judge, you can be called, you have got the right, that "son of a high-court judge." That is all right. But you cannot claim to become the high-court judge. That is not possible. Unless you are qualified, unless you are actually acting as high-court judge, you cannot be called a high-court judge. Simply by becoming the son of a high-court judge you cannot become the high-court judge. Similarly, simply by becoming the son of a brāhmaṇa, you cannot become a brāhmaṇa. A woman, vāma-svabhāvā, she can accept that "Because he's the son of a brāhmaṇa, he's brāhmaṇa." Therefore this word is used, vāma-svabhāvā. Because woman are considered less intelligent. In the Bhagavad-gītā... Their heart is very soft. Just like children, their heart is very soft. But their intelligence is not very sharp. That is the difference. Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyāḥ. Kṛṣṇa says, striyaḥ śūdrās tathā... They have been put in one group: woman, vaiśya and śūdra. Because they are not very intelligent. They can be molded by another intelligent man to the proper channel. Therefore they require guidance. They require guidance.

This morning I was reading about Sītā-devī's being kidnapped by Rāvaṇa. Now, because there was not Rāmacandra present and Lakṣmaṇa was also not present, she was unguarded and Rāvaṇa took the opportunity to kidnap her. So even Sītā-devī, she is goddess of fortune, she is the spiritual potency of Lord Rāmacandra, she is not ordinary woman, but showing us the example that even Sītā-devī... Sītā-devī is the original potency. Of course, Rāvaṇa could not kidnap Sītā-devī as she is. That is not possible. This is described in another Purāṇa, that when Rāvaṇa came to kidnap Sītā, Sītā-devī disappeared from there and she kept a māyā form, false form, and Rāvaṇa kidnapped her. This is stated in very authoritative scripture. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was traveling in South India, a brāhmaṇa invited Him. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu at noontime went there, but He saw the brāhmaṇa has not cooked anything. There was nothing prepared. And he was crying and reading Rāmāyaṇa. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu inquired, "Brāhmaṇa, why you are in such a depressed condition, you are crying?" "Sir, I am so..." He was in the ecstasy of Hanumān. "Sir, I am so unfortunate that Sītā-devī has been taken by Rāvaṇa and I could not rescue her still." In this way he was puzzled. So he did not cook anything. Then Caitanya Mahāprabhu pacified him. Then he cooked. He could understand that "I invited..." It was done. Then, when he was returning, I forget the name of the Purāṇa... Kūrma Purāṇa. He got evidences that Sītā-devī, when she was supposed to be kidnapped by Rāvaṇa, her a false form was kidnapped, and when Sītā-devī was tested, putting her into the fire, she entered into the fire and the māyā Sītā was burned and the original Sītā came out. So it was not possible for Rāvaṇa to touch even the lotus feet of mother Sītā. But apparently it is externally manifested that Sītā was taken away just to teach us that even Sītā-devī...

Sītā-devī is the origin of all potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Cit-śakti. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has got many potencies, multipotencies, and one of the potency is hlādinī-śakti, pleasure potency. That pleasure potency is Sītā, Rādhārāṇī, Lakṣmī-devī. This has been described by Svarūpa-dāmodara Gosvāmī, rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmād ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau [Cc. Ādi 1.5]. These are described, that the Kṛṣṇa's pleasure potency, Rādhārāṇī, is Kṛṣṇa. But to take pleasure They became two. Ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau. They became divided into two, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Again, Śrī Caitanya, prakaṭam. When Kṛṣṇa came as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa combined together. Therefore the devotees of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they worship śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya. They say. This is a fact. So Lord Rāmacandra is also Kṛṣṇa. Sītā-devī is also expansion of Rādhārāṇī. They are the same tattva.

rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.39]



So here the example that even Sītā-devī, the direct potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, she is showing that without being protected, she can be ravished, she can be kidnapped, she can be misused by the rākṣasas. This is the example. Sītā-devī was quite competent, but this is the example.



Another example is that because Lord Rāmacandra took Sītā in the forest... From moral principle, He should not have taken Sītā. Pathe nārī vivaryaya(?). The moral principle is that when you are going out of home, you should not take your wife with you, pathe nārī vivaryaya, because there may be so many dangers. That actually happened, Sītā-devī, because Lord Rāmacandra was ordered to go to the forest. Not Sītā-devī, neither anyone, neither Lakṣmaṇa. They, out of their own affection for Lord Rāmacandra, they decided to go with Him. But because Sītā-devī went with Rāmacandra, so many catastrophes happened. She was kidnapped, and there was fight, and the whole dynasty of Rāvaṇa was killed, and so many things happened. So this instruction that pathe nārī vivaryaya. And another lesson is, even Lord Rāmacandra, He was attached. Naturally one is attached to his wife. So if we become attached to a woman, then we have to face so many dangers. This is another instruction. Even Lord Rāmacandra is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and still He had to accept so many troubles. They were loitering in the forest, feeling the separation of Sītā-devī. So many things happened.

So vāma-svabhāvā. They are, women are very simple, soft-hearted. The whole idea is they should be given protection. No freedom. That is injunction of the Manu-saṁhitā. Na strī svātantryam arhati. Women should not be given freedom. They must be protected. Not that if... Sometimes we receive the complaint in foreign countries, they say that "You keep your women like slaves." I replied, "We do not keep our women as slaves. They're very respectful at home. The sons offer their highest respect to the mother. The husband gives the topmost protection to the wife." This is the example. Just like Lord Rāmacandra. Lord Rāmacandra is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but Rāvaṇa took Sītā from His protection. Rāmacandra could marry many millions of Sītās, or He could create many millions of Sītā, but He's showing the example that it is the husband's duty to give protection to the wife at any cost. And He did it. For one woman He killed the whole Rāvaṇa's dynasty. This is husband's duty. So protection, not slave. It is protection. The husband should give to the wife the topmost protection, and the wife should be so faithful to the husband that... Sītā-devī, she was king's daughter, Videha-rāja. She was the daughter... She was not a poor man's daughter. And Daśaratha Mahārāja did not ask her to go to the forest with her husband. She could easily say, "My dear husband, You are going to the forest. I am king's daughter. I cannot take so much trouble. Better You go. Let me go to my father's house." No. "I shall take all the troubles with my husband." This is faithfulness.

Similarly, Draupadī. Draupadī also went with the Pāṇḍavas in the forest when they were banished, and Kuntī-devī also went with her sons in the forest. This is the system. Kuntī-devī had nothing to do with the gambling of Pāṇḍavas and Duryodhana, but because the sons were to go to the forest, the mother also followed and the wife also followed. This is Vedic system. Vedic system... Caitanya Mahāprabhu also had very nice beautiful wife at home and very affectionate mother. Both personalities are very good asset in family. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said that if one hasn't got mother at home and the wife is not very agreeable, or not very peaceful... He said,

mātā yasya gṛhe nāsti

bhāryā cāpriya-vādinī

araṇyaṁ tena gantavyaṁ

yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham



He advises, if one has no mother at home and wife is apriya-vādinī, she talks very roughly, not very nicely, then that person immediately leave that home and go to the forest. Yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham. For him, either at home or in the forest, the same thing. Yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham. This is Vedic culture. Woman should be trained up from the very beginning how to become good wife and good mother. That is the duty. Vāma-svabhāvā. So here is example, Kuntīdevī is one example. Draupadī one example. We have got many examples how to train woman. They are very soft-hearted. They can be molded in any way. And Bhīṣmadeva has advised... When Bhīṣmadeva was in the bed of arrows, śara-śayyā, so the Pāṇḍavas, the Kurus, they took many advices about politics, sociology. Many things-religion, king's duty, so many instruction was taken. In that instruction he also confirmed the Vedic injunction that woman should be always protected very carefully. There is one quality of shyness. If you break that shyness of woman, it will be very dangerous. It will be very dangerous. That is the one verb,(?) (word) to check.



So modern civilization is not strictly following the Vedic injunction. Therefore, especially I have seen in the Western countries, there is no home practically. There is no homely happiness, because women are allowed to mix freely and there is no protection. They are not married, there is no husband. The father also does not take care. As soon as the girl becomes fifteen, sixteen years, she goes away. Therefore I have practically seen there is no home, there is no peace in the Western countries. These are very important things, that soft-hearted woman, vāma-svabhāvā, they should be given protection. They should be trained up how to become faithful wife, affectionate mother. Then the home will be very happy, and without happiness we cannot make any spiritual progress. We must be peaceful. This is the preliminary condition. Therefore, as far as possible, the Vedic injunction is there should be division in the society, varṇāśrama. Varṇāśramācāravatā. Because the whole aim is to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam. Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān viṣṇur ārādhyate. Our only aim should be how to approach Viṣṇu.

ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ

viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi

tadīyānāṁ samarcanam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



This is the instruction of Lord Śiva to Pārvatī. Pārvatī's question was, "Which ārādhanam is the best?" So he replied, ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param. He said... [break] ...but the knowledge is there. They have not lost the knowledge, but we have neglected. If we take advantage of this knowledge, then the whole world will become happy.



That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. What is the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu? His mission is... He said,

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



Anyone who has taken birth on the land of Bhāratavarṣa... It is puṇya-bhūmi. And not only puṇya-bhūmi, not only Lord Rāmacandra has appeared here, not only Kṛṣṇa has appeared here, not only Lord Buddha has appeared, not only Caitanya Mahāprabhu has appeared... Because it is puṇya-bhūmi. Whenever the Lord appears, He comes on this land. Bhārata-bhūmite manuṣya. Therefore the human being, not the cats and dogs, must take advantage of this birth on Bhāratavarṣa and take advantage of the śāstras and make his life successful. Janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra. Indians are not made for exploiting others. Upakāra: how people will be advanced in spiritual consciousness, how they will understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu. Because they do not know what is the aim of life. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. We are born all fools and rascals, abodha-jāta, without any sense. So we require education. What is that education? Ātma-tattvam. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. So we require education. What is that education? Ātma-tattvam. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. If we do not culture, cultivate ātma-tattvam, then whatever we are doing, we are being defeated. That's all. We are being defeated. Ātma-tattvam.



That ātma-tattvam is the first instruction in the Bhagavad-gītā.

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



This is ātmā, beginning. Asmin dehe. Within this body there is the soul. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe. Not the body is important. Body's nothing; it is dead matter. When Kṛṣṇa began His instruction and Arjuna was lamenting on the basis of this body... "If we kill our brothers their wives will be widowed and they'll be bhraṣṭācāra(?), the varṇa-saṅkara will be there." Everything he was calculating on the basis of this body. All politics, sociology, they are going on the basis of this body. But Kṛṣṇa, as soon as He was accepted by Arjuna as guru... Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam: [Bg. 2.7] "Now, Kṛṣṇa, I accept You as my guru. Not as friend." Because friendly talking is useless waste of time. He accepted Him as guru. When guru speaks, you cannot argue. That is not the process. You should accept a guru who is infallible. Otherwise it is useless. He accepted guru Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa is infallible. If we accept guru, a bogus guru, then it is no benefit. Guru means Kṛṣṇa's representative. Not that everyone can be guru.



It is said in the śāstra that ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipraḥ. Just like here it is accepted, brāhmaṇo nitarāṁ guruḥ. So generally brāhmaṇa is accepted as guru by other orders of society. So, but śāstra says that brāhmaṇa is guru, that's all right, but ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipraḥ. One brāhmaṇa is very nipuṇa in his karma-kāṇḍīya knowledge, ṣaṭ-karma. Paṭhana-pāṭhana-yajana-yājana-dāna-pratigraha. This ṣaṭ-karma, nipuṇa, very expert. Mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ. And he's very expert in chanting the Vedic hymns and execution of tantra and so many things. Avaiṣṇavo gurur na syāt. If he's avaiṣṇava, if he's not attached with Viṣṇu, if he does not carry the order of Kṛṣṇa, gurur na sa syāt. Sad-vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ. But if a person is Vaiṣṇava, even if he's born in the family of a śva-paca... Śva-paca means dog-eater, caṇḍāla. If he's a Vaiṣṇava he can become guru. And if one is a brāhmaṇa, if he's not a Vaiṣṇava... Naturally, brāhmaṇa means Vaiṣṇava. Brāhmaṇa means paṇḍita. Still, in India a brāhmaṇa is addressed as "Paṇḍitajī." Because a brāhmaṇa and mūrkha, rascal, this is contradictory. It cannot be. Unless one is highly learned, unless one has learned what is Brahman, he cannot become brāhmaṇa. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. So not only one should be brāhmaṇa, but he should become a Vaiṣṇava. Still higher. From brāhmaṇa platform he has to come to the Vaiṣṇava platform.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



One has to become brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. That is brāhmaṇa. The sign is na śocati na kāṅkṣati. He does not care for anything material. He's always satisfied. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. That is brāhmaṇa. But, in spite of this quality, if he does not enter into the bhakti, then he's not a Vaiṣṇava. He may be a brāhmaṇa... This is clearly defined in the Bhagavad-gītā. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. He's pacified. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. He's equal to everyone. Then he's qualified to become a devotee, Vaiṣṇava. So unless he comes to that stage he cannot become guru. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2].



So here, the Pāṇḍava family, they are very enlightened family, and still, vāma-svabhāvā, the woman is soft-hearted. He did not... She did not consider about Aśvatthāmā's position. But so far Kṛṣṇa is concerned, Arjuna is concerned, they considered that he is not a brāhmaṇa, but he is a brahma-bandhu. Brahma-bandhu means son of a brāhmaṇa, but behavior is something else. He's called brahma-bandhu.

Thank you very much. (end)



761004SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.44

-

Vṛndāvana, October 4, 1976



Pradyumna: "It was by Droṇācārya's mercy that you learned the military art of throwing arrows and the confidential art of controlling weapons."



Prabhupāda:



sarahasyo dhanur-vedaḥ

savisargopasaṁyamaḥ

astra-grāmaś ca bhavatā

śikṣito yad-anugrahāt

[SB 1.7.44]



This is also another Vedic civilization, that if you are benefited by somebody, you should always remain obliged to him. Śikṣito yad-anugrahāt. There is one Bengali proverb, guru-māra-vidyā. "Guru, you learn from him first of all, then kill him. Don't care for guru." This is demonic. By the grace of guru you learn something. Then when you learn something, then you become greater than him, don't care for guru. This is demonic. Even if you have learned something, you must feel always obliged, ataḥ padarśayat(?).



So this is Vedic civilization. Draupadī advising Arjuna that "You have learned. Feel always obliged," ataḥ padarśayat. So this is Vedic... "This military art, by his grace, by guru's grace, now you are expert in the science of military art. And suppose his son has committed some sinful activity. You cannot punish him, retaliate, so that guru's family will be aggrieved." This is Vedic culture. Not only he is personally, but in his absence, his wife, his family, you should consider them. So there is nothing about... What is the purport? Read.

Pradyumna: "Dhanur-veda or military science, was taught by Droṇācārya with all its confidential secrets of throwing and controlling by Vedic hymns. Gross military science is dependent on material weapons, but finer than that is the art of throwing arrows saturated with Vedic hymns, which act more effectively than gross material weapons like machine guns or atomic bombs. The control is by Vedic mantras, or the transcendental science of sound. It is said in the Rāmāyaṇa that Mahārāja Daśaratha, the father of Lord Śrī Rāma, used to control arrows by sound only. He could pierce his target with his arrow by hearing the sound only, without seeing the object. So this is a finer military science than that of the gross material military weapons..."



Prabhupāda: It is called śabda-vedī. He who... Just like I cannot see where is the bird. He's chirping. But śabda-vedī, I can throw wherever the bird is, it will go and kill. That is called śabda-vedī. Mahārāja Daśaratha used it. Therefore he was cursed that he would die being aggrieved when Rāmacandra will be banished. Go on.



Pradyumna: "So this is a finer military science than that of the gross military military weapons used nowadays. Arjuna was taught all this, and therefore Draupadī wished that Arjuna feel obliged to Ācārya Droṇa for all these benefits. And in the absence of Droṇācārya, his son was the representative. That was the opinion of the good lady Draupadī. It may be argued why Droṇācārya, a rigid brāhmaṇa, should be a teacher in military science. But the reply is that a brāhmaṇa should become a teacher, regardless of what his department of knowledge is. A learned brāhmaṇa should become a teacher, a priest and a recipient of charity. A bona fide brāhmaṇa is authorized to accept such professions."



Prabhupāda: So there is nothing especial to be explained. The only important part of this verse is, that don't learn guru-māra-vidyā. Even if you become more learned that your guru, you should not exhibit it before your guru. You should always remain a fool number one. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu showed Himself by His example. Guru more mūrkha dekhi 'karila śāsana [Cc. Ādi 7.71]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was not mūrkha, but He has taught us that before guru, we shall always remain a mūrkha. That is advancement. Not that "I know more than guru. I don't care for guru. Now give me blessing that I can find out some better guru." This nonsense, if you don't find... If your guru is not perfect, then why you are asking blessing to find out another?



So anyway, this guru-māra-vidyā should be avoided. That is the instruction in this verse we can get, and that is the Vedic way. It is not that Draupadī is speaking, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu is also speaking... Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very strict on this point. As soon Vallabhācārya spoke that "I have written a better comment than Śrīdhara Svāmī," immediately Caitanya Mahāprabhu become offended. He said, "Oh, you have become more than Śrīdhara Svāmī? You don't care for Svāmī?" So he remarked immediately, svāmī yei jana na māne veśyara bhitare. That is the system. You cannot overrule ācārya. Ācārya... Ācāryopāsanam. Ācārya should be always worshiped. Even if you, by ABCD, you have become more learned than the ācārya... That is not possible, but if you foolishly think like that, still, you should not exhibit your foolishness, that you know more than the ācārya. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... By His life example, He has taught us that the more we remain ignorant, foolish before the ācārya, or before the guru, that is more we advance. Real success is how one is faithful to his guru. That is real success. Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau. It is not by education or grammatical knowledge you can learn anything. No. It is by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And that grace comes down through the grace of guru. That grace also does not come directly. We should not be neglecting this point.

yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



Things become revealed by devotion, not by so-called education. No. Ciraṁ vicinvan. Na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan, prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi [SB 10.14.29]. By little prasāda, satisfaction... In many places these things are stated. Yat kāruṇya-katākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ gauram eva stumaḥ. Kāruṇya-katākṣa. Not complete kāruṇya, but katākṣa, simply little glancing, he becomes so great, kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tridaśa-pūr ākāśa...



Therefore Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. Not that bhagavat-prasāda is achieved by education and grammar. No. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. By the mercy of guru one can achieve. That is just like a common word, "If you love me, love my dog." So you cannot approach Kṛṣṇa without loving His dog, His servant. Satāṁ prasaṅgāt. A person who is trying to distribute the message of Kṛṣṇa, he is very, very dear dog of Kṛṣṇa. Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. He is very... It doesn't matter how far he is advanced in education, how far he has learned grammar. These are not the things. The things is how far he is working to carry out the mission of Kṛṣṇa. Then one has to receive Kṛṣṇa's mercy through the bona fide servant. Kṛṣṇa cannot be bluffed by so-called education and grammar. Kṛṣṇa is not so... Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. He never says "By grammar or by education one can understand." Never says. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ. We should be educated, we should be very careful, but real thing is bhakti. Anyābhi... Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. Api cet su-durācāraḥ. Many places it is said. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api [SB 1.5.11]. Even a bhakta writes something which is not very grammatically, rhetorically correct... Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ, nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat. But because he has tried to broadcast the glories of the Lord, even not in perfect language, that is his qualification.

tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

[SB 1.5.11]



The sādhus, they are not interested about rhetorical or grammatical adjustment. The sādhu wants to see who has spoken. If he's a Vaiṣṇava, then his word will be accepted. Caitanya Mahāprabhu strictly prohibits that is one is not a Vaiṣṇava, don't hear from him. Avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam, śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. "But he's such a learned man," or "He's writes so nicely, correctly." But because he's not Vaiṣṇava, one should not hear from him. "Why? It is so nicely written." No. Sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ. Milk is very good food, everyone knows. But as soon as it is touched by the lips of a serpent, it is poison immediately. Therefore it is forbidden. And one who has no knowledge how to respect guru, how he can become Vaiṣṇava? Chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says. If you don't become a faithful servant of Vaiṣṇava, there is no possibility of your liberation. Chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyecha kebā. Tāṅdera caraṇa-sevi-bhakta-sane vāsa, janame janame haya ei abhilāṣa. This is Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura's... Our determination should be to serve the previous guru and ācārya. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam [Bg. 4.2]. That is our determination. Tāṅdera caraṇa-sevi. Our service... Not directly Kṛṣṇa. Because to serve Vaiṣṇava is more than serving Kṛṣṇa directly. Mad-bhakta-pūjābhyadhikā [SB 11.19.21]. Kṛṣṇa likes that. He doesn't accept anyone's service directly. That is a gross mistake. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is teaching us... [break] ...trying to become one with Kṛṣṇa or one with the gopīs. These are all Māyāvāda philosophy. Tāṅdera caraṇa-sevi. You have to serve the servant of Kṛṣṇa, tad bhṛtya dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. That is the way. Not directly.



So here Draupadī is reminding that, yad-anugrahāt śikṣito bhavatā: "You are neglecting his, satisfying him. Do you think if you kill his son he'll be satisfied? Maybe his son is a criminal from all points of view; still, ultimately, if you kill his son he'll be aggrieved. That is natural. That is natural." There was... In Allahabad, it is our practical experience. Two brothers, all of a sudden, they became angry. They fought one another. One brother was killed. The anger is so dangerous. So naturally, in the court he was ordered to be hanged. Then the father appealed to the court that "My one son is already killed, and the other remaining son, if he is also killed, then what will be my condition?" So court considered this proposal, and the boy was ordered to be killed, he was saved. Yes. So this consideration is there even in ordinary way. And actually, these sons were rogues. They fought, one is killed, another is going to be killed. But this old man will be finished. The court considered it, and he was saved. He was not hanged. He was given some long duration of imprisonment. That we have seen. The same thing, the affection is everywhere. So Draupadī is giving the best instruction, that "By the mercy of Droṇācārya you have learned this art, and now this art you are going to use for killing his son? What is this logic?" Very good argument.

A similar argument was given by Duryodhana to Droṇācārya. Droṇācārya and this Draupadī's father, they became inimical. So he got a son, Uttara. No? Anyway, that son was meant for killing Droṇācārya. And at the same time, that son was a student of Droṇācārya in the art of military science. So Duryodhana reminded Droṇācārya that "This son, Virāṭa, Virāṭa Mahārāja's son, He is meant for killing you, and you have foolishly taught him the military science. Now he's using the military science to kill you." So there are so many instances like that. Sometimes this art, guru-māra-vidyā, is done by rascals and fools. That should not be done. That is instruction from every practical point of view.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



761005SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.45-46

-

Vṛndāvana, October 5, 1976



Pradyumna: "He (Droṇācārya) is certainly still existing, being represented by his son. His wife Kṛpī did not undergo a satī with him because she had a son. O most fortunate one who knows the principles of religion, it is not good for you to cause grief to glorious family members who are always respectable and worshipful."



Prabhupāda:



sa eṣa bhagavān droṇaḥ

prajā-rūpeṇa vartate

tasyātmano 'rdhaṁ patny āste

nānvagād vīrasūḥ kṛpī

[SB 1.7.45]



tad dharmajña mahā-bhāga

bhavadbhir gauravaṁ kulam

vṛjinaṁ nārhati prāptuṁ

pūjyaṁ vandyam abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

[SB 1.7.46]



So, in continuation of the Pāṇḍavas' position in relationship with Droṇācārya, the guru, so many things are being explained by Draupadī. So she is not ordinary woman. She knows everything of the religious principles, and therefore she is teaching the assembly of respectable, learned persons how the spiritual master should be respected. Droṇa is also, I mean to say, qualified as bhagavān. Bhagavān Droṇa. Anyone who is extraordinarily powerful, he is addressed sometimes as bhagavān. Nārada Muni is also sometimes addressed as bhagavān. Lord Śiva is also sometimes addressed as bhagavān. We have explained the different features of bhagavān many times. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47). So the Supreme Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. Nānyat paratara... Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. There may be so many bhagavāns, but the absolute bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya. Not samagra, but the Supreme Personality, He is samagra. The others, they have got to certain extent the qualities of bhagavān. In that sense they can be addressed as bhagavān. But they are not samagra. Samagra is, samagra means the complete. That is only attributed to Kṛṣṇa. Nobody else.



Sa eṣa bhagavān droṇaḥ prajā-rūpeṇa vartate. Prajā means offspring, son, daughter also. Prajāyate. One who is born of the father. Without father, there is no possibility, son or daughter. Therefore prajāyate. One who gives birth. And the prajā... Prajā is the product of the body of the father. A son or daughter, they may be different persons, but they belong to the body of the father. Yathā yoni yathā bījam. Father is the bījam. Just like bījam, the seed. The seed is the tree later on. Similarly, the bījam, the seed, is put by the father in the womb of the mother, and as the seed implanted in the earth and taken care of with watering, sprinkling, it grows to a big tree, similarly, the seed is sown in the womb of the mother, and the mother takes care of the seed, and it comes to a big body later on and comes out. This is the process of birth. So in one sense, between the seed and the tree there is no difference. Similarly, the seed of the father and the father, there is no difference. Here it is, prajā-rūpeṇa vartate.

So according to Vedic culture, if one woman has got son, she is not considered to be widow. Widow means one who hasn't got husband or husband is dead. So if the husband's representative is there, so, strictly speaking, she is not widow. So prajā-rūpeṇa vartate. Again the wife is considered ardhāṅginī. I think in English also it is said, "better half." Wife is considered half the body. The left hand side half... Perhaps you have seen the picture that Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī, one body. The left-hand side is Rādhārāṇī, right-hand side is Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has explained this, rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmād ekātmānāv api [Cc. Ādi 1.5]. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, They are one, but for pastimes they have become two. Ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau. Again Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa united, caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptam. So these things are there. So wife is considered better half. Ardhāṅginī. So the ardhāṅginī is there, and the son is there. In so many ways they are convincing that "Do not think that Droṇācārya is dead and gone." He's (She's) convincing this point. "Droṇācārya is still existing. So killing the son of Droṇācārya means killing Droṇācārya. So do not do this." He's (She's) putting so many arguments.

Then, tad dharmajña mahā-bhāga bhavadbhir gauravaṁ kulam. One should act in such a way that it should be glorified in the family. The family consideration is very important in Vedic culture. A family does not mean that only a husband, wife, or a few children. No. Family means the generation. That is Vedic conception. So if something is wrong done by any member of the family, that becomes a scar to the whole family. So she is, from family-wise, she is warning that "Do not do anything which will be a discredit to the whole Pāṇḍava family." Vṛjinaṁ nārhati prāptuṁ pūjyaṁ vandyam abhīkṣṇaśaḥ. So the guru and the guru's family, they do not require to be chastised or punished. It has been misused in so many ways. In Bengal... Just like they say nityānanda-vaṁśa. Coming from Nityānanda. So Nityānanda had one son, Vīrabhadra. But Vīrabhadra did not marry. So there is no dynasty by semina. By nityānanda-vaṁśa means by disciplic succession. So sometimes extra advantage was taken as nityānanda-vaṁśa. But people have got respect for such thing, dynasty. So not only it is now, from time immemorial, guru, guru's dynasty... Even in Mohammedan religion there is such sentiment, Mohammed and his dynasty, Hussain, they are taken very respectfully. So considering all points, the guru's respect must be maintained. This is the sum and substance of the instruction. But there is other opposite instruction also.

If the guru is not in his proper way according to śāstra... Guru means he must be abiding by the rules and regulation of the śāstra. Sādhu-guru-śāstra. Sādhu means one who is obeying the rules and regulation of śāstra. Śāstra must be the medium. Without śāstra nothing is acceptable. That is spoken by Kṛṣṇa. Tasmād śāstra-vidhānoktaḥ. Yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ [Bg. 16.23]. So nobody can transgress the rules and regulation of śāstra, and what to speak of a guru. Guru is ācārya. Acinoti yaḥ śāstrāṇi. One who knows the rules and regulation of the śāstra and he teaches his disciple according to the śāstra, he is called ācārya. So ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhicit [SB 11.17.27]. Ācārya should be respected, as Kṛṣṇa says, as good as Kṛṣṇa. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also said, sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ **. Ācārya, guru, is as good as God. Sākṣād-dharitvena. Ācārya should be respected as Kṛṣṇa. Therefore ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhicit [SB 11.17.27]. If somebody foolishly thinks that "They are worshiping a man. He's like me, and he has taken the seat, and he's taking worship, respect, from disciples." Sometimes they question like that. But they do not know that how ācārya should be respected. Ācārya should be respected sākṣād-dharitvena, just like God. It is not exaggeration. It is according to the śāstra. And ācārya also accepts all these respectful obeisances to carry to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the process. As we receive knowledge from the ācārya, similarly, our activities, the result of activities, is carried by the ācārya to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ācārya does not accept anything on his own account. Ācārya accepts everything on Kṛṣṇa's account. That is the principle. And because he is representative of Kṛṣṇa, he is dealing on behalf of Kṛṣṇa.

We have got in practical experience. Formerly, in British government, there was viceroy. Vice means in place of and roy means royal king. Viceroy. So this viceroy was respected as the king, as the emperor. That is the process. When he's no longer a viceroy, then he's not respected. But so long he is acting as viceroy... And the rule was that whatever presentation was given to the viceroy he did not accept it personally. It was kept in the state. So these are the process. So guru, ācārya, being representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he should be worshiped. Nāvamanyeta... Na martya-buddhyāsūyeta. Never think of envying. As soon as we become envious of the ācārya, there is falldown, immediately. Yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. This is the teaching of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He's also ācārya. Ācārya-paramparā.

So, nāvamanyeta karhicit martya-buddhyā. Ācārya should not be considered as ordinary human being. Vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhir guruṣu nara-matiḥ, arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matiḥ. These are the injunction. Nārakī. Everyone knows that here is vigraha, Gaura-Nitāi vigraha, Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma vigraha, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa vigraha. Everyone knows that it was, these vigrahas were ordered from Jaipur and it is now installed. But why people are coming in thousands to see the vigraha? They do not know that it is made of stone? Everyone knows. Maybe one or two may be coming, sentiment. In every temple... Just like Jagannātha Purī everyone knows that Jagannātha is made of wood. Then why lakhs of people are going there to see? Similarly, Bālajī. Everyone knows He's made of stone. But thousands of people are going to see. So this is the system. This is not artificial. This is the system. One... As the vigraha... Vigraha means the form of the Lord. There are eight kinds of the forms of the Lord. They are made of stone, they are made of wood, they are made of jewels, and sometimes they are made of painting, and metal. So many. There are eight. All these vigrahas are to be worshiped. That is mentioned in the śāstras. Painting also. If there is painting or even if you think of the form of the Lord within the mind, that is also vigraha. Just like dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. The yogis, they think of Viṣṇu form within the core of the heart. That is also vigraha. Don't think that is imagination. That is also vigraha. So there are eight kinds of vigrahas, and each and every one of them are as good as the other. Similarly, vigraha of guru is also... Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. This is the injunction of the śāstra. And... "May be in the śāstra, but it is not carried." No, it is carried. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktaḥ **, it is said, tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ. Those who are aware of the śāstras...

Just like we have installed the Deity according to śāstra. There is nothing imaginary. It is not idol worship. Idol worship is different. Just like in the Western countries they put an idol on the street, on the park, as the resting place of the crows and passing stool on the head. That is idol worship. The so-called statues are installed and without any protection... No. Our worship is not idol worship. This is Deity worship. We construct temple and spend lakhs of rupees to install the Deity. It is not idol worship. Idol worship is different. Therefore it is warned, arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīḥ. If somebody thinks that the vigraha is idol worship... There are so many rascals, they think like that. They are... "Why you are worshiping in the temple?" Amongst the Indians also, the Arya-samajis, they protest against temple worship. But who cares for them? Here in Vṛndāvana, there is Arya-samaji temple. Nobody goes there. But this is a new temple recently started, and thousands of people are coming. Why? All of them are fools and rascals? This is exactly according to the śāstra.

And the argument that God is everywhere, why you should go to the temple? And what is this nonsense? If God is everywhere, why not in the temple? But this is their argument, nonsense argument. God is everywhere, but not in the temple. This is their argument. So we do not care. Nobody cares. So many agitators came and gone, but the Vedic process will go on. Let the dogs bark, the caravan will pass. There is no difficulty. So on the whole, this is Vedic civilization, that the vigraha of the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepted as He is present. We should take it that Kṛṣṇa... Actually, this is the fact. As you have read in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, there was the Sākṣi-Gopāla history, and the two brāhmaṇas, they promised before the Deity, and later on there was misunderstanding, and the Deity from Vṛndāvana went to bear witness in Orissa more than thousands of miles away. And that Sākṣi-Gopāla, witness Gopāla-Sākṣī means witness-is still being worshiped in Jagannātha Purī, near. There is a station, Sākṣi-Gopāla.

So as the Deity of the Lord, vigraha, should not be considered as made of stone, wood, similarly, guru also should not be accepted as ordinary human being. He should be given all respect as we give to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is being explained by even one woman. That is Vedic culture. Draupadī is explaining the importance, and she has said, sa eṣa bhagavān droṇaḥ. She's quite right when she's accepting Droṇa as bhagavān. Sa eṣa bhagavān droṇaḥ prajā-rūpeṇa vartate. And he is present by his prajā. So these things should be taken very seriously instruction. Therefore śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. This is pramāṇa. Pramāṇi-grantha. Pramāṇi-grantha means śabda-pramāṇa. Śabda-pramāṇa, anumāna pramāṇa, and anumāna... Just like a sound is going on. One who knows, that's all right. But we can... Hypothesis. We can think that some machine is running on. We may not know what is that machine. So this is anumāna. I'm not seeing the machine, what kind of machine is running, but I can think of, imagine that it may be some machine is running on. That is also another pramāṇa. Hypothesis, inductive, deductive. They are also... Analogy. There are so many processes. So here, Kṛṣṇa and guru, they should be accepted on the same level. Therefore Draupadī has addressed Droṇācārya as bhagavān. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ **. It is accepted. We should also accept. Thank you very much. (end)



761006SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.47-48

-

Vṛndāvana, October 6, 1976



Pradyumna: "My lord, do not make the wife of Droṇācārya cry like me. I am aggrieved for the death of my sons. She need not cry constantly like me.



If the kingly administrative order, being unrestricted in sense control, offends the brāhmaṇa order and enrages them, then the fire of that rage burns up the whole body of the royal family and brings grief upon all."

Prabhupāda:



mā rodīd asya jananī

gautamī pati-devatā

yathāhaṁ mṛta-vatsārtā

rodimy aśru-mukhī muhuḥ

[SB 1.7.47]



yaiḥ kopitaṁ brahma-kulaṁ

rājanyair ajitātmabhiḥ

tat kulaṁ pradahaty āśu

sānubandhaṁ śucārpitam

[SB 1.7.48]



So, in these two verses the important point is that Draupadī is sympathetic. That is Vaiṣṇava. She is Vaiṣṇavī. This is the attitude of the Vaiṣṇava. Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Vaiṣṇava is para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. That is Vaiṣṇava's qualification. He doesn't care for his own personal distresses. But he, a Vaiṣṇava becomes aggrieved, distressed, when other is suffering. That is Vaiṣṇava. Prahlāda Mahārāja said,



naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās

tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ

śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-

māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān

[SB 7.9.43]



Prahlāda Mahārāja was so much harassed by his father, and his father was killed. And still, when he was offered benediction by the Lord, Nṛsiṁhadeva, he did not accept it. He said, sa vai vaṇik. My Lord, we are born in the family of rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Asuras, they are influenced by the two lower qualities, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. And those who are devatās, they are influenced by the sattva-guṇa.



There are three guṇas, qualities, in the material world. Sattva-guṇa. Tri-guṇamayī. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī [Bg. 7.14]. Guṇamayī. Triguṇamayī in this material world, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So those who are influenced by the sattva-guṇa, they are first class. First-class means first-class in this material world. Not in the spiritual world. Spiritual world is different. That is nirguṇa, no material qualities. There is no first-class, second-class, third-class. Everyone is first-class. That is absolute. Kṛṣṇa is first-class, His devotees are also first-class. The trees are first-class, the birds are first-class, the cows are first-class, the calves are first-class. Therefore it is called absolute. No conception of relative, second-class, third-class, fourth-class. No. Everything is first-class. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Everything is composition of ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. There is no classification. Either one is situated in dāsya-rasa, one is situated in sākhya-rasa, or in vātsalya-rasa or mādhurya-rasa, they are all one. There is no such distinction. But there is variety. You like this rasa, I like this rasa, that is allowed.

So here, in this material world, they are being influenced by the three rasas, and Prahlāda Mahārāja, being the son of Hiraṇyakaśipu, he considered himself that "I am influenced by the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa." He's a Vaiṣṇava, he's above all guṇas, but a Vaiṣṇava is never proud of his guṇa. Actually, he does not feel like that, that he is very advanced, he is very enlightened. He always thinks, "I am the lowest."

tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



This is Vaiṣṇava, that "I am the lowest of the human being." Just like Caitanya-caritāmṛta author, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he said,



jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha

purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha

[Cc. Ādi 5.205]



Jagāi-Mādhāi, he was considered to be very sinful. "I am more sinful than Jagāi-Mādhāi." Jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha. And my position? Purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha. "The worm in the stool, he has got some position, but I am lower than that."



jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha

purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha

[Cc. Ādi 5.205]



Mora nāma yei laya tāra puṇya kṣaya. "Anyone who takes my name, whatever little asset he has got on account of pious activities, he will lose it." In this way... This is not artificial. A Vaiṣṇava thinks like that. A Vaiṣṇava like Kavirāja Gosvāmī and Rūpa Gosvāmī, they always think like that. That is Vaiṣṇava. They never think that he is very advanced. Never. So similarly, Draupadī is thinking her position and what will be the position of Aśvatthāmā's mother? Aśvatthāmā's mother, she is also woman, and she is studying Aśvatthāmā's mother's position from her position. She's very much aggrieved on account of her sons being killed. So she is thinking if Aśvatthāmā's mother is under the distress of her sons's being killed, what will be her position? She is disturbed, thinking of the position of Aśvatthāmā's mother. Personally, she is not at all aggrieved. She's aggrieved, but she is thinking the grief of Aśvatthāmā's mother more than her. This is Vaiṣṇava.



Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja said, śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. Because my father has done so much injustice unto me, so Kṛṣṇa wanted to give him benediction. But he refused. "No. I do not require anything. I am quite happy. I don't want anything. And in exchange of my service... Because I have done some work as Vaiṣṇava, it is my duty..." Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. "It is my duty as a servant. I have tolerated all tribulations offered by my father. I was never disturbed. I preached amongst my class friends. Whatever possible I have done. But that does not mean I want some benefit. No. I am not a bāniyā, vaṇik. Sa vai vaṇik. So do not offer my any benediction. I am quite satisfied." So the question may be that "You are satisfied in spite of undergoing so much trouble? Still, you are...?" "Yes, I am satisfied. Yes, I am satisfied." "How?" Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. "Because I have learned by the grace of Nārada Muni how to chant Your holy name." That's it. Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta. "This chanting of Your glorification is mahāmṛta, a great nectarean." Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. "My cittaḥ, my consciousness, is always absorbed in the thought of Your glorification. Therefore I am not at all unhappy." "You are not unhappy in spite of so much tribulation given by your father?" "Yes. I'm not at all." This is Vaiṣṇava. He cannot be unhappy. We see that Prahlāda Mahārāja was put into so much trouble by his father. Even, even this Draupadī, she was put into so much trouble-immediately, her sons are killed. But she is, actually she is not unhappy. This is Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava cannot be unhappy in any circumstances.

Ahaituky apratihatā. That is explained. Ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati. If you become situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you'll be so satisfied that in any circumstances nobody will be able to give you any trouble. This is Vaiṣṇava. Yayātmā suprasīdati. Ātmā, brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. There is no question of lamenting. But still, a Vaiṣṇava laments not for his own purpose. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja says that na udvije para. Kṛṣṇa is para. Nṛsiṁhadeva is para, the Supreme. "O the Supreme, I am not at all disturbed." Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyāḥ. Why? Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ [SB 7.9.43]. "Because by the grace of Nārada Muni I have learned this art, how to chant Your holy name. That I have learned." Tvad-vīrya-gāyana. "I learned or not learned, but whenever I chant, then I merge into the ocean of nectarean."

A similar is stated about the Gosvāmīs. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. We have seen it practically. One big politician in Calcutta, C.R. Das. He was earning fifty thousand monthly. In those days. Fifty thousand means... I am speaking... He died in 1925. That means fifty years ago he was earning fifty thousand per month. Now fifty thousand means fifty lakhs nowadays. He was so rich man. But on the Congress resolution that the prominent members of the Congress, they should not cooperate with the government... And one of the item of noncooperation was they should not practice in the British court because there is no justice. That was Gandhi's order, that "In the British court there is no justice. So why should you go there? Don't go." So this C.R. Das, on the resolution of the Congress... He was one of the prominent members. He gave up. So he had no income. So he had no income. The Congress was giving him five hundred rupees, pocket expenses. Because he was such a rich man. What is five hundred rupees for him? He was earning fifty thousand rupees and spending. So he could not bear that inconvenience. He died within a year. He was a rich man. He could not provide. And he was very charitably disposed. If somebody would come to him he would say, "I have lost my all income. Now I have got this five hundred rupees. You can take it." He was such a charitably disposed. So anyway he could not tolerate.

But a devotee... Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, he also did the same thing. What is that? Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. When he was inspired by Caitanya Mahāprabhu... He was a minister in charge of Nawab Hussain Shah's government, but he decided, "What is this nonsense ministership? Let me join Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So he did it. Therefore about him it is said, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīm. He was associated with big, big men. Maṇḍala-pati. He was minister. But he gave up. "What is this nonsense? It has no value." So if we compare with C.R. Das, he also gave up his income, but he died. But what happened to Rūpa Gosvāmī? Naturally, such a rich man, minister, he gave up his position, he should have also died because no income? No. He did not die. That is the difference. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. For benefiting the mass of people who are suffering for want of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to do them good, they became mendicant. Kaupīna-kanthāśritau. You have seen the picture of Rūpa Gosvāmī. A small loincloth, and nothing more. Then? He should have died. No. Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhuḥ. They were enjoying. Enjoying how the gopīs are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They were twenty-four hours thinking. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So similarly, Prahlāda Mahārāja says that tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna... The same philosophy, everywhere. What was spoken by Prahlāda Mahārāja millions of years ago, the same thing was perceived by Rūpa Gosvāmī five hundred years ago, and same thing can be perceived now also. Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. If you once become merged into the nectarean of chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, then you'll always remain happy. There is no doubt about it. Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ [SB 7.9.43]. So either Rūpa Gosvāmī or Prahlāda Mahārāja or anyone, even up to date, they may face many difficulties, so-called difficulties. A Vaiṣṇava has no difficulty. But we see... Just like we see Prahlāda Mahārāja was in difficulty. Rūpa Gosvāmī was in difficulty. He was minister and he became a mendicant. Kaupīna-kanthāśritau. No, he was not difficulty.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, his father income was, in those days, twelve lakhs of rupees. And in Rādhā-kuṇḍa he lived taking little butter every alternate day. And saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ. And he was offering obeisances also counting. Just like we count chanting, he was counting that "I must offer hundred times obeisances." That he was doing. This is Gosvāmī's behavior. So a Vaiṣṇava has no difficulty. The same thing is exemplified by Draupadī. She is aggrieved on account of her son's being killed by Aśvatthāmā. Now she is feeling more for the mother of Aśvatthāmā, how she will feel if her son is killed. This is Vaiṣṇava. Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. A Vaiṣṇava is para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. A Vaiṣṇava has personally no distress. Anywhere he can sit down and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And where is his difficulty? Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. He has no. But why he takes so much distress? Now, because tato vimukha-cetasaḥ. Śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ. Prahlāda Mahārāja says, "I am aggrieved for the rascals who are not devotees." Tato vimukha-cetasaḥ. Vimukha means they are not interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So a Vaiṣṇava is disturbed, perturbed. How these rascals are suffering so much in material condition. So how to teach them Kṛṣṇa consciousness. How to make them happy. This is Vaiṣṇava's concern. Vaiṣṇava concern, personal, there is no concern. Vaiṣṇava is not satisfied that "Because I have no problem, I can chant anywhere and enjoy." No. Still, Vaiṣṇava takes the risk. As Prahlāda Mahārāja said, that "I do not wish to go alone to Vaikuṇṭha or anywhere, my Lord, unless I can deliver all these rascals." This is Vaiṣṇava. He knew that all the..., Vimukha-cetasaḥ. These materialistic persons, they are engaged in planning for material happiness. They are working so hard, becoming baffled without any benefit. So māyā-sukhāya bharam ud...many, many plans, many, many skyscraper buildings, roads and motor cars. What is the real purpose? The purpose is they want to be happy. But that is not possible. Therefore they are vimūḍhān. Rascals. They are going in the wrong way. How to divert their attention to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then they will be happy.

These European, American boys, they are coming from rich family. They have, even nationally, they have got big, big skyscraper buildings, motor car, and why they have come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Because they were not happy. It is a fact. They were not happy. So a Vaiṣṇava can understand this, that outwardly, externally, they may have nice dress or nice building or nice motor car, but internally they are so unhappy that they rise up to the top of the skyscraper building and fall down to commit suicide. This is his position. The Vaiṣṇava can understand that bharam udvahato vimūḍhān. They are making skyscraper building, but there is no happiness. It is simply a, what is called? A Gorgeous arrangement only. Otherwise, there is not a drop of happiness. Śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ.

So the feeling of Vaiṣṇava is like that. Similarly, Draupadī is Vaiṣṇavī. She is feeling more than herself, the wife of Droṇācārya, mother of Aśvatthāmā, how she will feel. Therefore Vaiṣṇava's qualification is, para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Personally a Vaiṣṇava is not unhappy, but a Vaiṣṇava becomes unhappy for others" distress. Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye. This is Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's prayer to Sanātana Gosvāmī. Vairāgya-vidyā. He was feeling obligation to Sanātana Gosvāmī, how Sanātana Gosvāmī taught him vairāgya-vidyā. So, kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. This is Vaiṣṇava position. So Kuntī... And from ordinary moral point of view, it is said by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyati sa paṇḍitaḥ. Anyone who can see in others, feeling like himself... If I cut your throat, you'll feel pain. How I know it? Now, because if you cut my throat I'll feel pain. So para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Here Kuntī is feeling that, that "I am already suffering because my sons are killed. So why I am going to retaliate? I am going to give the same suffering to the mother of Aśvatthāmā by killing her son." This is Vaiṣṇava feeling. This is Vaiṣṇava feeling. So Vaiṣṇava is not aggrieved or distressed for personal interest, and Vaiṣṇava is always feeling how others will be happy.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa is very, very satisfied with the Vaiṣṇava. Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. So you have taken to the vow of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Try to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world. And we have got little success. One politician in U.S.A., he has remarked that "This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is increasing like an epidemic." He has said that. "And if we do not check it, one day it may take our government." He has opined like that. So any intelligent man can know what is the ultimate result. Everyone... Because mass of people, if they take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then government is yours. That is a fact. And if the Kṛṣṇa consciousness government is there, no meat-eating, no smoking, no illicit sex, so many no's, the demons will die. (laughter) That is the position. Thank you very much. (end)



761007SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.49-50

-

Vṛndāvana, October 7, 1976



Pradyumna: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: O brāhmaṇas, King Yudhiṣṭhira fully supported the statements of the Queen, which were in accordance with the principles of religion and were justified, glorious, full of mercy and equity, and without duplicity. Nakula and Sahadeva (the younger brothers of the King) and also Sātyaki and Arjuna, the Personality of Godhead Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of Devakī, and the ladies and others all unanimously agreed with the King."



Prabhupāda:



dharmyaṁ nyāyyaṁ sakaruṇaṁ

nirvyalīkaṁ samaṁ mahat

rājā dharma-suto rājñyāḥ

pratyanandad vaco dvijāḥ

[SB 1.7.49]



nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca

yuyudhāno dhanañjayaḥ

bhagavān devakī-putro

ye cānye yāś ca yoṣitaḥ

[SB 1.7.50]



So bhagavān devakī-suta. Bhagavān. People may inquire, "What kind of Bhagavān He is? He has taken birth as the Devakī-suta. Any ordinary man, he takes birth as the son of such and such gentleman or such and such mother. So what kind of Bhagavān He is?" Therefore we have to understand how Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa is Bhagavān. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. He appears as the son of Devakī or Vasudeva. We have to know this. And if you can know then you become immediately liberated. Our business is liberation. This is our main business. What is the purpose of getting this opportunity of human life? That we must understand. We should not waste our valuable life like the cats and dogs. This is our main business. To understand God. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the life. Brahman, paraṁ brahma. Brahman, paraṁ brahma, or, Brahman's, I mean to say, potencies. Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ. These things are there. We should understand. That is our business. So if we understand why Bhagavān appears as the son of Devakī, then you become liberated. This is the... Bhagavān says janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. You have to learn it tattvataḥ, in truth. Not superficially. Then you'll understand how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān, appears as the son of Devakī or son of Vasudeva. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san. Although He's aja... Aja means who never takes birth. Still, He takes birth. Contradictory. This is inconceivable.



Unless God has got inconceivable energy, He's not God. This has been discussed by Jīva Gosvāmī. If you do not accept inconceivable energy of God, then there is no God. This is inconceivable. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san, sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā [Bg. 4.6]. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnām. This is God. How it happens, how it is possible, if you understand properly, then you become liberated simply by understanding this, that Bhagavān, why He shall not appear as the son? Why you shall restrict? God is not under your restriction. That is God. If He becomes under your rules and regulation, then He's not God. That is inconceivable. How ajo 'pi, although unborn, how He takes birth. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi. Bhūtānām īśvaraḥ. He's the Supreme Controller, but He likes to be controlled by mother Yaśodā. Bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san. He controls everyone, but why He accepts one lady, innocent lady, not very educated, not Vedantist, a village lady, interested in churning curd and butter. Not Vedantist. And He has become just like a very affectionate son of this village lady. "Mother, let me suck your breast."

So this is God's pastimes. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā. He is eko hi...bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. He is supplying the necessities of life to all the living entities. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). But He is begging from mother Yaśodā, "Kindly allow Me to suck your breast." And when mother refuses, He becomes angry. He breaks the pot of butter and so on, so on. You know this. This is called transcendental pastimes. And at the same time when it is required, He immediately lifts the Govardhana Hill. Immediately. Although He is dependent on mother Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja. Nanda Mahārāja is seeing, "Oh, this little boy has lifted Govardhana Hill? Oh! How it is possible? Let me help." He's trying to help Him by sticking the stick on the Govardhana Hill that it may not fall down. You see? He has already lifted. Still, because father, affectionate, he's thinking, "The childish boy, he has lifted the Govardhana Hill. It may now fall down. Let me help Him." This is going on. This is called transcendental pastimes.

And those who are not devotees, they cannot understand that "How it is possible?" They say it is, what is called? Mythology. It is mythology. It is not mythology, it is fact. Vyāsadeva, such a learned person, vidvān. Lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. He is vidvān. He has written this sātvata-saṁhitā with some mythology, some fiction, some imagination? It is rascaldom to consider it like that. It is not mythology; it is fact. That is Bhagavān. He has wasted his time to describe some mythology? But they have no common sense. And not only that, Vyāsadeva has written. Later on all big, big commentators like Śrīdhara Svāmī, Vijayadhvaja, Vīrarāghavācārya, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Sanātana Gosvāmī, many. They have never said that this is mythology. Never said. Never said. You'll not find in any of the comments of these big, big stalwart ācārya. Vīrarāghavācārya, he is very learned scholar belonging to the Rāmānujācārya Sampradāya. They have never said it is mythology. Where do you get this idea of mythology? That is possible. God is all-powerful. He can do anything. He can appear. Why should you restrict Him not to become the son of Devakī? Why should you restrict? Is He under your control or you are under His control? He can become the Devakī-suta. He can become a small child to be chastised by mother Yaśodā. He likes it. Everyone offers Him with reverence all respect. Nobody dares to restrict Him and chastise Him. Nobody goes to God, that "You cannot do this. You are fool, You are rascal." Nobody says. But still He wants to hear all this. That is a pastime.

Just like a big rich man. He eats so many nice things. But sometimes he says, "Give me some puffed rice." Puffed rice is not his food, but he likes sometimes. Similarly, everyone prays to God with reverence and vow and obedience, but He wants to be chastised sometimes. That chastisement, from where this chastisement will come? It will come from His devotee, not ordinary. If ordinary man chastises, imitating Yaśodāmāyi, he will be offender. He will be punished. But where He agrees to be chastised, "Mother you chastise Me," that is bhakti. That is devotional service. So there is nothing extraordinary when it is said here, bhagavān devakī-suta. He can become Devakī-suta. It is His mercy.

So we have to understand that, how Bhagavān, ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa. Bhagavān means ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47). All powerful. He can appear anywhere, without any restriction. But still, He appears as Devakī-suta. Janma karma ca divyaṁ me yo jānāti. We have to understand through the śāstra. And that tattvataḥ understanding is possible only through bhakti. Not by any other means. Not by jñāna or yoga. That is not possible. It is simply through... Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. The jñānīs, yogis... Karmīs, they are third-class, they cannot. The yogis, jñānīs, yogis, they have got spiritual advancement, but still, until they come to the platform of bhakti, it is not possible to understand. Janma karma ca me divyaṁ tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9].

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



So if we want to understand Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān, in truth, then we have to take the path of bhakti. No other means will help us. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. How He becomes Devakī-suta, how He... Then the statement of Draupadī was accepted by all the gentlemen, or the kings. Everyone accepted. And they considered dharmyaṁ nyāyyaṁ sakaruṇam. Just like even in judgement... The other day I told you the judgement given to a murderer. There must be some consideration, sakaruṇam. Sakaruṇam means mercy. Not that... Because one has committed murder in a fanatic condition, he is excused sometimes. That is sakaruṇam. The judgement should be given not simply on the superficial causes. Everything should be con... Dharmyaṁ nyāyyaṁ sakaruṇaṁ nirvyalīkam. Suppose a child commits something wrong. He is not punished. A brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa never commits any sinful activity. If he, sometimes in an unnatural condition, if he does something. So he should be excused. This is Vedic law. The woman, the brāhmaṇa, the child, the cow, and...? Old men. Yes. They should be excused. That is



dharmyaṁ nyāyyaṁ sakaruṇaṁ

nirvyalīkaṁ samaṁ mahat

rājā dharma-suto rājñyāḥ

pratyanandad vaco dvijāḥ



He accepted. "Yes, what Draupadī is saying is all right." Not only he, but also others. Nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca yuyudhāno dhanañjayaḥ bhagavān. Ultimately, bhagavān devakī-putro cānye yāś ca yoṣitaḥ.



So, mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is dharma-suta. He is not ordinary person. He is the son of Dharmarāja, Yamarāja. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's mother, Kuntī, had the power to call any demigod. She got this benediction from Durvāsā Muni. So he (she) had his (her) three sons, means Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, and Arjuna. She got Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira from Dharmarāja, Arjuna from Indra, and Bhīma from Varuṇa..., Vāyu, yes. Similarly, still she is one of the chaste women. These things are there. But still, they are not polluted. But in the Kali-yuga these things are prohibited. Devareṇa sutotpattiṁ kalau pañca vivarjayet [Cc. Ādi 17.164].

In the Kali-yuga people are very much polluted. They cannot transgress. This is not transgression, this is powerful. Just like you are prohibited to go to the filthy place, prohibited. But the sunshine goes. Sunshine goes. Sunshine is not prohibited, that "Here is a filthy place, lavatory. Sunshine, you do not come here." No, sunshine doesn't require your permission. It can go anywhere. But it is not polluted. Tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya [SB 10.33.29]. One who is tejī... Don't try to imitate tejī. You must become tejī. Then... Just like for Bhagavān everything is perfect. Apāpa-viddham. Bhagavān is never affected by any so-called sin. For Him there is no sinful activities. Apāpa-viddham. You'll find in the Īśopaniṣad. There is the mantra, Vedic mantra. And if you think, consider, that "Kṛṣṇa is doing so many things, this is sinful." No. Therefore God is always good. God is good. There is a common word. Even if you see that He is doing something wrong, that is not wrong. That is right. Tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya [SB 10.33.29]. He's so powerful, for Him there is no wrong. He's never wrongdoer.

Therefore devotees, they do not expect that "Kṛṣṇa will always be very kind upon me. He may be harsh, but that is also good." Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa's devotee, even he is harsh, he is unkind, so-called unkind, it is also good. Just like Nārada Muni cursed the Yamalārjuna. What is that? Their name? The Kuvera's sons? They were cursed to become tree, but what was the result? The result was that although they became trees they were fortunate enough to see Kṛṣṇa personally. So God or His devotee, Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa devotee, you should always take that they're always good. God is good. And the devotee is good. Either we see that He's merciful... He's always merciful. Therefore devotees never take anything as not merciful. Tat te anukampām. They take everything from Kṛṣṇa as sympathy, anukampā. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇaḥ [SB 10.14.8]. One who can see this anukampā in reverse condition of life, the compassion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk. His right to become liberation becomes guaranteed. If anyone accepts the mercy of God in any circumstances, and he does not do anything wrong to anyone, such person is guaranteed to be liberated. That is the injunction of the śāstra. Thank you very much. (end)



761008SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.7.51-52

-

Vṛndāvana, October 8, 1976



Pradyumna: "Bhīma, however, disagreed with them and recommended killing this culprit who, in an angry mood, had murdered sleeping children for no purpose and for neither his nor his master's interest.



Caturbhuja (the four-armed one), or the Personality of Godhead, after hearing the words of Bhīma, Draupadī and others, saw the face of His dear friend Arjuna, and He began to speak as if smiling."

Prabhupāda:



tatrāhāmarṣito bhīmas

tasya śreyān vadhaḥ smṛtaḥ

na bhartur nātmanaś cārthe

yo 'han suptān śiśūn vṛthā

[SB 1.7.51]



niśamya bhīma-gaditaṁ

draupadyāś ca catur-bhujaḥ

ālokya vadanaṁ sakhyur

idam āha hasann iva

[SB 1.7.52]



So in the previous verse it is described, bhagavān devakī-suta. Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa, Devakī-suta. Still, people may doubt that Kṛṣṇa, being Devakī-suta, how He can become the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because sometimes very powerful person is also called bhagavān. So such persons have very confidence in Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is Caturbhuja. Therefore here, in this verse, Kṛṣṇa is confirmed to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead by adding this word, Caturbhuja. Don't doubt. Because Kṛṣṇa has appeared with two hands, that does not mean He is not Bhagavān. He is Caturbhuja. To confirm it.



Actually, sometimes it is said that Kṛṣṇa is the incarnation of Viṣṇu, but actually Viṣṇu is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2], that is said in the Bhagavad-gītā. Viṣṇu also one of the devas, first, principle devas. Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu, and Lord Śiva. Guṇāvatāra. Viṣṇu expanding Himself in three avatāras. Sattva-guṇa He takes charge Himself, sattva-guṇa. Rajo-guṇa it is given to Brahmā in charge, and tamo-guṇa is given to the Lord Śiva. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya. Sṛṣṭi, creation, is done by Brahmā, rajo-guṇa; and sthiti, maintenance, is done by Viṣṇu; and destruction is done by Lord Śiva, tamo-guṇa. He is not tamo-guṇa. In charge of tamo-guṇa. Just like somebody becomes superintendent of jail. It does not mean that the superintendent is also one of the prisoners. No. He's in charge of the jail department. Similarly, Lord Śiva, He's not in tamo-guṇa. He's transcendental. He is almost Viṣṇu. He's neither ordinary human being. Lord Śiva is in between viṣṇu-tattva and jīva-tattva. So how he can be in the tamo-guṇa? Nobody is... They are all transcendental. Especially Lord Viṣṇu.

Lord Viṣṇu has nothing to do with these material affairs, as a big man, a rich man has nothing to do personally, but he gets things done by his assistant, by his servant. It is like that. In the Vedas also, Upaniṣad, it is said, na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. Lord Viṣṇu has nothing to do personally. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate, na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate. Nobody is equal to Him, neither nobody is greater than Him. Everyone is below. Therefore viṣṇu-tattva is asamordhva. Nobody is equal, nobody is higher. To consider equal to viṣṇu-tattva is aparādha, offense. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has warned this offense very strictly.

prākṛta kariyā māne viṣṇu-kalevara

viṣṇu-nindā āra nāhi ihāra upara



If somebody thinks Viṣṇu as one of the product of this material world, prākṛta...



prākṛta kariyā māne viṣṇu-kalevara

viṣṇu-nindā āra nāhi ihāra upara



Māyāvādī philosophers, they abuse that Viṣṇu's body is. Viṣṇu comes, appears, He accepts a material body. That is condemned, condemned by Bhagavān in Bhagavad-gītā. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. He does not accept any material body. Tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham. Ātma-māyayā. Sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā [Bg. 4.6]. Not with material help. Ātma-māyayā, cit-śakti. So Kṛṣṇa, there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa's soul and Kṛṣṇa's body. Just like we have got. We are different from this body. And Kṛṣṇa is not different from the body. He does not change His body. Although He assumes several avatāra, but he does not change His body. Advaitam acyutam... Acyuta, not different from the original personification, identification. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Although He assumes so many varieties of viṣṇu-tattva, still, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33]. Therefore viṣṇu-tattva is, never looks like old man. Nava-yauvanam. Always young. Kṛṣṇa always young. Nava-yauvanaṁ ca.



So in order to confirm Kṛṣṇa's position, here it is not Devakī-suta. Because one may doubt, that "Devakī-suta is ordinary human being or living being." No. Here it is said, catur-bhuja. Here it is said, bhagavān. Here it is said, catur-bhuja. So we should always remember that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Being. And Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. Don't think that above Kṛṣṇa there is any other higher authority, either Brahman or Paramātmā or Viṣṇu. So many... Absolute Truth is manifested in so many features. But Kṛṣṇa is the original. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28].

It is summarized in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that there are so many descriptions of the incarnation of Viṣṇu, but at the end, Vyāsadeva concludes that whatever incarnations are described here, they are aṁśa-kalā. Aṁśa means direct expansion, and kalā means expansion of the expansion. Just like Kṛṣṇa, the first expansion is Balarāma, Baladeva. And the next expansion is Saṅkarṣaṇa, Vāsudeva, Aniruddha, Pradyumna. The next expansion is Nārāyaṇa. The next expansion again second catur-vyūha. Saṅkarṣaṇa again. Dvitīya-catur-vyūha. Then next expansion, Viṣṇu, Mahā-Viṣṇu. Next expansion, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. And next expansion is Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. In this way, there are different expansion, but kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Ādyaṁ puruṣaṁ śāśvatam. Kṛṣṇa is the original person. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. "I am not expansion of anybody." Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. They are all īśvaras, controller. Viṣṇu-tattva is controller always. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Everywhere Viṣṇu is the Supreme Controller.

So every viṣṇu-tattva is controller. There is no doubt. And they have got equal power. Not that Lord Rāmacandra is less powerful than Kṛṣṇa. No. They have equal power. The example is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya [Bs. 5.46]. Just like one candle. You ignite another candle, you ignite another, another, another. But all these candles, they are equally powerful. Although you can say, "This is first candle, this is second candle, this is third candle..." Similarly, viṣṇu-tattva, everyone is equally powerful. Although Kṛṣṇa is first, Balarāma is second, Saṅkarṣaṇa is third, like that. But do not think They are less powerful. No. Viṣṇu-tattva means They are equally powerful. Svāṁśa. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan [Bs. 5.39]. Kalā. Rāma is expansion of Viṣṇu, but it is not that Rāma is less powerful than Kṛṣṇa. Nobody is less powerful. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu [Bs. 5.39]. There are so many avatāras. Kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yaḥ. But Kṛṣṇa is the paramaḥ pumān, the Supreme Being, the Supreme Person. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Everywhere. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. This is the conclusion of the śāstras. So don't consider that Kṛṣṇa, because He has come, appeared in Vṛndāvana like a cowherd boy, never think...

Of course, the Vṛndāvana-vāsī, they do not know what is Kṛṣṇa. They are villagers. They do not know. But they do not love anyone more than Kṛṣṇa. That is their qualification. They do not know even Viṣṇu. When the gopīs saw viṣṇu-mūrti... Kṛṣṇa assumed the viṣṇu-mūrti. They were passing. They said, "Oh here is Viṣṇu. All right. Namaskāra." They were not interested even with Viṣṇu. They were interested with Kṛṣṇa, although they do not know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, if, without knowing what is Kṛṣṇa, if you simply become attached to Kṛṣṇa, then your life is successful. Simply, somehow or other, you become attached to Kṛṣṇa. Mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ... [break] ...yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu. Simply you have to... This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Somehow or other, you increase your attachment for Kṛṣṇa. Some way or other. Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet. This is Rūpa Gosvāmī's instruction. Somehow or other, you become attached to Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to induce people how to become attached to Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakti-yoga. Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet. Then? Vidhi-niṣedhāḥ. There are so many rules and regulations for bhakti-yoga. Yes, there are. And Rūpa Gosvāmī says, sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ. Some way or other, if you become attached to Kṛṣṇa, then all the vidhis and regulative principles and rules and regulations, they will act as your servant. They'll, automatically there will be... Because as soon as you become attached to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa said, kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā.

kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā

śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

[Bg. 9.31]



Kṣipram, very soon. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30].



Don't think that these Europeans or Americans, they are mlecchas and yavanas. That is aparādha. Offense. Because they are sādhu. They do not know... They have accepted Kṛṣṇa without any hodgepodge understanding, that "This is also good, this is also good, this is also good." They are strictly following the instruction of their spiritual master. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Even a small child in our association, Śyāmasundara's daughter, she would go to somebody, she was only five years old. She would ask, "Do you know Kṛṣṇa?" So somebody said, "No, I do not know." "Oh, Supreme Personality of Godhead." She would preach like that. So they are convinced, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. This conviction is the foremost quality. Then other things will follow. Sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ. So if one is simply convinced on this point, that kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam, and he does like that, follows the principle, kṛṣṇaika-śaraṇam. Varṇāśrama-dharma. Kṛṣṇaika-śaraṇam. That is wanted. Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja. So do that. Stick to this principle, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa is para-tattva, the Absolute Truth, and Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading. Mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam [Bg. 9.4]. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Jagad avyakta-mūrtinā. This avyakta. The Kṛṣṇa's potency is everywhere. Therefore those who are advanced devotee, they do not see anything else than Kṛṣṇa. Everywhere he sees Kṛṣṇa. And that is a fact.

Kṛṣṇa also teaches that "I am here." If you cannot conceive that Kṛṣṇa is everywhere present, Kṛṣṇa personally gives you instruction, "Here I am." Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya [Bg. 7.8]. Everyone is drinking water at least four times, five times. So at the time of drinking water, or drinking anything, if you remember Kṛṣṇa then you become purified. Mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha. That is yoga, bhakti-yoga. If you practice only this. Whatever you drink, you drink something for some taste. So either you drink soda water, or water, or milk, or even wine. Because the Europeans, Americans, they are accustomed to drink wine. But if they follow this instruction of Kṛṣṇa, that "This taste is Kṛṣṇa," then he remembers Kṛṣṇa. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. As soon as he brings Kṛṣṇa in his mind, he becomes a bhakta. So easy. Anyone can become kṛṣṇa-bhakta if he follows the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā. There is no difficulty. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. This is the simple process. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ [Bg. 7.8]. This is for ordinary class of men. But if you think that you are very advanced in learning, in Vedic literature, and Vedic mantras, yes, then Kṛṣṇa says, praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu. That praṇava-oṁkāra, oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. That praṇava is Kṛṣṇa. Praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu.

So either you become a highly learned scholar in Vedic literature or you are simply an ordinary person, you can think of Kṛṣṇa and you become successful in your life. There is no difficulty. Raso 'ham. If you are ordinary person... Any, every, every person drinks water or drinks something. Let him immediately think of, as soon as he tastes, "Here is Kṛṣṇa." Puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca. A flower, a rose flower, very fragrant. As soon as you smell you can remember Kṛṣṇa. "Oh, this smell is Kṛṣṇa." Actually, that is Kṛṣṇa. You cannot create that smell. It is Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's art. That, puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca, that gandha, that smell, flavor, is within the earth. Wherefrom the rose is coming? From this earth. But still the rose is so fragrant. You cannot take out the fragrance from the earth. Everything is there. Sarva-kāma-dughā-mahī. Everything is within the earth. But you cannot take out. It is Kṛṣṇa. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He has got this power to exact, to extract puṇya-gandha through the rose flower. You haven't. You may be very big chemist, but you cannot do that. So in this way, if we study Kṛṣṇa, if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then your life is successful. That we are teaching. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. And the śāstras will help you.

But even if you do not read śāstra, if you always remember Kṛṣṇa, impression of Kṛṣṇa. The temple is made for layman. Even woman, child, if he sees daily Kṛṣṇa here, then he gets impression. He can think of Kṛṣṇa. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto [Bg. 18.65]. Therefore the temple is there. Everyone should come every day, every morning, or as many times as possible and take the impression of Kṛṣṇa and keep it within your core of heart and think of Kṛṣṇa. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī mām... And offer little You don't require to study Vedānta philosophy or this or that. Because what is the purpose of Vedānta? The purpose of Vedānta is vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyam [Bg. 15.15]. You have to understand Kṛṣṇa. So if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa, then you are greatest Vedantist. Greatest Vedantist. Vedaiś ca sarvair. Vedānta-vid vedānta-kṛt ca aham. He is the compiler of Vedas. So whatever instruction Kṛṣṇa has given in the Bhagavad-gītā, that is all Vedānta. This simple instruction, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto, this is Vedānta. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya [Bg. 7.8]. This is Vedanta. So to become Vedantist means to understand Kṛṣṇa, follow Kṛṣṇa's instruction, and be successful in your life. Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.8: Lectures





730410SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.18

-

New York, April 10, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



kunty uvāca

namasye puruṣaṁ tvādyam

īśvaraṁ prakṛteḥ param

alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām

antar bahir avasthitam

[SB 1.8.18]



Translation: "Śrīmatī Kuntī said: O Kṛṣṇa, I offer my obeisances unto You because You are the original personality and are unaffected by the qualities of the material world. You are existing both within and without everything, yet You are invisible to all."



Prabhupāda: So this is the position of God, that He is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham. He is within this universe; He is within the atom also. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayā...



eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.35]



This is Brahma-saṁhitā. The Lord, by expansion of one of His plenary portions, He is existing within this universe. Not only within the universe, but within the atom also. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. This is God's qualification, that He can become greater than the greatest. Just like we have got conception the greatest-this universe. We cannot even imagine how long, how far it is extended. But such universes are coming out from the breathing of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Yaḥ kāraṇārnava-jale bhajati sma yoga-nidrām ananta-jagad-aṇḍa-saroma-kūpaḥ [Bs. 5.47]. From His breathing, when He exhales, innumerable universes come out, and when He inhales, all those universes again enters. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It is generated and again annihilated. This is going on. This is one side, that innumerable universes can be put into the nostril hole of the Mahā-Viṣṇu. And another side, He can enter even within the atom. This is God consciousness. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. He is greater than the greatest. We generally say, "God is great," but we do not know how great He is. People say, "God is great," but we have no conception how great He is. He is so great that He can swallow innumerable universes within His belly.



Just like when Kṛṣṇa was challenged by His mother that "Show me Your face. You say that You have not eaten the earth. Your friends complained, and You say that You have not eaten. So I want to see. Open Your mouth." So when He opened, (s)he saw all the universes within the mouth. All the universes. He proved, "My dear mother, not only a little earth, but the whole universe is within My mouth." (laughter) So when mother Yaśodā was astonished, she thought something illusory, "All right, don't do it again. That's all." (laughter) She does not know that "Here is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To show me His mercy He has become my child." She does not know. She always thinks, "He is my child. He is under my control."

This is the relationship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with His devotees. This is wanted. Simply to understand "God is very great," that is not sufficient knowledge. When you deal with the great, exchange your relationship with the great, that is perfect. That is perfect. Suppose your president is very great. That's all right. Everyone knows, "President is very great." But what shall I derive out of that? When I actually deal with him, I become his friend, I become his servant, I become his secretary, I become... Some way or other, if I am related with that great personality, that is my benefit. Otherwise what is the use knowing, "Oh, President Nixon is very great"? There are so many... What I am deriving from that great? This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they simply remain silent, "Oh, God is very great," and they cannot imagine how great He is. But a devotee can understand how great He is. He can see that innumerable universes are within the mouth of God. This is the position of devotee. This is not sufficient knowledge: "God is great." God must be great. That's all right. But unless you come in dealing with that great, you cannot relish actually what is God and how great He is.

So here Kuntī says, alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [SB 1.8.18]. Sarva-bhūtānām, "All living entities..." alakṣyam, "You are invisible, invisible, although," antar bahir avasthitam, "You are within and without." God is within yourself. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Īśvara, the Supreme Lord, is situated in everyone's heart. The yoga system means to see, find out that God, Paramātmā, or meditate upon Him. Now the yoga system has come down as bodily exercise to keep the health very good, to reduce fat, this is yoga system. This is not yoga system. This is a bodily exercise. Real yoga is that God is within me, but He is invisible, alakṣyam. Antar bahiḥ, although He is within and without, still I cannot see.

So meditation means concentrating the mind to find out God, where He is within my heart. That is real perfection of yoga. So people do not know this science. Here it is nicely explained that antar bahir avasthitam. The virāḍ-rūpa... Just like Arjuna wanted to see the gigantic form of God. He showed him. So we can see the gigantic form in this universe. That is described in the Bhāgavatam. You have read that the big, big mountains, hills, they are the bones of the gigantic form. So they are described. The highest planetary system, Brahmaloka, is the head, or what it is called? Skull? What is this portion? Skull. So the rivers are the veins. The seas are holes like here we have got. In this way it is all described, the gigantic form. So... And gigantic form, at the same time, He is within your heart, very small form.

So He is within and without. Simply we have to purify our eyes to see Him. That's all. You can see God without and within, but you cannot see with these eyes. These materially contaminated eyes or materially contaminated senses, you cannot understand by these senses. But God can be perceived, can be seen, by these senses, by these eyes, when you purify it. That purificatory process is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The more you purify, the more you can see God within and without. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. The indriya, these senses, cannot perceive, cannot see, cannot touch, cannot hear nāmādi. Unless you are purified, you cannot hear also Kṛṣṇa name. Unless you are purified, the name enters this ear and goes out in this ear. You cannot appreciate. Therefore purificatory process is required.

People are affected with three kinds of material qualities: goodness, passion and ignorance. Generally, they are affected by the lower two qualities-ignorance and passion. Rajas-tamaḥ. How do we know that "This man is in the modes of goodness and this man is in the modes of passion and this man is in the modes of ignorance"? How do we know? By the symptoms. By the symptoms. When one is affected by the lower qualities, rajas-tamaḥ, passion and ignorance, his symptoms are that he is very greedy and lusty. These are the symptoms. As soon as you find a person is very greedy and lusty, he is to be understood under the control of the lower-grade qualities of this material world. And sattva-guṇa means prakāśa, illumination. When one is situated in the goodness, that is brahminical qualification. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā [Bg. 18.42]. He is truthful, he is controlling the mind, controlling the senses, śama, dama; titikṣā, he is tolerant; titikṣā, ārjavam, he is simple, simplicity. Śamo damas titikṣā śuci, he is clean; jñānam, he knows things what it is; vijñānam, he can apply the knowledge in practical life, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyam. Āstikyam means to have firm faith in God. He knows that God is there. God is there and he knows that God is within, God is without. These are the symptoms of a person who is in goodness.

So these three classes of men are there. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to bring persons from the wretched, low qualities, ignorance and passion, to bring him to the platform of goodness. And that goodness also has to be purified. In the material world the goodness is also attacked by the other, lower qualities. Big, big men, very good men, but there are so many defects. Because unless... First of all you have to come to the platform of goodness, brahminical position. Then you have to purify that goodness, sattvaṁ viśuddham, viśuddha-sattva, vasudeva-sattva, vasudeva platform. Then you will be able to understand what is God. It is not so cheap thing that one can understand God so easily while he is in the modes of material nature, especially the lower grade modes.

So at the present moment, most people, they are in the lower grades of the material qualities, ignorance and passion. Therefore you see all over the world, rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobha [SB 1.2.19]. Every man is greedy and lusty. Every man. So in this position, it is very difficult. Alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [SB 1.8.18]. So unless you change this quality... This quality can be changed. It is not that it is stereotyped. How these European, American boys and girls, they are coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness? How? They have changed their quality. By the process, we have got this process. In this process we can change the quality. That process is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā:

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Kṛṣṇa says, "One who is engaged in My unalloyed service," avyabhicāreṇa, "no adulteration, pure devotional service..." Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate, one who is engaged in the service of the Lord, purified, unalloyed... Unalloyed means no motive, no motive. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Other motives, completely zero. Generally, they go to temple to church, to..., or mosque, generally, they go with a motive. Just like in the Christian world, they go that "God must be order supplier. We shall pray to God, and He must supply. Then I accept God. This is the condition. And if He does not supply my order, I don't care for this God." So they are not going to become servant of God. They want to make God his servant: "God, give us our daily bread." That's all right. God is giving daily bread. Why you are asking, bothering God? He is supplying food to millions and trillions of living entities, and why not to you? He'll also supply. That is not our problem, that God will supply our bread. He is supplying without asking. Do the animals go to the church and ask for bread? But they are getting sufficient. They are getting sufficient.

Therefore God consciousness does not mean any motive to take from some God, something from God. That is not God consciousness. You give everything to God. That is God consciousness. Just like the conception of accepting God as child. That is better conception (than) to accept God as father, because from father we simply take away: "Father, give me this, give me that, give me that, give me that." And if you accept God as child, then you have to give everything. This is Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava conception. Yaśodāmāyi. (S)He has accepted, (s)he is worshiping God as child, so that she is always engaged that Kṛṣṇa may not be in any inconvenience, about His body, about His comforts. Always mother Yaśodā is anxious that "Kṛṣṇa is now very naughty. He may not capture some monkey, He may not fall down on the water, He may not be burnt in the fire." Always anxious. Because this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. She is always anxious to give protection to Kṛṣṇa. The best service. Kṛṣṇa does not require anyone's service. He is complete, pūrṇam. But for pleasing His devotee, He becomes dependent. He is bothering mother, "I am hungry. Why don't you give Me food. I will steal butter, your stock."

So this philosophy, Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava philosophy, is very sublime, to accept God as subordinate. Kṛṣṇa says in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, you will find, that "Everyone worships Me with awe and veneration. But if anyone worships Me without any awe, veneration, and treats Me as insignificant, I like that. (laughter) I like that." So that exchange of Kṛṣṇa's feelings you can find in this Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava philosophy, that mother Yaśodā is treating Kṛṣṇa as very insignificant. "He is my child. If I don't give Him protection, He will die." Therefore Kṛṣṇa is very much obliged to mother Yaśodā. Yes. But nobody... Everyone comes to God, "Oh, God is so exalted and..." That He is hearing throughout, but when the mother Yaśodā comes and chastises Him, He likes it very much. Yes, yes, likes it very much.

So Kṛṣṇa, although He happened to be nephew of Kuntī... Kuntī was Kṛṣṇa's father's sister. But because (s)he was devotee, she knew that "Kṛṣṇa also, although He is playing the part of my nephew, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Therefore she said, namasye puruṣaṁ tvādyam īśvaraṁ prakṛteḥ param: [SB 1.8.18] "You are īśvara, You are the controller." What kind of controller? There are so many, food controller and house controller, these... You have got. No. Not that kind of controller. Prakṛteḥ param: "You are controller. Your position is beyond this material world," prakṛteḥ. Prakṛti means this material world. Prakṛteḥ param. That means these controllers within this material world, they are produced at a certain date and they will be finished at a certain date, these controllers. Just like your President Nixon. He is controller of your country, but his controlling power is given at a certain date and it will be finished at a certain date. So Kuntī says, "You are not that kind of controller, that Your controlling power begins at a certain date and finishes at a certain date." Therefore, prakṛteḥ param. In the prakṛti, within the material nature, we have got some controlling power. Everyone. But that has the beginning and ending. As our life begins and ends, everything here in this material world, it has a beginning and end. But Kṛṣṇa's controlling power is not like that. He says, she says, namasye puruṣaṁ tu ādyam: "You are the original person. You have created this cosmos. So before the creation of the cosmos, You were controller, and when the cosmos will end, You will remain controller." Therefore prakṛteḥ param. "Within the prakṛti, within the material nature, everything has got beginning and end, limited. You are not that kind of controller." Prakṛteḥ param, eternal.

Another understanding is that because Kṛṣṇa is controller, beyond this material nature, therefore He is not a product of this material nature. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they cannot understand. Their poor fund of knowledge... If God has created this material world, then He must not be anything of this material world. Because before creation He was existing, and after creation, after annihilation, He will remain, then how He can be anything of this material world? Material world, anything has got a beginning and end. But God is beyond this material world. He was existing... He said, "Let there be creation." Just like in your Bible it is said. So there was creation. So how He can be one of the created beings? By His wish there was creation. And another thing is then His desires, His wish, they are nothing of this material world. They are spiritual. Prakṛteḥ param means "superior to this material world."

In the Bhagavad-gītā, you understand, there are two kinds of nature: parā and aparā. So this material nature is aparā, apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. Apareyam. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4]. The land, water, fire, air, sky, these five elements, they are described in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā: "They are separated energy, inferior quality energy. But beyond this inferior quality energy, I have got another superior quality of energy." What is that? Jīva-bhūta. You can understand that jīva-bhūta, the living entities. Yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. Because jīva-bhūta, we living entities, we are superior than the matter because we are controlling the matter. Just like we have been in the riverside, so many things, material things, we saw. But who has made it? The living entities. The matter has not come into so many forms without the touch of the living entity. Everyone can understand. The big, big ship, how it has come into existence? Because a living entity planned, engineered how to do it, and he brought material things, and he manufactured it. Therefore this inferior energy, the material things, they are subordinate to the spiritual energy.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa, when He is prakṛteḥ param, He is beyond this material nature. His body, His activities, His pastimes, His name, His form, everything, it is not material. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. If everyone simply tries to understand Kṛṣṇa as He is in truth, then he becomes liberated, simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. You try to understand Kṛṣṇa not by speculation, but as Kṛṣṇa says, as God says, or as a Kṛṣṇa devotee says. Just like Kuntī. Kuntī is a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. She said that "You are prakṛteḥ param." She is authority. She is authority, because devotee, every devotee, pure devotee, they are confidential. Otherwise how Kṛṣṇa has accepted to become her nephew? Just like Kṛṣṇa has accepted to become the son of Yaśodāmāyi or Devakī, similarly, He has accepted to become a nephew of Kuntīdevī. This prayer was offered by Kuntī when Kṛṣṇa was taking leave. After establishing them, after the battle of Kurukṣetra, when everything was settled up and Kṛṣṇa was going back to Dvārakā, so He came to offer His respects to His aunt, Kuntīdevī, and when the farewell was taking place, Kuntī offered this prayer to Kṛṣṇa. Namasye, namasye. He happens to be nephew, but she is offering his obeisances. Because (s)he knows, "He is playing the part of my nephew, but He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Therefore although she is superior in position because aunt, she is offering namasye, "I offer my respectful obeisances unto You." This is the position.

So God is invisible, who? For the persons who have no eyes to see Him. Alakṣyam. Although He is everywhere: aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35], idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān. This viśvam, this universe, is the transformation of the energy of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore... The energy is not different from the energetic. Therefore the whole world is Kṛṣṇa, whole world is Kṛṣṇa. So we have to make our eyes. That eyes can be purified, as it is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Santaḥ, those who are saintly persons, those who have developed love for God, prema, that añjana, that ointment, who have smear the ointment of love on the eyes... So then... Just like we apply sometimes ointment and cūrṇa... What is called in English, cūrṇa? Powder, something? Anyway... So when our eyes are cleansed we thinks clearly; similarly, if we apply the ointment of love of God on the eyes, then we can see God. Just like Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa. Kuntī is seeing. Others, they do not understand that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the Pāṇḍavas, and the Pāṇḍavas' mother, they know that "Here is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Alakṣyam. Just like Kṛṣṇa was exhibiting His virāḍ-rūpa in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Only Arjuna was seeing, nobody else.

So God reveals Himself to the devotee. Although... Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja was seeing that Nṛsiṁhadeva has come, and his father, atheist father, he was challenging, "Where is your God?" So God is everywhere, but He is not visible to the nondevotee. But one who is devotee, he can see Him. Every... Not only once. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva [Bs. 5.38]. Sadaiva means always. He is seeing always Kṛṣṇa. That is the position of saintly person. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu [Bs. 5.38]. Hṛdayeṣu, in the heart, vilokayanti, they see.

So if you can see God, you can talk with God, if you can go back to home, back to God, why should you lose this opportunity? This opportunity is in the human being. You can see God, you can talk with God, you can go back home, back to God. Everything is possible. And that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



740928SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.18

-

Māyāpura, September 28, 1974



Prabhupāda: Now, you editor, I think it has to be correct. Tvā means "You." It is not "although." Read.



Nitāi: (reads translation responsively with devotees) "Śrīmatī Kuntī said: O Kṛṣṇa, I offer my obeisances unto You because You are the original personality and are unaffected by the qualities of material nature. You are existing both within and without everything, yet You are invisible to all."



Prabhupāda:



namasye puruṣaṁ tvādyam

īśvaraṁ prakṛteḥ param

alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām

antar bahir avasthitam

[SB 1.8.18]



So Kuntī is the aunt, pisimā, aunt of Kṛṣṇa. Vasudeva's sister, Kuntī. So when Kṛṣṇa was going back to Dvārakā, after finishing the Battle of Kurukṣetra and establishing Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira on the throne, His mission... His mission was that Duryodhana should be thrown out, and Yudhiṣṭhira must sit down on the throne. Dharma, Dharmarāja.



That is the desire of Kṛṣṇa, or God, that the state executive head should be as pious as Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. That is the scheme. Unfortunately, people do not want that. They have now discovered this democracy. Democracy... "Demon-cracy." Shortcut of "demon-cracy" is "democracy." All the demons and rogues, they gather together, somehow or other votes, and occupy the seat, and the business is plundering. The business is plundering. If we talk very much upon this, it will not be very favorable, but according to śāstra... We, we talk according to śāstra, that the democracy means assembly of rogues and plunderers. That is the statement in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Dasyu-dharmabhiḥ. The government men will be all dasyu. Dasyu means plunderer. Not pickpocket. Pickpocket, somehow or other, if you do not understand, takes something from your pocket, and the plunderer, or the dasyu, he catches you and by force, "If you don't spare your money, I shall kill you." They are called dasyu.

So the, in the present age of Kali, the government men will be dasyu. This is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Dasyu-dharmabhiḥ. You can, we can see practically. You cannot keep your money. You earn with hard labor, but you cannot keep gold, you cannot keep jewelry, you cannot keep money. And... They will take it away by laws. So they make law that... Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was just quite opposite. He wanted to see that every citizen is so happy that they are not troubled even by excessive heat and excessive cold. Ati-vyādhi. They are not suffering from any disease, they are not suffering from excessive climatic influence, eating very nicely, and feeling security of person and property. That was Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. Not only Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. Almost all the kings, they were like that.

So Kṛṣṇa is the original king. Because He is stated here, puruṣam ādyam īśvaram. Īśvaram means controller. He's the original controller. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mayādhyakṣeṇa [Bg. 9.10]. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram. Even this material nature, wonderful things are going on, that is being controlled by Kṛṣṇa. This is to be understood. So we are reading Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other Vedic literature. What is the purpose? The purpose is vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. The purpose is to understand Kṛṣṇa. If you don't understand Kṛṣṇa, then your reading of so-called Vedas and Vedāntas and Upaniṣads, they are useless waste of time. So here Kuntī is directly saying that "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are ādyaṁ puruṣam, the original person. And īśvaram. You are not ordinary person. You are the supreme controller." That is understanding of Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Everyone is controller, but the supreme controller is Kṛṣṇa.

So although this material world is condemned... Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15], Kṛṣṇa says. It is also Kṛṣṇa's kingdom. Because everything belongs to God, Kṛṣṇa. So this condemned place is created for suffering of the condemned persons. Who are condemned? Those who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa and wants to become happy independently, they are all condemned demons. And those who are surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, they are not condemned. That is the difference. So although Kṛṣṇa has created this material world for the condemned persons, still, He wants to see that they are having their necessities of life and..., so that they may live prosperously. And let them enjoy for some time this material world according to their inclination. But at last, let them come back home, back to home, back to Godhead. Just like the prisoners: they are condemned, and the government puts them into jail. So for their criminality they are punished within the jail. But the government does not want that these prisoners may remain perpetually within the jail. The same thing. Try to understand. Government does not want. Government wants that "They have been condemned. So for their criminality, let them suffer for some time. And then they correct themselves and again they are freed." Not that government does...

Sometimes government arranges nice instruction, classes. Perhaps those who were with me in Ahmedabad... We were invited by the jail authorities to speak. Who were with me? Nobody? In Ahmedabad?

Devotee: I was.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So I was given place just in front of the room where Gandhi was imprisoned. That, that room is considered as sacred. So government makes such arrangement that "These prisoners may be corrected." Similarly, in this material world, although we are all condemned... Anyone who is within this material world, he is condemned. Simply there is division. Just like in jail also, there are first-class prisoners, there are second-class prisoners and third-class prisoners. The first-class prisoners, they are given some facilities. Just like political prisoners, they are given separate bungalow and servants, newspaper, book. But they cannot go out of the prison. That is called first class. Similarly, there are second class. And third class, ordinary.



So here also, we are first-class, second-class, third-class prisoners. Therefore we find so many varieties of living condition. But we are all prisoners. And He's the supreme controller. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, as supreme controller, He wants His representative to rule over this material world. That is Kṛṣṇa's mission. In every planet there is a person, representative of Kṛṣṇa, who is ruling over the planet. Just like the sun planet. The sun planet is being ruled by the sun-god. His name is Vivasvān. He was also instructed by Kṛṣṇa, and that is explained in the Fourth Chapter: imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. "I spoke this philosophy of Bhagavad-gītā..." Just like He spoke to Arjuna, similarly He spoke also. And who can know? He spoke to all the rulers of different planets-Indra, Candra, Varuṇa, sun-god, moon-god, that... So many. Thirty-three millions of planets and thirty-three millions of rulers. So He wants His representative.

So it is the duty of the representative of Kṛṣṇa to reform these condemned persons to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is their duty. Kṛṣṇa wants that "These rascals, these condemned persons, who are suffering in this material world, and they cannot understand that 'We are suffering...' They are making plan. No plan will be successful." Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. You can make your plan, but it will never be successful. The only plan will be successful. What is that? Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. That is the only plan. There is no other plan. But these rascals, they are being put into severe penalties. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. More and mo... The more they are forgetting God, they are put in, they are put into more and more miserable condition. Practically we see, with the advancement Kali-yuga, people are forgetting his relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and the price of commodity and the food grains, the price is increasing. They cannot eat sufficiently. So many people are dying of starvation. If they cannot eat, how they will live?

Therefore Kṛṣṇa gives His instruction. He's the supreme ruler. He gives this order: annād bhavanti bhūtāni: [Bg. 3.14] "You require food grains." This is practical. Who will disagree with Kṛṣṇa, that "We don't require food grains; we require bolts and nuts in the factory"? Who will say? This is practical. So they do not... Just like we see here that, that they do not grow food grains. They are growing jute because they will get some money, more money. But the rascal does not know that "I will get more money, and it will be taken away next by the food grain seller." So similarly, we are interested in industry, in plan-making, this, that, so many things. But Kṛṣṇa does not say that "You open slaughterhouse and industries and brothels and cinema." No. Kṛṣṇa does not say. Kṛṣṇa says, "Grow more food, rascal! You'll eat and become strong." And nobody is obeying Kṛṣṇa. Is it not? Practically try to understand Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavata. Not by sentiment. And preach this philosophy all over the world.

What Kṛṣṇa says, that is practical. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. "How we shall get anna? There is no rain." You see nowadays, there is no rain. Why? Because you are, we are all rascals. We do not know how to get rain. Kṛṣṇa says, parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ: "There will be food grains when there is sufficient rain." And how rain there will be? Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ: [Bg. 3.14] "And if you perform yajña, then there will be sufficient rain." So nowadays you, people may say, "How to perform yajña? It requires so much money, so much ghee, so much food grains to offer as oblations." But Kṛṣṇa has made it very easy. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ. I know, the śāstras know that in the Kali-yuga it will be very difficult to perform the ritualistic yajña ceremony because people will be poor, poverty-stricken. Where they will get ghee, and where they will get grains? No. This is yajña: kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā. Harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. This is yajña.

So people are so rascal, they will not even chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Kṛṣṇa, svayaṁ bhagavān... Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He introduced. Saṅkīrtanaika-pitarau. Gaura and Nityānanda is the father of the saṅkīrtana movement. Therefore Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura has offered his prayer, saṅkīrtanaika-pitarau ajanu-lambita-bhujau kanakavadhatau, saṅkīrtanaika-pitarau kamalayatakṣau vande mahā-puruṣa te caraṇāravindam(?). So Kṛṣṇa is teaching. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. He's personally teaching. That is perform yajña. He's personally chanting, dancing, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The picture is in our front. Personally He's teaching us, "Perform this yajña, you rascal, and you'll get everything. You'll get everything." Now, where is the proof? The proof is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and spending crores of rupees. Simply. What we are doing? We are not doing any business. We have not many professional men. But why we are getting...? We are spending eight lakhs of rupees per month. And we have got food, we have got milk. We are, rather, feeding others also, bringing food. So why don't you see practically how these Kṛṣṇa conscious people... They... They know that we are fabulously rich. This question was raised in Parliament also. So how we became fabulously rich? We do not do anything. I have not taught you anything magic. I simply request you, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra sixteen times please!" But you... We are not even following that. This is the only remedy. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32].

So Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Īśvara. He's teaching us this yajña. He's giving us the hint. Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. If you do not accept this movement, then you'll go on suffering, suffering, suffering, suffering. If you don't accept this principle, then your future is simply suffering.

prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya

kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ

mandāḥ sumanda-matayo

manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ

[SB 1.1.10]



This is the symptoms of Kali-yuga. Manda-bhāgyāḥ, all unfortunate. All unfortunate. Everyone must suffer. This is the position. But if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, perform the yajña... Because this is the instruction by the Supreme Person. Puruṣaṁ tvā ādyam. Ādyaṁ puruṣam, the original person. The origin of everything. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The Supreme Person from whom everything has come down. That is the order. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught us that harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21],... We are certainly in difficult position, but the only remedy is that we must chant the holy name of the Lord repeatedly. And that will solve all the problems. You preach this cult all over the world.



So Kṛṣṇa is the original person. He has admitted, and śāstra admits, and here is another authority, Kuntī. Kuntī, the mother of the Pāṇḍavas. Kuntī's not ordinary woman. Kṛṣṇa has gone to offer His respect, to take the dust of her feet. Because materially she happens to be aunt of Kṛṣṇa, elderly lady, superior. So Kṛṣṇa has gone to pay His respect before departing. That is the system, Vedic system, to offer respect to the superior first of all. Before going... "No..." Kṛṣṇa is going. "(S)he knows that 'I am Personality of Godhead.' " No. Kṛṣṇa was touching the feet of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira because he was elder brother. When Kṛṣṇa used to come at the Pāṇḍavas' house, every Pāṇḍavas knew that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It was not unknown to them. But Kṛṣṇa was coming down and touching the feet of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. And Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was not returning. He was embracing Him because He was younger brother. So this is the etiquette.

So the idea is that Kṛṣṇa is the original person. That is admitted by Arjuna also.

paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

[Bg. 10.12]



They know, knew it. Not only Kuntī knows. But Kṛṣṇa was, when present, how many people knew Him? Only the Pāṇḍavas knew Him perfectly. The Pāṇḍava family. And some of the other, Kuru family. Bhīṣma knew Him. Even Dhṛtarāṣṭra also knew Him. And many other saintly persons, Vyāsadeva, Devala, Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni, of course, does not belong to this planet. So to know Kṛṣṇa is not very easy job. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Still, if Kṛṣṇa is pleased, then He can make Himself known to a devotee. Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi, jānāti tattvam [SB 10.14.29]. Anyone who is in receipt of little favor of Kṛṣṇa, he can understand Kṛṣṇa.



So Kṛṣṇa is the original person. Another significance of this verse: Kṛṣṇa is not woman. Just like there are some so-called speculators, that "Kṛṣṇa is also... Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, or the Supreme Person, can, is also woman." But He's not woman. He can assume the role of woman if He likes, but does not mean He's woman, woman. He's man. Man means the enjoyer. Man, or puruṣa. Not man. Puruṣa. So They are puruṣāvatāra. The three Viṣṇus, They are called puruṣāvatāra. Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu and the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, They are called puruṣāvatāra. So Kṛṣṇa is puruṣa. Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer. And ādyam, the original enjoyer. Ādyam, puruṣam. But what kind of puruṣa? Like you and me? Just like we are also assuming puruṣa, "I am male." Not like you. Prakṛteḥ param. These puruṣa... I am puruṣa, another man is, another living entity is woman. These are dresses given by this material nature.

Actually, we are not puruṣa. We are all prakṛtis. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

[Bg. 7.5]



We are all prakṛtis. Don't try to become enjoyer. Prakṛti means enjoyed. Prakṛti is predominated, and puruṣa is the predominator. So because we are, actually our constitutional position is to become predominated and we are trying artificially to become predominator, that is the trouble. Every one of us, we are trying to become predominator. Actually, we should be predominated. So when we agree to become predominated and agree to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa, I was so long under misconception that I am predominator. You are predominator. I am predominated. So I surrender unto You." Mānasa deha geha jo kichu mora, arpiluṅ tuwā pade nanda-kiśora. This is Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's statement. If we become like that, then we'll be happy, to be predominated.



And don't try to become imitator. But the imitation is so strong that even persons who are very much elevated in knowledge, they are also falsely presenting that "I am God." The māyā's influence is so strong that at the last stage... Therefore they fall down. These people, these Māyāvādīs who are trying to become God... Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ [SB 10.2.32]. To merge into the existence of the Supreme. You can merge, but you cannot be equal. That is not possible. Asamordhva. But the Māyāvādīs, they are thinking, "We are as good as Kṛṣṇa." Therefore they do not go to the temple of Kṛṣṇa. Because they think self, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa. But that is a mistake. Therefore śāstra says that ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. They are thinking that they have become liberated, become Nārāyaṇa, Nārāyaṇa, God, but that is aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. Because... They are thinking like that because their intelligence is not yet cleansed. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. Therefore āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa, by performing severe austerities, penances, they come to the stage of merging in the Brahman effulgence, but that (does) not solve the problem. In the Brahman effulgence they fall down again.

So Kṛṣṇa is the only puruṣa. Prakṛteḥ param. So prakṛteḥ param. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is not a puruṣa like us. We are within the prakṛti. We are within the prakṛti. He is beyond the prakṛti. Therefore His body is not material. He's not within the prakṛti. But the rascals, they cannot understand this. They think that "Kṛṣṇa is like us." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. So because they are mūḍhas, they think that "Kṛṣṇa is like us, Kṛṣṇa has a body like us," but that is actually not the fact. Here Kuntī says, authority says, prakṛteḥ param. Prakṛteḥ param, alakṣyam. The prakṛteḥ param. Suppose something beyond our vision. Just like we are sitting down this house. We cannot see what is going on upstairs. Alakṣyam. So if Kṛṣṇa is a person beyond this material creation, how we can see Him? Alakṣyam. Alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [SB 1.8.18]. Still, He is in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61].

So alakṣyam, invisible, those who are yogis, they are trying to see. They are trying to... Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Dhyānāvasthita. They are trying to see. So there are different processes of seeing, but actually you can see by one process. That is bhakti. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. So those who have taken the path of devotional service, they'll be able to understand that Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Ahaṁ brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhā. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of this Brahman effulgence. You have heard so many times. Kṛṣṇa is Paramātmā, and Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this way try to understand Kṛṣṇa, and then you are liberated.

Thank you very much. (end)

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.18

-

Chicago, July 4, 1974



740704SB.CHI



Prabhupāda: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Devotees: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Prabhupāda: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Devotees: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Prabhupāda: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Devotees: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Prabhupāda: (leads Sanskrit word-for-word with devotees responding) This is a prayer offered by Kuntī to Kṛṣṇa. After finishing the battle of Kurukṣetra, when Kṛṣṇa was leaving for His own kingdom, Dvārakā, at that time He went to take blessings from Kuntī. Kuntī happened to be Kṛṣṇa's aunt, father's sister. So He went to take leave from aunt. At that time Kuntī offered this prayer. Kuntī, although she knew that Kṛṣṇa is her nephew, brother's son, but still she knew that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa comes here as ordinary human being, but the purpose is to reestablish the principles of religion as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām,



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

(abhyutthānam adharmasya)

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham



The, any, anything, īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam, anything, whatever you will see, that is God's property, Kṛṣṇa's property. So as the owner sometimes goes to visit his property or to see things, that management is going on nicely, so everything belongs to God, Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-loka-maheśvaram. (makes comment aside)

Devotee: Take the children out.



Prabhupāda:



bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati



This is the mistake of the modern world. Not only modern, this is the mistake of the material world. They do not know that everything belongs to God. That's a fact. We fight, "This is my land, this is your land," but fighting, we die, and the land is there. The land does not go with the fighters. They fight amongst themselves, "This is my land," "This is my land," but the land remains, and the persons fighting, they go away. This is the position. But still we do not understand that the land does not belong to either you or to me. It belongs to Kṛṣṇa. So anyway, just to establish, to remind us, Kṛṣṇa comes, so that "Any land does not belong to you." Bhoktāram, "I am the enjoyer," sarva-loka-maheśvaram, "I am the proprietor of all the planets." That's a fact.

So Kuntī knew it, that "We are..., we fought the battle of Kurukṣetra, but actually Kṛṣṇa is the supreme proprietor." Therefore he is..., she is offering her prayer, namasye puruṣaṁ tvā, "You are puruṣam." Puruṣam means the enjoyer. Kṛṣṇa is not addressed as a, a female. Just like there are, not in your country, in India there are many devotees of Durgā, that they take Durgā as the supreme. Durgā is supreme, the supreme power and energy within this material world. The supreme energy, that is external energy, that is called Durgā. Durgā means "very difficult to overcome." The, everyone is trying to overcome the difficulties of this material world, but it is very, very difficult. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā: "You cannot surpass the stringent laws of material nature." You cannot. This is our struggle for existence. Material nature is offering some difficulty, and we are trying to overcome them. This is called struggle for existence, and this is going on lfe after life. Any life, either human form of life or animal form of life, the struggle is there. There must be always anxiety, sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt, because we have accepted this material body, or this material world.

To accept this material world means to accept different types of material body, and so long you have got this material body, either you have got the body of a human being or an animal or of demigod, that always there must be fearfulness, anxiety, because we have accepted something foreign. This material world is foreign to the living entities. The living entity is spiritual, so his actual residency is in the spiritual world. But somehow or other he has come in contact with this material world; therefore he is suffering threefold miseries-adhyatmic, adhibautic, adhidaivic. He must suffer. Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to get the living entity relieved from this material miserable condition of life, and take him back to home, back to Godhead. That is also Kṛṣṇa's mission. Kṛṣṇa also came to impress that "This is not your place." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja. "You are creating so many plans to live here very peacefully, but that is not possible. Therefore you give up all this onsense plan, just come to Me, surrender to Me, and I shall give you protection." Because He is the father, father wants that the nonsense sons, they want to live independently, but he has no such means, therefore father comes to invite, "Come back." Sarva-dharmān..., vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ. These things are explained in the Bhagavad-gītā.

So Kuntī knew it; therefore, although Kṛṣṇa was present before her as a nephew... Aunt is respectable, that Kṛṣṇa came to offer His respect, obeisances, before going home. But Kuntī is offering respect to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore she is saying namasye, "I offer my obediences unto You, Kṛṣṇa." Why? Puruṣaṁ tvā, "You are the Supreme Person; therefore I must offer my respect unto You." Namasye puruṣaṁ tvā, ādyam. Ādyam means original, original person. That is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, anādiḥ. Anādiḥ means who has no beginning. But He is the beginning of everything. That is Kṛṣṇa. We have got experience that anything in our experience, it has got a beginning. Beginning. But Kṛṣṇa is without beginning, and all others, they have got beginning. From Kṛṣṇa, within this material world, from Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā. From Brahmā, Nārada or many other demigods. Then from demigods, we human being. In this way we have increased. Brahmā is the first created being within this universe, and h is created by Kṛṣṇa. So they are taking account of this material, this universe, so Brahmā is therefore called grandfather, or a father of the father. But Kṛṣṇa is the great-grandfather, the father of Brahmā's. Therefore it is said ādyam, the original person. Namasye puruṣaṁ tvā, ādyam. What kind of ādyam? Īśvaram. Īśvaram means controller. Ādyam īśvaram, the original controller.

Now, we have got experience about controlling. Suppose I am controlling this institution, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. But that does not mean I am the original controller. Similarly, there are many, many big men, business magnates, controlling his factories, office, but he is not original controller. He is controlled by the government, and the government is controlled by somebody, the people. In this way you will see in this world there is one controller. Everyone is controller. If you..., one has nothing to control, he keeps a dog to control. That is very good experience in your country. He has no children to control, no wife to control-keep a dog. So the controlling propensity is there, everywhere, but he is not Supreme Controller. So if you study, that here is a controller, controlling a dog, but he is controlled by his master, he is controlled by somebody, somebody, somebody, in this way you will find that Brahmā is the original controller of this universe, but he is also controlled by Kṛṣṇa. Therefore H is the original controller, and the original controller means God, who is not controlled by anyone. Within our experience we see that one is controller, but he is controlled by somebody else. But in this way, when you, if you can, you approach a person who is controller, but never controlled by others, that is God. Therefore here it is said, namasye puruṣaṁ tvā, ādyam īśvaram.

Then ādyam īśvaram, how it is? Now prakṛteḥ param, beyond this material nature. You will find in the Bhagavad-gītā this verse, paraḥ tasmāt bhāvaḥ anyaḥ: "There is another nature." Just like you have seen within your vision the big, I mean to say, horizon, and there within this there are millions and millions of stars, sun, suns and planets we cannot account for, although you are seeing daily. But we have no such knowledge; we cannot account for them. We are so minute. Still we are thinking, "Where is God? I am God." So, Kṛṣṇa is not that kind of God, imaginative. He is real God. Therefore He is prakṛteḥ param. Prakṛteḥ means this cosmic manifestation, beyond that. He is creator of this. God is creator of this cosmic manifestation. Therefore it is said prakṛteḥ. Prakṛteḥ means this material nature. Param, superior, beyond. Prakṛteḥ param alakṣyam: but not visible. God is not visible to everyone. He is visible-"Here is God"-but those who have not developed the eyes to see God, they think "Here is a doll, and tese foolish people are worshiping a doll." No. He is God, Kṛṣṇa. He is Kṛṣṇa. This is called arcā-vigraha. Kṛṣṇa agrees to accept your service. If you want to serve the universal form of God, that is not possible. Where you will get so big dress to cover Kṛṣṇa, if He appears in His universal form.? (laughter) But He is so kind that He has come in a form. Because He is almighty, all powerful, so whatever you can provide, you can dress Kṛṣṇa, you can feed Kṛṣṇa, you can decorate Kṛṣṇa. It is His mercy, to become handy for your service. This is called arcā-vigraha.

So the devotional service is so nice that-this example I have given many times-just like in front of your house there is small letterbox, a red letterbox, but if you put your letters within that box it will go ten thousand miles away. Therefore it is post office. It is not a box. It is post office. The post office has kindly come before your door for your convenience, so that you can put your letters there and it will go to the destination. Similarly, this arcā-vigraha, He is just like that. Although Kṛṣṇa is universal, still He has agreed to take your service. That will be accepted. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ (bhakty-upahṛtam)

aśnāmi...



Kṛṣṇa says, "My devotee, with affection," yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Kṛṣṇa is not hungry. Kṛṣṇa has not come to you for accepting your offering because He is hungry. No. He is not hungry. He is self-complete, and in the spiritual world He is served, lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam, He is served by hundreds and thousands of goddess of fortune. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind, because if you are seriously lover of Kṛṣṇa, He is here to accept your patraṁ puṣpam. Even you are the poorest of the poor, He will accept whatever you can collect-a little leaf, a little water, a little flower. Any part of the world, anybody can secure and offer to Kṛṣṇa. "Kṛṣṇa, I have nothing to offer You, I am very poor. Please accept this." Kṛṣṇa will accept. Kṛṣṇa says, tad aham aśnāmi, "I eat." So main thing is bhakti, affection, love.

So here it is said alakṣyam. Kṛṣṇa is not visible, God is not visible, but He is so kind that He has come before you, visible to your material eyes. Kṛṣṇa is not visible within this material world, material eyes. Just like Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel. We are Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel, all living entities, but we do not see each other. You cannot see me, I do not see you. "No, I see you." What you see? You see my body. Then, when the soul is gone from the body, why you are crying "My father is gone"? Why father is gone? Father is lying here. Then what you have seen? You have seen the dead body of your father, not your father. So if you cannot see the particle of Kṛṣṇa, the soul, how you can see Kṛṣṇa? Therefore śāstra says, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. This blunt material eyes, he cannot see Kṛṣṇa, or cannot hear Kṛṣṇa's name, nāmādi. Nāma means name. Nāma means name, form, quality, pastime. These things cannot be understood by your material blunt eyes or senses. But if they are purified, sevonukhe hi jihvādau, if they are purified by the process of devotional service, you can see Kṛṣṇa at all times and everywhere. But for ordinary person, alakṣyam: not visible. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, God is everywhere, aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham. So alakṣyam sarva-bhūtānām. Although Kṛṣṇa is outside and inside, both, still we cannot see Kṛṣṇa unless we have got the eyes to see Kṛṣṇa.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to open the eyes how to see Kṛṣṇa, and if you can see Kṛṣṇa, antah bahih, then your life is successful. Therefore śāstra says that, antar bahir.

antar bahir yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kiṁ

nāntar bahir yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim



Everyone is trying to become perfect, but the perfection means when one can see Kṛṣṇa within and without. That is perfection. Ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kiṁ. If you have been able to worship Kṛṣṇa, then there is no need of any more austerities, penances, (indistinct) to self-realize or to know God. There are so many processes, austerities, penances. Sometimes we go to the forest, go to the forest to see where is God, where... There, there are different processes, but the śāstra says that actually if you are worshiping Kṛṣṇa, ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kiṁ, that there is no more need of your undergoing severe penances and austerities. And narādhito, narādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim, and ultimately after going severe..., undergoing severe austerities and penances, if, if you do not know what is Kṛṣṇa, then what is the use? It is useless. Narādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim, antar bahir yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kiṁ. Similarly, if you can see twenty-four hours Kṛṣṇa, within and without, then the that is the end of all tapasya.

So here Kṛṣṇa say again..., Kuntī says that "Although Kṛṣṇa is within and without, because we haven't got the eyes to see Him," alakṣyam, "not visible." Just like here Kṛṣṇa was present in the battle of Kurukṣetra, only the five Pāṇḍavas, just like, and their mother Kuntī, they could understand that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And few others. So even though Kṛṣṇa was present, somebody took Him as ordinary human being. Avajā..., avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam. Because He was very kind to the human society, He came personally. Still, because they had no eyes to see Him, they could not see. Therefore Kuntī says, alakṣyam, "You are not visible, although You are antaḥ bahiḥ, sarva-bhutanam." Not that antaḥ bahiḥ of the devotee-everyone. Everyone's heart Kṛṣṇa is situated, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe. Pointing out, hṛd-deśe, here in the heart, Kṛṣṇa is there. Now, therefore, meditation, yoga principle, is how to find out Kṛṣṇa within the heart. That is called meditation.

So Kṛṣṇa's position is always transcendental. If we accept this transcendental process, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, regulative principles, and try to become free from sinful life. Because you cannot see Kṛṣṇa or understand Kṛṣṇa while you are practicing all sinful activities. Then it is not possible. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. Those who are duṣkṛtinaḥ... Kṛti means merited, meritorious; but duṣkṛti, but merit is applied for sinful activities. So, we therefore request our... We shall not request; this is our, I mean to say, rules and regulation, that one must be free from the sinful activities. The sinful activities, the four pillars of sinful life, are illicit sex life, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. So our students are advised..., not advised, they must follow; otherwise they will fall down. Because a sinful man cannot understand God. One side we should practice the regulative principles and the devotional process, another side we should avoid sinful activities. Then Kṛṣṇa is present, nd you can talk with Kṛṣṇa, we can be with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. Just like Kuntī is talking with Kṛṣṇa as her nephew, similarly you can talk with Kṛṣṇa as your son, as your husband, as your lover, as your friend, as your master, as you like.

So I am very glad this, to, to see the Chicago temple. You are doing very nice, and the hall is also very nice. So go on with your service attitude and realize Kṛṣṇa. Then your life will be successful.

Thank you very much.

Devotees: Jaya! Hari bol! (end)





740704QA.CHI



Last portion of Questions & Answers

-

Chicago, July 4, 1974



Prabhupāda: ...as well as the difference between cats and dogs and human being. And everything is there. Those who are following, they are happy, practically you can see. And those who are not following, they are unhappy. Yes.



Devotee (1): Śrīla Prabhupāda, what do you consider is Gaurasundara's position presently?



Prabhupāda: That you can, everyone can understand. (slight laugh) There is no explanation required.



Devotee (2): Prabhupāda, you've..., we've been reading your Caitanya-caritāmṛta comments, and in the Seventh Chapter and Eighth Chapter, that you've been emphasizing very much this mantra,



śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya

prabhu-nityānanda

śrī-advaita gadādhara

śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda



You've asked your disciples to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra at least sixteen times round on the beads. Can this mantra also be chanted afterwards, in addition, also on the beads?



Prabhupāda: No, no. I have advised that, that śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya, this Pañca-tattva, must be chanted, but that is kīrtana, and this is japa. Sixteen rounds, it is called japa. So, kīrtana, when there is chanting, if you chant the Hare..., śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu, then it becomes very clear. There will be no offense. So therefore our process is, first of all chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, er, śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu-nityānanda śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvās..., you get some strength, then chanting, very..., it will be easy.



Devotee (3): Śrīla Prabhupāda, if after finishing one's sixteen rounds of the mahā-mantra...



Prabhupāda: Hm?



Devotee (3): ... Hare Kṛṣṇa, is it all right to...



Prabhupāda: It is not finished. If you have got time, if, if you haven't got to do anything else, you can continue, (laughter) sixteen hundred. It is not mechanical: "Now I have finished sixteen rounds, that's all." Why sixteen rounds? You chant sixteen hundred rounds. That is minimum, because you cannot concentrate your mind in chanting, you have no attachment for chanting, that is a, a regulative principle. You must. You must finish this. Otherwise, those who are actually attached to the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, that, that Haridāsa Ṭhākura, they are chanting whole day and night. But you cannot imitate that. Your mind is not fixed up. Therefore it is minimum sixteen rounds. Not that "Because minimum sixteen, I cannot chant more." Why not more? You can chant more, more.



Devotee (3): Śrīla Prabhupāda, after, if, if we chant more than sixteen rounds, can we chant bhaja śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya in our japa? Is it all right...



Prabhupāda: No, no, śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya is for, in the beginning it is done. Now you go on chanting as much as you can. And if you chant śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya that is also very good. There is no prohibition.



Devotee (4): How do we become free of envy?



Prabhupāda: Hm?



Devotee (5): How to become free of envy. How do we become free of envy?



Prabhupāda: Envy?



Devotee (5): Mm.



Prabhupāda: You don't become envious to your spiritual master. Then you will become free from envy. As soon as you become envious to your spiritual master, then you will..., then begins envious. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Devotees: Jaya! (end)





710409SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.18-19

-

Bombay, April 9, 1971



Prabhupāda:



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave-namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



vande 'haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca

śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam

sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and of all the other preceptors on the path of devotional service. I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇavas and unto the six Gosvāmīs, including Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī and their associates. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrī Advaita Ācārya Prabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all His devotees, headed by Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura. I then offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and all the gopīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā.]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi praṇamāmi hari-priye



[I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.]



(break-Hindi) ...nirviśeṣa avyakta, impersonal feature. [break] Impersonal. The manifestation of this material world is the impersonal feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And His personal feature is situated in everyone's heart as Paramātmā. Therefore it is said here, alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām antar bahir avasthitam [SB 1.8.18]. Although Kṛṣṇa, or God, is outside and inside, still, He is not visible. Still, he is not visible. Alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. He is inside and outside, but still, He is not visible.



So not visible to whom? Not visible to the ordinary persons who are not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For them He is not visible. Although He is inside and outside, still, He is not visible. Alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [SB 1.8.18]. Sarva-bhūtānām means all these ordinary living entities, they cannot see Kṛṣṇa, or God, either within or outside. Why? Kṛṣṇa says also in the Bhagavad-gītā, nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ: [Bg. 7.25] "I am not visible to everyone because there is a curtain which is covering the eyes of the ordinary persons, yoga-māyā." Just like the cloud covering the eyes to see. One cannot see the sun in complete or in full vision when there is cloud. Similarly, māyā, yoga-māyā, has created a cloud on account of which we cannot see God. But the same eyes can be also, I mean to say, purified. The same eyes. Just like you have got cataract, you cannot see, you become blind. But if the cataract is operated, then your vision is again revived. So you can see. Ordinarily, you cannot see God, either inside or outside. Alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām antar bahiḥ [SB 1.8.18]. Although we say that God is there within, God is outside, but why you cannot see? Because we are not devotees. But as soon as you become a devotee, you become a lover of God or Kṛṣṇa, then you can see.

Kṛṣṇa is present everywhere. He says, antar bahir avasthitam. The Brahma-saṁhitā says,

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.38]



Premāñjana-cchurita. By prema... Prema means love. The ointment of love, when it is smeared over the eyes, then those who are devotees, santaḥ, saintly persons, they can see always Kṛṣṇa within his heart. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti. Antaḥ. And bahiḥ, so far experience, that he sees everything. One who is lover of God, he can see Kṛṣṇa in everything. Whatever he sees, he sees Kṛṣṇa there, because he knows that "This thing is produced out of Kṛṣṇa's energy." Take for example a flower. A devotee sees a flower produced by Kṛṣṇa's energy. He sees the beauty of flower, appreciating Kṛṣṇa's artistic sense. When he hears the sweet voice of a bird, he immediately understands that "Kṛṣṇa is speaking so nicely through this bird." This is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Everywhere he sees. Antar bahiḥ.



So if one comes to this platform to understand Kṛṣṇa or to see Kṛṣṇa within and without... [break] ...by Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One who will see Kṛṣṇa within and without always, twenty-four hours. Nothing, he will see nothing. The others, they will simply say, "Where is God? God is dead. Can you show me God?" Such persons will never be able to understand what is God because they want to see God by challenging. That is not possible. God is not visible by challenging. Simply by love and surrender. Then God can be seen. Alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām antar bahir avasthitam [SB 1.8.18].

Therefore śāstra says that alakṣya... Ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim: [Nārada-pañcarātra] "If one has come to the point of worshiping the Supreme Lord, there is no more necessity of undergoing severe austerities and penances." Because others, karmīs and yogis, for their sense gratification, karmīs, jñānīs, and yogis, they have to undergo severe austerities. But the bhakta, somehow or other, he can, if he simply learns how to love Kṛṣṇa, then he hasn't got to undergo severe austerities and penance. Immediately he is released. Because that is the perfectional stage. If you live in Kṛṣṇa, always loving... Just like the gopīs. The gopīs, they learned how to love Kṛṣṇa. That's all. They never underwent any severe austerities like the great saintly persons going to Himalaya and pressing their nose and something like that. No, never did. Their only business was how to love Kṛṣṇa. Automatically. Without any... Of course, that stage is not easily obtained, but the śāstra says if you come to that stage, simply to love Kṛṣṇa, then you are on the highest platform of blissful life. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu [Bs. 5.38]. Santaḥ, those who are devotees, they are twenty-four hours seeing God. That is to be... That is the highest stage of perfection. And by Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, one can be brought to the platform, how to love Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours without any cessation.

But others, they cannot see. Why they cannot see? Māyā-javanikācchannam ajñādhokṣajam avyayam. Because their eyes are covered by a curtain created by māyā. Māyā. Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said. They are very much proud of their knowledge, advancement of knowledge, scientific knowledge. But Kṛṣṇa says, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. Their knowledge has been taken away by māyā. Apahṛta means taken away. Here also, the same thing, Kuntī says, māyā-javanikācchannam ajñā. Māyā-javanikācchannam ajñā adhokṣajam avyayam. They cannot see Adhokṣaja. Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is also known as Adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja. Akṣaja. Akṣa means direct perception. Just like we sometimes say, "Can you show me? Can you show me?" So the answer is, "Whether you have got eyes to see?" God or Kṛṣṇa cannot be seen by these eyes. So Adhokṣaja. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Adhokṣaja. Adhaḥ. Adhaḥ means down, made down, or defeated. Your sense perception will be defeated if you want to realize by God by your imperfect sense perception. That is not possible. You will be defeated. Adhaḥ akṣaja. Akṣaja means akṣa. Akṣa means eyes. Just like we say, "Can you show me?" You cannot see. Because māyā-javanikācchannam, by the māyā there is a curtain. What can you see? Just like we are very much proud of seeing, but we are seeing because there is light. If the light is taken away, you cannot see.

So your seeing power is conditional. Your seeing power is conditional. You cannot see God in that way. Only if you develop love of God, then you will be able to see always, twenty-four hours, Kṛṣṇa. This is the science. Māyā-javanikācchannam ajñā. Because the javanikā, the curtain is there, created by māyā, therefore everyone is ajñā. Ajñā means foolish, without any knowledge.

māyā-javanikācchannam

ajñādhokṣajam avyayam

na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā

naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā

[SB 1.8.19]



Mūḍha-dṛśā. Mūḍha. Mūḍha means the same ass, those who are seeing like ignorant or ass. What is the example? Just like an actor, theatrical actor playing on the stage. A child, he is seeing somebody acting, but the child has forgotten that his father acting. Because the father has dressed in a different way and he's a different posture, playing on the stage, although the child is sitting amongst the audience, he cannot understand that "He's my father playing." Because he hasn't got the understanding. It may be that who is elderly than me, that means one who is advanced his knowledge, he can see. Or the mother can say, "Oh, don't you see your father is playing there?" So although the child and the mother is there, one cannot see, other can see. That means one who has got knowledge, he can see. One who hasn't got knowledge, he cannot see, although God is everywhere. God is everywhere. Everywhere. Na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā [SB 1.8.19]. Naṭo. Naṭo means the theatrical actor. When he is dressed just like an actor, the foolish man cannot see him. Naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā.



tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ

munīnām amalātmanām

bhakti-yoga-vidhānārthaṁ

kathaṁ paśyema hi striyaḥ

[SB 1.8.20]



Others, those who are paramahaṁsa... How... Kṛṣṇa does not become visible, because He is visible only to the paramahaṁsa. Paramahaṁsa means the supreme position of a human being. That is called paramahaṁsa. There are... You know, according to Vedic system, there are brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. The eight stages. The sannyāsī is to be supposed the first-class stage. So amongst the sannyāsa stage also, there are four stages: kuṭīcaka, bahūdaka, parivrājakācārya, and paramahaṁsa. Not that all sannyāsīs on the equal status. The first status is kuṭīcaka. Sannyāsa means one has to give up the relationship with family. So in the beginning of stage, because he is newly entered in the sannyāsa life, it is not possible for him to give up immediately his village or... Of course, when there was systematic sannyāsa system, then that anyone had to take sannyāsa at a certain stage. Nowadays there is... Sannyāsa, accepting sannyāsa life, is also forbidden because nobody can actually follow strictly the rules and regulations. And neither anybody has got any inclination to accept sannyāsa. Therefore in this age sannyāsa is sometimes forbidden. Kalau pañca vivarjayet [Cc. Ādi 17.164]. But if you ask that "Why you have taken sannyāsa?" or "You have got some sannyāsīs," this sannyāsa is not karma-sannyāsa. This sannyāsa is devotion, Vaiṣṇava sannyāsa. Vaiṣṇava sannyāsī means anyone who gives up everything and devotes simply his time for pushing on Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, he is also sannyāsa.



It is recommended in the Bhagavad-gītā: sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca. Anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ [Bg. 6.1]. One who is working, anāśritaḥ karma-phalam, without any desire to enjoy the fruits of his activity. These sannyāsīs, they are working for Kṛṣṇa. They have no desire to make any profit out of it. Other sannyāsīs, they are making any profit. They want mukti, mokṣa. But these sannyāsīs, they do not want even mokṣa. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the ideal sannyāsī. He says, mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. He never claimed that "I may not have any more birth." Mokṣa means one who hasn't got to take birth of this material body. That is called mokṣa. So a Vaiṣṇava sannyāsī, they do not want even mokṣa. Therefore they have no demand. So that sannyāsī is different from the ordinary sannyāsī. Ordinary sannyāsī, he has demand. He wants mukti. But Vaiṣṇava sannyāsī, either he is in sannyāsī dress or in not sannyāsī dress, simply because his aim and object is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa; therefore he is sannyāsa. Anāśritaḥ karma. He has no shelter of the work that he is doing for Kṛṣṇa. Not that "I shall work in this way, and there will be good result, and I will enjoy it." Other sannyāsīs, they are thinking like that: "I will go austerities and penances severely. I shall go to Himalayas and execute very rigidly all the principles of sannyāsa. But as a result of this, I will get liberated, mukti." Therefore he has got demand.

So that sannyāsī and this sannyāsī is different. Anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti, sa sannyāsī. So this sannyāsī can be accepted even in gṛhastha life, even in householder life. Because in one sense, all these boys and girls who are working for Kṛṣṇa, they have no other desire. They are all sannyāsīs because they have no desire to achieve any result out of their work. The only thing they want: the kṛṣṇa-bhakti, how Kṛṣṇa will be satisfied. They are engaged in preaching work because they want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. They are teaching all over the world the same principles, the same philosophy, that "Please surrender unto Kṛṣṇa and you will be happy." That is their message. They have no other message. Therefore anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryam karoti. They are all sannyāsīs.

So out of... Of course, because Lord Caitanya accepted this sannyāsa, so we are maintaining that system, but actual point of sannyāsa is not mukti, but satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is sannyāsa, how Kṛṣṇa will be satisfied, how Kṛṣṇa's representative will be satisfied. Because we have to work under Kṛṣṇa's representative. Anything we work, if we want to be expert, then we have to work under some expert. Therefore we accept guru. We do not serve Kṛṣṇa directly. We accept guru. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. The principle is guru is the representative of Kṛṣṇa, and if we work under guru and if we can satisfy, then Kṛṣṇa is satisfied. That is very easy to understand. Suppose in office you are working under some officer. You have no acquaintance with the proprietor, but your pay, your promotion will be considered by the proprietor on the recommendation of this officer. When the officer will say, "Yes, this man has worked very nicely," then your increment of pay and your promotion immediately will be accepted by the proprietor. Therefore śāstra says, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. If you can satisfy your spiritual master, then you must know that you have satisfied Kṛṣṇa. Because he is representative of Kṛṣṇa, you are working under him, so if he says, "It is all right," Kṛṣṇa says, "It is all right," although you have never seen Kṛṣṇa. And yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi. And if the spiritual master says, "Oh, you are doing nothing" then your, all spoiled, all labor is spoiled. Na gatiḥ kuto 'pi. You have no other shelter.

So this paramahaṁsa stage is... We have come to explain paramahaṁsānām. Here it is said, tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ munīnām amalātmanām [SB 1.8.20]. Amalātmanām. Amala means without any dirty things. paramahaṁsa means without any... What is that dirty thing? The dirty thing is to have any slight desire for enjoying this material body. That is called dirty thing. Amalam. Everyone is samala. Samala, with dirty things. The karmī, jñānī, yogi, everyone is infected with dirty things. Why? The karmīs, they want that "I shall be elevated in the heavenly planet and I shall enjoy there in the Nandana-kānana, and beautiful wife, beautiful women." That is their ambition, the people are working very hard here. Everyone wants very comfortable life with good bank balance, good house, good wife, good children. That is their ambition. That is karmī. They have no other ambition. Similarly, jñānī. When the jñānī sees that his good wife, good family, good money, and good house is nonsense... "It will not stay, but for some years I can enjoy. Then it will be all vanquished." They are jñānīs. They know how things are happening. Therefore they want mukti. But there is still want, that "Now I have given up all this. I don't want this material happiness. Now I shall merge into the existence of the Supreme Lord. Because Supreme Lord is the supreme enjoyer, so if I become one with Him, then I shall enjoy, supreme." The same enjoyment spirit is there, to merge into the Supreme. In a different way only. The karmīs are directly trying to enjoy sense enjoyment. They are indirectly wanting another kind, another higher status of sense enjoyment.

So similarly, the yogis also, they want to play some jugglery, magic. If they can achieve one of the... There are eight kinds of yoga-siddhis. There are many... You will find they are showing some yoga-siddhi, and people are after that. Foolish people, they are thinking that he is God. If you can create something by jugglery... Suppose I am sitting here. I make like this and immediately I produce something, golden pot. Oh, immediately thousands of people will come: "Oh, here is God. Here is God. Because he has produced a cup, golden cup which is worth, say, two thousand rupees, therefore he has become God." There are many persons, merchants, they are producing two thousand rupees every moment. Then why he is not God? But the foolish people, they have no sense. They are captivated by these juggleries, yoga-siddhi.

So yoga-siddhi, jugglery, yoga-siddhi magic, captivates foolish persons. So they want yoga-siddhi. If some foolish persons gather, then he gets sense enjoyment. That is another type of sense enjoyment. So therefore in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī sakali aśānta. They are not paramahaṁsas. Paramahaṁsa... Here it is stated that bhakti-yoga-vidhānārtham. Tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ munīnām amalātmanām [SB 1.8.20]. Amalātmanām means when there is no more dirty things. The karmīs, they have got dirty things, sense enjoyment. The jñānīs, they have got also dirty things. One may say that "Mukti is dirty thing?" Yes. According to Vaiṣṇava calculation it is dirty thing, because Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he said, kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. Kaivalyam means to become one with the Supreme, mukti. He said, "It is exactly like hell." Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūrākāśa-puṣpāyate. "And these heavenly planets," the domain or the objective of the karmīs, "that is like flower in the sky." And durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate. Durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī. The yogis, their first business is... They get so much yoga-siddhi because first business is indriya-saṁyama. Yoga-siddhi is not obtained easily. One has to practice it. And the first practice is controlling the senses. Durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate.

So anyway, our point is that paramahaṁsa means one who has no such dirty things in the heart, bhukti-mukti-siddhi. All, they are dirty things. Bhukti means material enjoyment, mukti means to become, to merge into the existence of the Supreme Lord, and siddhi means yoga-siddhi. So they are all dirty things. So such dirty..., a person with such dirty things, he is not paramahaṁsa. He may be a sannyāsī, but he's not a paramahaṁsa. Paramahaṁsa means who has no dirty things.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



So all the bhaktas, those who are pure devotees, he is paramahaṁsa.



So Kṛṣṇa comes to teach this highest science of devotion to make people paramahaṁsas. Not these dirty karmīs, jñānīs, and yogis. Kṛṣṇa's business is... Therefore Kṛṣṇa, first condition, says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam: [Bg. 18.66] "Just you surrender unto Me and I shall make you a paramahaṁsa." Then you will be able to see always Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. [break]



...pūrṇam, a man is disturbed with all these dirty things, he cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Paramahaṁsānām. So it is rather difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



But we are trying to push on Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the direction of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So it may be possible by the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise it is a very difficult subject matter. (end)



740705SB.CHI



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.19

-

Chicago, July 5, 1974



Prabhupāda: (chants Sanskrit word-for-word and devotees repeat) So, Kṛṣṇa is covered by a curtain, māyā-javanikā. Javanikā means curtain, and māyā, "deluding." We have explained yesterday that Kṛṣṇa is existing outside and inside. Outside..., inside He is existing, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe, pointing out. Hṛd-deśe means this heart, the Lord within, īśvaraḥ. Not only within the heart, but within the atoms, as it is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā,



eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.35]



Govinda, because He has entered within this universe, therefore the cosmic manifestation is possible. Otherwise it is not. Just like I am the soul, you are the soul. Because you have entered this body or I am entered this body, therefore the movement of the body is possible. As soon as I or you leave this body, it is dull, no more, no movement. It is very easy to understand. Similarly, how the movement of the cosmic manifestation is going on, the so-called scientist, philosopher, rascals, they do not understand, because Kṛṣṇa has entered. It is very easy to understand. I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, very minute part. Still, because I have entered this body, therefore the body moves, the activities of the body going on. Is it very difficult to understand? So, anyone can understand that this lump of matter, big cosmic manifestation, until a thing like me, soul, is there, how it is going on nicely-how the sun is rising in due time, the moon is rising in due time, the oceans are flowing in due order. Everything i in order. That we have to understand by the symptom. It requires little brain. Just like as soon as in the morning you see no more darkness, it is now..., there is light, immediately you can understand there is sun, sunrise is there. Similarly, as soon as you see the world order is going on very nicely, there must be God. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: "Under My direction," Kṛṣṇa said. He personally said, and if you have got intelligence, you should understand also. But if you are dull rascal, then you cannot understand. Therefore, here it is said, "You dull rascal, you do not know that Kṛṣṇa is covered by a curtain given by māyā." That is stated in Bhagavad-gītā also, nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25].

So you have to require..., you have to acquire that knowledge how to understand the existence of God, Kṛṣṇa, everywhere-inside and outside. So Kuntī Devī says that "You are within and outside." Kṛṣṇa is within, within your heart, and Kṛṣṇa is outside also. Otherwise how this big cosmic manifestation is going on? Huh? Not only that, He is everywhere, even within the atom, aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayān... Still we can not understand where is Kṛṣṇa. This is our misfortune. Duṣkṛtinaḥ, mūḍhāḥ, they can not understand. Why they cannot understand? That because they are duṣkṛtinaḥ, always engaged in sinful activities. Who can see Kṛṣṇa? Who is not sinful. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpam [Bg. 7.28], one who has finished his life of sinful activities, he can understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is our request to everyone: Please do not commit these four kinds of sinful activities-illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. This is the preliminary qualification to understand God. Especially one must not kill animals. The Bible also.Therefore it is said, "Thou shalt not kill. You rascal, if you want to understand what is God, you must stop this killing art. Thou shalt not kill." But these rascals will not understand. This is the mis..., misfortune. And therefore God is always covered to their eyes. Kuntī Devī therefore said, māyā-javanikācchannam. Māyā-javanikācchannam ajñā. Ajñā means rascal, who has no knowledge, dull, dull-headed, mūḍhāḥ, ass. These words are used in the śāstra. Why mūḍhāḥ? The word is used as an, an ass. The ass, amongst the animals, is the most, I mean to say, what is called, foolish, most foolish. The ass works very hard, and bears burden, heavy burden, ton, but he does not know "Why I am carrying so big burden? Why I have taken so much responsibility?" That he does not know. So here you will find so many big, big politicians, leaders, they have accepted big, big burden like an ass, but they do not know why they are doing so. They do not know. Their only solace is a temporary satisfaction that "I have become president," "I have become this master," "I have become this," for few years. But he does not know what is his real business. So therefore the karmīs, they are working hard day and night, but he does not know why he is working so hard day and night.

So actually, they are working so hard simply for sense gratification. Therefore śāstra says, nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. Śāstra, Ṛṣabhadeva says that this body... This is also material body, but there is distinction between this body and the dog's body or the hog's body. The hog is, with this material body, he is working day and night, "Where is stool? Where is stool?" That is his business. As soon as he gets some stool, he eats and he is satisfied: "Now my labor is satisfied." Similarly, those who are working very hard day and night simply for sense gratification, they are no better than these hogs and dogs. Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke kaṣṭān kāmān. He does not know "Why I have got this first class body, human body, civilized body? What is my business?" Not for eating meat, and gambling, and intoxication. It is for self-realization, to understand what I am, what is God, what is my relationship with God, and what is the aim of my life. It is meant for that. But they donot know, and because they do not know, asses, mūḍhas Kṛṣṇa says, na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ they will not accept the existence of God, although God is inside and outside. This is the description of the mūḍhāḥ. Here it is said, ajñā. Ajñā means ignorant. And what is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣajam. Adhok..., adhokṣaja. Adha, adhakṛta. Adhakṛta means subdued. Akṣaja, our knowledge, direct perception. We are very much proud of our eyes, akṣa. So Kṛṣṇa's another name is Adhokṣaja. Where your eyesight fails to see you, see Kṛṣṇa; therefore he is Adhokṣaja. Akṣaja jñānam. Knowledge received through direct perception of the senses is called akṣaja jñānam, and Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja, where knowledge by direct perception cannot reach. And perfection of life is when you become attached to that adhokṣaja. In another place of Śrīmad... (break) Peace will be possible when you develop your loving propensity for the Adhokṣaja, who is beyond your senses. Therefore those who are duṣkṛtinaḥ, mūḍhāḥ-many languages have been used in the Vedas they do not know what is the aim of life, they are simply thinking "I am this body," then this kind of thought is there in the dogs and cats also. He is also thinking "I am this body." So, this modern civilization is big dog civilization, that's all. That is not human civilization. Human civilization means that he must be interested to know Kṛṣṇa and God. That is human civilization.

So, māyā-javanikācchannam ajñādhokṣajam avyayam. Avyayam means imperishable. Avyayam na lakṣyase, they cannot see. Na lakṣyase, observed, cannot be observed by them, na lakṣyase. Mūḍha, again the same word is used, mūḍha. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā. This word is used. One who does not know what is God, and what is his relationship with God, he is a mūḍha. In so many places, there are so many śāstras you will find this word mūḍha. Here it is said, na lakṣyase mūḍha. Mūḍha-dṛśa, whose sense perception is just like blind man. A blind man is given a elephant, an elephant. Now, "Mr. Blind Man, just understand what is this." So, he is blind, he simply, I mean to say, moves his hand over the leg. "Sir, it is a column. It is a big column." So blind man, he cannot see; he thought that elephant is big column. So anyone who is speculating about God, he is the blind man studying the elephant, like that. Or the frog in the well studying Atlantic Ocean. What he will understand? Suppose a frog is informed "Mr. Frog, Dr. Frog, (laughter) I have seen a big, vast mass of water." "What is that?" "Atlantic Ocean." "How big is it?" "Very, very big." Maybe, he is in the three-feet well. "Four feet?" "No, no, very, very big." "Five feet?" "No, very big." "Six feet?" (laughter) How he will understand the Atlantic Ocean? He can simply imagine, maybe three-feet, four-feet, five-feet well. But beyond all feet, that he cannot understand. Because of mūḍha-dṛśa, the direct perception, and he is a rascal.

So by mental speculation, so-called big, big philosophers, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa can be understood by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. By the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa comes. Kṛṣṇa is visible. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena. When you are trained up how to love God, Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will reveal Himself, and you will see Him. Premāñjana-cchurita. Not with these eyes, but another eyes. What is that eyes? Premāñjana, love, the ointment of love, when it is smeared in your eyes, then you can see. Just like there is medicine, eye ointment, or surma, in India it is called surma. Sometimes you apply, your vision becomes very cleansed, and you can see things very nicely. So we have to cleanse our eyes to see Kṛṣṇa, by the ointment of love of Kṛṣṇa. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilo..., santaḥ. Then, when you are saintly person, santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti, He... He is, actually He is already indicated in the śāstra that God is situated within your heart. So then when your eyes are clear, then you can see, hṛayeṣu, always existing. But so long you are mūḍha-dṛśa, you are mental speculator, the curtain is covered, the covering is there, you cannot see Kṛṣṇa. Māyā-javanikācchannam ajñādhokṣajam avyayam na lakṣyase, "You are not visible," mūḍha-dṛśa, "by persons who are rascal and simply believe in direct perception," mūḍha-dṛśa. How it is? In Sanskrit language you will find exact example is given, naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā. Just like you have gone to see a performance, dramatic performance, and some of your relatives, say your brother or father, is playing there, but he is dressed in such a way that you can not recognize he is your father. Although he is in your front, the father or the brother whom you see every day, this man, being, has dressed himself in such a way, he is playing the part of a king or something else, you can not understand. Somebody says, "Did you see your father is playing?" "Where is my father? Where is my father?" This is the position. Because Kṛṣṇa is playing His part in a different way. He has ot so much business because He is directing the whole universal affair. You can understand, if one man becomes busy in so many things, his brain becomes puzzled. But Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart-not only the human being; the animals, the trees, plants, everyone. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ. And what He is doing? He is giving direction. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am sitting in everyone's heart," sarvasya ca aham hṛdi sann... Again hṛdi, in the soul, in the heart. Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca, "I am giving particular direction to everyone." He is forgetting something, he is reminding..., he is reminded something. In this way Kṛṣṇa is doing. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanam. How much busy is that? The thief wants to steal something, somebody's house, so he is also praying God, "Please give me some opportunity so that I can steal." So Kṛṣṇa is giving him direction, "All right, you steal in this way." And the same person in whose house the stealing wil be committed, he is also praying, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, please protect me from thieves." So he is also believing. That just see Kṛṣṇa's business: He is giving direction to the thief, and giving direction to the person in whose house the stealing will be committed. So if..., just try to understand how much Kṛṣṇa is busy. That is God. Although He is performing so many contradictory business, contradictory business, opposing business, still His full brain, His full brain, He does not forget to dance with the gopīs at the same time. This is Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa. If you are busy with so many transactions, you forget to see your wife and children and forget. But no. Kṛṣṇa, goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto. Although He is busy dancing with the gopīs, although He is busy to play with His cowherd friends, goloka eva nivasaty, in this way He is living in the Goloka, and akhilātma-bhūto, still He is in everyone's heart and giving direction, all contradiction. This is Kṛṣṇa. Don't try to imitate Kṛṣṇa, rascal. Kṛṣṇa is not so easy. Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa. You are you are. That is real philosophy.

Thank you very much.





Devotees: Jaya! Hari bol!



Prabhupāda: Now, who is the priest?



Devotee: Jagadīśa.



Prabhupāda: Now begin mantra. Namaḥ.



Devotees: Namaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Apavitram.



Devotees: Apavitram.



Prabhupāda: Pavitro vā.



Devotees: Pavitro vā.



Prabhupāda: Sarva.



Devotees: Sarva.



Prabhupāda: Vastam.



Devotees: Vastam.



Prabhupāda: Gato.



Devotees: Gato.



Prabhupāda: Api.



Devotees: Api.



Prabhupāda: Vā.



Devotees: Vā.



Prabhupāda: Yaḥ.



Devotees: Yaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Smaret.



Devotees: Smaret.



Prabhupāda: Puṇḍarī.



Devotees: Puṇḍarī.



Prabhupāda: Kākṣam.



Devotees: Kākṣam.



Prabhupāda: Saḥ.



Devotees: Saḥ.



Prabhupāda: Bāhya.



Devotees: Bāhya.



Prabhupāda: Abhyantaraḥ.



Devotees: Abhyantaraḥ.



Prabhupāda: Śuciḥ.



Devotees: Śuciḥ.



Prabhupāda: Śrī viṣṇu.



Devotees: Śrī viṣṇu.



Prabhupāda: Śrī viṣṇu.



Devotees: Śrī viṣṇu.



Prabhupāda: Śrī viṣṇu.



Devotees: Śrī viṣṇu.



Prabhupāda: Now, Jagadīśa Prabhu, do your business. Hm. All chanted?



Devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: (starts chanting japa with devotees joining) Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare... Jagadīśa ... (break) (end)





740929SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.19

-

Māyāpura, September 29, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "Being beyond the range of limited sense perception, the eternally irreproachable factor covered by the curtain of deluding energy, You are invisible to the foolish observer, exactly as an actor dressed as a player is not recognized."



Prabhupāda:



māyā-javanikācchannam

ajñādhokṣajam avyayam

na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā

naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā

[SB 1.8.19]



So one side is māyā-javanikācchannam. Māyā, this illusory energy, is covering with the curtain. Just like we are seeing the Deity, but if there is a curtain, we cannot see. Similarly, there is a curtain which is illusory energy, māyā. Big, big scientists, they cannot see what is behind this material nature. They cannot understand. Because the māyā, this wonderful material energy, is acting in such a big curtain, they cannot understand that beyond this there is something else. They cannot understand. Māyā-javanikā ācchannam. Illusory energy. They are thinking this material energy working, that is everything. Nothing beyond this. The whole world is covered. This is one side. And the other side: ajñā.



Māyā-javanikācchannam ajñā... These materialistic persons, they are ajñā, means they have no sufficient knowledge. Unless one develops the light of knowledge, sattva-guṇa... Sattva-guṇa is the light of knowledge. Rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa is darkness. Ignorance and passion. In this stage one cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa, what is God. Ajñā. Rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. As we have discussed in Bhagavad, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ, those who are infected with the two kinds of material modes, means rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, they are simply busy, kāma and lobha. They are busy only... Those who are passionate, they are simply busy for sense gratification, and those who are in ignorance, in darkness, they have no eyes to see.

So these two classes of men... Mostly people are infected with these two kinds of modes of material nature. Rajas-tamas. The whole world. At the present moment, especially, mostly ignorance, and some of them are passionate. That passionate tendency is engaging them for so many industries and very, very strong work, ugra-karma. Ugra-karma. Ugra-karma means very strong...? What is, should be the English word? Ugra... Ugra, just like chili, pungent. There are many things. They are very strong in taste. So ugra-karma, these... Just like they are building hundred-and-fifty-story building. People can live comfortably in a small cottage or one-storied house or little more. But no, they're increasing. Their passionate activities are increasing. Just like in your country, in New York, now there is hundred-and-four-storied building, or more than that. Some building?

Brahmānanda: Hundred and ten.



Prabhupāda: Hundred and ten.



Brahmānanda: Two of them.



Prabhupāda: Two of them. They're increasing. They are thinking by increasing the stories more and more, that is advancement of civili... But how long you will increase? If you make million stories, still, it is unlimited. That we can see. So many airplanes are running in the sky. What is that? Still, it is vast. So many sputniks are running in the sky. Still, it is vast. So it is simply desire, that "If I make a hundred-and-fifty-storied house, then my life is successful." So in this way, instead of not wasting valuable time of this human life, they are simply wasting time in this way. That is also explained in the Rāmāyaṇa. Just the Rāvaṇa. He wanted to make a staircase up to the heavenly planet. It is like that. Ugra-karma. Why they are doing so? Ajñā, ajñā. Foolish people.



Now, if we say that "You are all foolish, rascal people. You are wasting your time in this way," they will think us crazy. And they think us like that, that we do not recommend these things. So it is very, very difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa in this condition, in this situation. Māyā-javanikācchannam and ajñā, foolish people. Ajñā. And the other, other side, Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja. Even one is advanced in knowledge... Knowledge means, our knowledge means we manufacture words or syllables from A to Z. That's all. ABCD. We compose words with these twenty-six, or how many? A to Z?

Devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Yes. That is... And in Sanskrit, as in English it is A to Z, similarly in Sanskrit, a, a, i, u, and the end is kṣa. So a and kṣa, that is called akṣa. Akṣa-ja. And ja means generated. So we also compose words, those who are Sanskrit scholars, they compose words from a to akṣa, just like English they compose words from A to Z.



So our mental speculation and advancement of education is limited between this a and kṣa, akṣa. Akṣa-ja. But Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja means where these kinds of speculation, beginning from a to kṣa, will not act. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. Adhaḥ kṛta, cut down. (aside:) Why they are going? They are busy in some other work? Eh? Ugra-karma. Without hearing, what he will do, nonsense? Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam, this is our main business. Śravaṇam. If you don't hear, what you will do? You will do simply sense gratification. That's all.

So this is difficulty, that we are not very much interested in hearing. And that is the main business. Our bhakti begins: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. We have to hear and we have to speak. But if we are not interested in hearing and speak, then it will be the same ṭhākura-bari(?), simply formula. That's all. And gradually it will be stopped. Unless there is life of śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam, these big, big buildings, temples, will become burden. So if we are, if we want to create burden for future, then we may give up this hearing and chanting and sleep very nicely. It will be burden. Galagraha. Not śrī-vigraha, but galagraha. Galagraha. Śrī-vigraha means worshipable Deity. So if we give up this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, then it will be thought that "Our Guru Mahārāja has given a burden in the neck, galagraha." This is the danger. So we must be very much alert in śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. Otherwise all this labor will be futile. This building will be only the nest, nest for the doves and the pigeons. That is the danger. That is being done. Nobody is interested. Such, such things...

Now, who is, who can understand Kṛṣṇa? There are so many impediments. One side, there is curtain of māyā; another side, everyone is a rascal and fool; and another side, Kṛṣṇa is beyond your sense perception. This is the position. How much one must be alert. Then one can understand. Just like the Gosvāmīs. Is Kṛṣṇa is so easy thing to be understood? But there is process. So if we do not adopt the process, then how we can understand Kṛṣṇa? These are the so many difficult things. One side, one thing is the māyā is checking. Māyā is trying to put stumbling block for your advancement of spiritual life. Māyā-javanikācchannam. And the other side, we are all fools and rascals. And the, again, Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja, beyond the range of sense perception. This is the position.

So unless we become very serious to understand Kṛṣṇa, it is very, very difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa. Māyā-javanikācchannam. On the one side, Kuntī says, antar bahir avasthitam: "Kṛṣṇa, You are within..." Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe [Bg. 18.61]. Kṛṣṇa is not far away. Kṛṣṇa is always with you. He, He's so friendly that just like two birds... It is said in the Upaniṣads: the one bird is eating the fruit of the tree; another bird is simply guiding and seeing. Because this material world, living entity wanted to enjoy. Just like you have seen that the dog and the master. The master is so friendly to the dog out of love. It is a dog, but when it is passing stool, he's waiting. Why? Is the duty of the master to wait because the dog is passing stool? No. Out of love. Out of love. We can see from practical example. Similarly... The master may be a great millionaire, but still, he loves the dog so much that on the morning walk he takes his dog and the dog is passing urine... What, what business dog has got? To pass urine and stool and go this way and that way. But the master is attending. Similarly, God, or Kṛṣṇa, is so affectionate that we have come here in this material world simply to pass stool and urine, still He's attending. Still, He's attending. Just imagine what merciful is Kṛṣṇa.

In the Upaniṣads it is said that two birds... The one bird is Paramātmā. Kṛṣṇa has become Paramātmā. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā that kṣetra-kṣetrajña. There are two things. One is this kṣetra, this body. Kṣetra, just the field. Just like we are tilling the field. And the tiller, the kṛṣāṇa. Similarly, we are, we have got this field, and we are growing our own, harvesting our own grains. Just like you are doing. So according to our labor, according to our attempt, we are getting food grains. Similarly, we have got this body, and I am, the spirit soul is the tiller. So according to my karma, I am getting the result. So similarly... Not only I am there, but Kṛṣṇa is also there. He's seeing what you are doing, what you are doing, what you want more. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am sitting in everyone's heart." Why? "Just to give him the facilities. This rascal living being has come to the material world to till the field to get some result. All right. Let him do that." Just like children play on the beach, do all nonsense, and the father sees, "All right, you have finished your business? Come on." So Kṛṣṇa is like that. He is simply seeing. We are acting so nonsensically, and Kṛṣṇa is giving us... The same way, a dog passing stool and urine, the master is attending. Or the father is seeing. The children are playing on the beach. They're making big, big house on the sand, and it has nothing, no value, but Kṛṣ..., the father is giving the opportunity, "All right, do it."

So Kṛṣṇa is giving us all the facilities, but we are so fool that we cannot understand that Kṛṣṇa is so friendly. That is... It is said, na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā [SB 1.8.19]. They cannot see. Because mūḍha-dṛśā. Mūḍha means rascal, and dṛśā... Dṛśā means seeing. They have no power to see. A mūḍha cannot see. Rascals, they cannot see. They are very much proud: "Can you show me God?" But they do not think, "Whether I am qualified to see?" They are very much proud of these eyes. What is the value of this eye? Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes, you can see Me, but according to My direction. You see Me: raso 'ham apsu kaunteya [Bg. 7.8]. You can see. It is very easy for you. You see Me in the water. While you taste, while you drink water, you see Me. I am the taste." So you are, everyone drinks water, and we get some taste. Otherwise why he's drinking water. So that taste, if you remember that "Here is Kṛṣṇa," simply by tasting water, simply by drinking water, if you follow Kṛṣṇa's instruction, one day you'll be a devotee. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. Simply by drinking water. Simply we have to know how to see Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore Kuntīdevī says, na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā [SB 1.8.19]. The mūḍha, the rascal, is so foolish... Kṛṣṇa says that "You see Me in the taste of water," but these rascals: "Hah! This is humbug. This is humbug. How, in the taste, Kṛṣṇa is there? I want to see in my own eyes." But you haven't got that eyes. Just develop your eyes gradually. Just like one is suffering from some eye disease. So take some medicine, then gradually, your eyesight will be improved. Take the spectacle, some power, then more power, more power. So... But they'll not take the instruction of Kṛṣṇa, the instruction of spiritual master. So they want to remain mūḍha-dṛśā, rascal and fool. And still they want to see Kṛṣṇa. This is the difficulty. Na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā [SB 1.8.19]. If you do not improve your eyes according to the direction of śāstra..., sādhu-śāstra-guru, these three things, then how you'll see Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is saying. That is śāstra. Śāstra means what is said by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is śāstra. And guru. Guru says the same thing. And sādhu says the same thing.

Sādhu-guru test means they do not change the words of Kṛṣṇa. They do not say, "Now I have manufactured something. Kṛṣṇa says that 'You can see Me in the taste of water.' I can say that you can see in this way: 'You see me and you will see Kṛṣṇa.' " Just (as) the Māyāvādī says, "You think of me." In the Aurobindo Ashram, there they have no other business. The disciples are advised that "Whatever you like, you can do. You should always think of Aurobindo." Just like Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. I inquired from the inmates of the Aurobindo Ashram. So I (inquired,) "What do you do?" "That we think of Aurobindo." They are... Because Aurobindo thinks that he is Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, so they advise that "You think of me." So the inmates, they think and smoke biḍi and cigarette. That's all. I have seen it. So these things are going on. Mūḍha-dṛśā. If we want to remain mūḍha-dṛśā, then it will be difficult for us to see Kṛṣṇa. We have dedicated our life to see Kṛṣṇa, to talk with Kṛṣṇa, to play with Kṛṣṇa, to have Kṛṣṇa as our son, to have Kṛṣṇa as our friend, to Kṛṣṇa as our lover. If this is our ambition, then we should not remain a mūḍha-dṛśā, foolishly...

So we have to follow the mahājano yena gataḥ... As Kuntī's advising. Kuntī is, she knows how to see Kṛṣṇa. She knows, "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Although He's playing the part of my brother's son, nephew, but actually, He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Just like Arjuna. Arjuna, he was talking like friend, but when he saw that "It is impossible to solve this problem... I am inclined not to fight and kill my relatives, but the duty is to kill them..." It is a very perplexed position. So therefore he accepted Kṛṣṇa as guru. He said that "I do not find anyone else who can solve my, this problem. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, I am surrendering unto You." Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. "Now we are not talking as friends. I accept You as guru." When one accepts somebody as guru, he cannot argue. That is the condition. Praṇipātena, sampūrṇa, fully surrendered. Otherwise there is no meaning of making a guru. It is not like that, a pet dog, that "Everyone makes guru, and let me guru, let me have a guru." But that is not the... Guru means first of all the condition is praṇipāta, fully surrendered. Not that "If I like, then I shall carry your order. And if I don't like, then I shall not do it." That is not acceptance of guru. Praṇipāta. First of all, we must agree. So because friends and friends talking... A friend may agree with his friend. He may not agree with... That is friendly talk. But Arjuna became śiṣyas te 'ham: "I am now Your śiṣya, disciple. Now there is no question of disagreeing with You. Whatever You'll say, I will accept." So at last Kṛṣṇa said, "Surrender unto Me." And Arjuna did it. That is the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gītā. He changed his decision. He changed. He did not want to fight. That was his decision. But when he accepted Kṛṣṇa as guru and He said that "You must fight. It is my desire. Even you don't find these people are not going back home, they will be killed here, that is my already plan..."

So these things are discussed in the Bhagavad-gītā. So if we remain mūḍha-dṛśā, in spite of opening our eyes in so many ways by Kṛṣṇa, by guru, by śāstra, if still, if we remain mūḍha-dṛśā, then how we can see Kṛṣṇa? That is not possible. Therefore it is said, na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā: [SB 1.8.19] "If we keep our eyes still mūḍha, illusioned, then we cannot see You." How? Naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā. Exactly... Kṛṣṇa... Just like one of my relatives, he is playing before me, but because I am mūḍha-dṛśā, my eyesight or my intelligence is not correct, I am seeing that somebody else... I see that my relative, my brother or father or friend, is dancing on the stage, but he is dressed in such a way that in spite of being present in my front, I cannot recognize. So if we remain mūḍha-dṛśā, then we cannot see Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Akhilātma-bhūtaḥ. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it said, goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Although He's living in Goloka Vṛndāvana, He's everywhere. Then how can I see? Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Those who have developed love for Kṛṣṇa, they can see always, twenty-four hours, Kṛṣṇa and nothing but Kṛṣṇa. This is the process.

So we have to increase our attachment, our love for Kṛṣṇa. Mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ. The... This is also explained. Everything is there. Mayy āsakta. We have to increase our attachment for Kṛṣṇa, our love of Kṛṣṇa. Then we shall see Kṛṣṇa always.

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.38]



These are the practical experience of mahājana, Brahmā. The Brahma-saṁhitā is written by Brahmā. He's mahājana. Mahājana means the person who knows Kṛṣṇa. The mahājanas are described, you know. Twelve mahājanas. Nāradaḥ svayambhūḥ śambhuḥ. Nārada is mahājana, and Brahmā is mahājana, Svayambhū. And Lord Śiva is mahājana. Kapilaḥ kumāro manuḥ prahlādo bhīṣmaḥ. The mahājanas are there. So we have to follow. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. We should not remain mūḍha-dṛśā. We should follow the mahājanas and the sādhus, śāstra. And they recommend... The most important process is śravaṇam. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If we don't hear about Kṛṣṇa, then how we'll make advance? We have to hear. My Guru Mahārāja was very kind upon me because I was very much interested to hear him. That you know. I hear him. I did not understand him, actually. In the beginning I could not understand him. He was speaking in so high philosophical way that it was not... Still, I wanted to hear him. That was my only qualification.



So the... It is the process. During lecture time, if we don't care to hear or we do other things or take rest, that is not very good sign. We should be very much careful. Then we shall remain mūḍha-dṛśā. Naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā. We have taken the vow to see Kṛṣṇa or to understand Kṛṣṇa. We should be very, very serious and do the needful. Then our life will be successful.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730412SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.20

-

New York, April 12, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ

munīnām amalātmanām

bhakti-yoga-vidhānārthaṁ

kathaṁ paśyema hi striyaḥ

[SB 1.8.20]



"You Yourself descend to propagate the transcendental science of devotional service unto the hearts of the advanced transcendentalists and material speculators who are purified by being able to discriminate between matter and spirit. How then can we women know You perfectly?"



Prabhupāda: So Kuntīdevī, she is submissively... This is the symptom of Vaiṣṇava. The Lord, Kṛṣṇa, has come to Kuntīdevī to take the dust of her feet. Because Kṛṣṇa considers Kuntīdevī as her aunt, Kṛṣṇa used to touch the feet of Kuntīdevī. But Kuntīdevī, although she is in such exalted position, practically on the level of Yaśodāmāyi, such a great devotee... So she is so submissive that "Kṛṣṇa, You are meant for the paramahaṁsas, and what we can see You? We are women."



So as it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ [Bg. 9.32]. In another place in the Bhāgavata it is said, strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnām. Śūdra, strī and dvijabandhu. Dvijabandhu means those who are born in brāhmaṇa family or kṣatriya family, high caste... According to Vedic system, there are four divisions: cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma... [Bg. 4.13]. According to quality and work, the first-class man is the brāhmaṇa, intelligent. The next, kṣatriya; the next, vaiśyas; and next, śūdra. So according to this classification, women, śūdra and dvijabandhu, dvijabandhu, they are taken in the same category. Dvijabandhu means born in brāhmaṇa family, kṣatriya family, but has no qualifications. The thing is to be considered by qualification. It is very practical. Suppose one man is born the son of a high-court judge. So it does not mean that because he's a son of a high-court judge, he is also high-court judge. This is going on. Because one happens to take birth in a brāhmaṇa family, without any qualification, he claims to become a brāhmaṇa. That is the falldown of Vedic civilization in India. A rascal number one, he's claiming that he's brāhmaṇa-without any qualification. His qualification is less than a śūdra; still he's claiming. And that is being accepted.

So it is clearly stated: guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Without qualification... The brāhmaṇa means the qualification. It is not this body. There are so many arguments, but they won't hear. They are very much against, in my movement, because I am making brāhmaṇas from Europe and America. They are against me. But don't care, we don't care for them. Neither any reasonable man will care for them. But there is a propaganda against me. Even amongst my Godbrothers, they are making... Because they cannot do it, so find out some fault. You see. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma



In every town, city, village of the world, His cult will be preached. What is His cult? Does it mean that the Europeans and Americans will not become brāhmaṇa? Because Vaiṣṇava cult means past brahmanism, past brahmanism.



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



He, bhakti-yoga, one who takes to bhakti-yoga, he immediately comes to the transcendental platform, brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. What to speak of brāhmaṇa? And this stereotyped, crippled idea has killed Vedic civilization. Now we are again reviving. It is meant for everyone.



Kṛṣṇa says,

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim

[Bg. 9.32]



Kṛṣṇa says. Although ordinarily we take striya, means women, śūdra and vaiśyas in the lower-class grade, but when one becomes a devotee, the, the, he is or she is no more in the lower grade. Te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. The devotional service is so nice that anyone... Ordinarily women is taken less intelligent; śūdra is taken less intelligent; vaiśya is taken less intelligent. But if he takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is the most intelligent. Kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei baḍa catura. This is the statement in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Anyone who has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is the most intelligent. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu says: guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151], kona bhāgyavān jīva. Ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not for the wretched, unfortunate class of men. No. It is meant for the most fortunate man. Anyone who has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is to be considered as the most fortunate man because he has got the line of action how his life will be perfect.



Therefore, anyone who is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and discharging the duties nicely, he is the most fortunate man, most perfect man. That is, Kuntīdevī is humbly submitting. Although is womanly body, she is a devotee. She is not like ordinary woman, less intelligent. She is the most in... She has recognized Kṛṣṇa, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. "Although He has come to me, materially, as my nephew, to offer me respect, but He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." There in the previous verse she said, alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām antar bahir avasthitam: [SB 1.8.18] "You are not seen by ordinary men, although You are inside and outside." In another verse also, na lakṣyase mūḍha-dṛśā: [SB 1.8.19] "Fools and rascals cannot see You." That means Kuntī sees Him. Unless she sees Kṛṣṇa as He is, how she can say, mūḍha-dṛśā na lakṣyase? And (s)he says, prakṛteḥ param: "You are transcendental to this material creation."

So here also she continues her humbleness. This humbleness is very good in devotional service. Therefore Caitanya, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches us: tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā. One should be tolerant than the trees and humbler than the grass to make progress in spiritual life. Because there will be so many disturbances. Because māyā... We are living... Just like if we are in the ocean. So you cannot expect very peaceful situation in the ocean. It must be always tilt, what is called, tiltering, tilting. Even, even a big ship, it is also not very fixed up position. At any moment there may be tumultuous waves. So in this material world you should always expect danger. You cannot expect very peaceful life within this material world. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. Śāstra says in every step there is danger. But if you become a devotee, then you escape. Māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Otherwise...

So in the beginning, if you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there will be so many disturbances by the māyā. Māyā will test you how far you are fixed up. She will test you. She is also agent of Kṛṣṇa. She does not allow anyone who is meant for disturbing Kṛṣṇa. Therefore she tests very rigidly whether you are..., you have taken Kṛṣṇa consciousness to disturb Kṛṣṇa, or you are actually serious. That is māyā's business. So there will be in the beginning test by māyā, and you will feel so much disturbances in making progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But if you remain steady... Steady means if you follow the rules and regulations and chant sixteen rounds, then you will remain steady. And if you neglect, then māyā will capture you, immediately. Māyā is always ready. We are in the ocean. At any moment, we will be disturbed. So therefore one who is not disturbed at all, he is called paramahaṁsa.

Therefore Kuntīdevī says: tathā paramahaṁsānām [SB 1.8.20]. Parama means ultimate. Haṁsa means swan. So paramahaṁsa means the perfect haṁsa. Haṁsa. It is said that if you... Haṁsa means swan. If you give to swan milk mixed with water, she will take the milk part and leave aside the water part. Similarly, a person who knows what is this material world... Material world is made of two natures-the inferior nature and the superior nature. The superior nature means spiritual life, and inferior nature is material life. So a person who gives up the material part of this world and takes only the spiritual part, he is called paramahaṁsa. Paramahaṁsa. Spiritual part means one who knows that whatever is working in this material... Just like this body-your body, my body. Anyone who knows that this movement, the activities of this body is due to the soul which is within this body... That is the real fact. This is only outward covering. Similarly, one who knows that Kṛṣṇa is the center of these all activities, he's paramahaṁsa. He knows the fact.

So bhakti-yoga is for the paramahaṁsa, one who knows that Kṛṣṇa is the central fact. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate. So one who knows that Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes, not only theoretically, but practically, convinced, he is paramahaṁsa. So Kuntīdevī says that "You are meant for the paramahaṁsas, not for the rascals and fools. You are meant for the paramahaṁsa." Tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ munīnām [SB 1.8.20]. Munīnām means those who are thoughtful. Also mental speculators, they are called also muni. Munīnām amalātmanām. Amala. There is no dirty things in their heart. Materialistic person means full of dirty things within the heart. What is that dirty things? That lust and greediness. That's all. This is the dirty things. All materialistic persons, they are lusty and greedy. Therefore their heart is full of dirty things. And amalātmanām means those who are freed from these two things, lust and

Devotees: Greed, greed.



Prabhupāda: Eh? Greed, greediness. Amalātmanām. For the..., bhakti-yoga. This bhakti-yoga is meant for the cleansed hearted, not the lusty and greedy. That is not... They may try. They'll gradually advanced. But once one is situated in bhakti-yoga, there is no more lust and greediness. Viraktir anyatra syāt. This is the test, whether one has become free from lusty desires and greediness. Then he is situated in bhakti-yoga. He's paramahaṁsa.



So Kuntīdevī, by humble submission, that "You are meant for the paramahaṁsa, for the amalātmanām, for the munīnām and who are engaged in bhakti-yoga. And what we are? We are simply woman. We are in the lower grade. How we can understand You?" This is humbleness. Although she understands everything, but still she's taking the position of an ordinary woman, that "How can I understand You?"

Thank you very much. (end)



740930SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.20

-

Māyāpura, September 30, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.)



tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ

munīnām amalātmanām

bhakti-yoga-vidhānārthaṁ

kathaṁ paśyema hi striyaḥ

[SB 1.8.20]



"You Yourself descend to propagate the transcendental science of devotional service unto the hearts of the advanced transcendentalists and mental speculators who are purified by being able to discriminate between matter and spirit. How, then, can we women know You perfectly?"



Prabhupāda: Tathā paramahaṁsānām [SB 1.8.20]. Kṛṣṇa is realized by qualification, and the qualifications are described here. The first qualification is paramahaṁsa. Paramahaṁsa. Parama means the best, and haṁsa means the swans. So there are different types of swans. We have seen. Out of them, the white big swan is accepted the best of them. So this haṁsa, or this swan, has got a qualification special, that you offer them milk mixed with water. So the haṁsa, it will take the milk portion and leave aside the water portion. Every animal has got a special qualification. Just like you'll find the lizard, a very plain wall, polished wall, but they'll go very swiftly. You have no science to do that. You cannot do it. The vulture, it goes very high. They have got very small eyes, but they can see from miles away where is some dead body. That is their business.



So everyone has got some special qualification. That is God's gift. The... Similarly, this is also an animal. It has got the special qualification: they can discriminate what is water and what is milk. So this world is mixed up, spiritual and material things. Just like your body, my body, this is also mixture. Anything is a mixture of spirit and matter. So one who can discern the spirit from the matter, he is called paramahaṁsa. So intelligent man... Paramahaṁsa, what is the paramahaṁsa? Now, munīnām. Paramahaṁsa... Muni means very thoughtful. So if you are thoughtful, then you'll be able to discern between matter and spirit. The body is moving, but those who are not muni, thoughtful, they think the body is moving automatically. But actually, that is not the fact. Because the spirit is there, therefore it is moving. So muni, those who are thoughtful, they can understand. Foolish men, they cannot understand. They cannot understand that beyond this body there is another force, which is helping the movement of the body. They cannot understand the Bhagavad-gītā statement: tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. That moving force is perpetual, eternal. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. It is not lost after the destruction of the body, but it is transferred to another body. They cannot understand, because they are not muni. The muni means very thoughtful. And how one can become perfect muni? That is also said here. Amalātmanām. Amala. Mala means dirty things, and amala, amala means just the opposite. No. Amala, "a" means "no." His heart is cleansed of all dirty things. Such men. Amalātmanām. So these are the qualifications. Paramahaṁsa, one must be only spiritually interested like the swan. He is interested only to drink the milk, not the water. Similarly, one must become paramahaṁsa. One must be interested with spiritual advancement of life, not material. Reject. Reject it.

So these are the qualifications to understand Kṛṣṇa. One who is spiritually interested, one who is very thoughtful, and one who is cleansed of all dirty things from consciousness or from the mind, these are the qualifications when one can understand Kṛṣṇa. These things... Why these things, indiscrimination, dirty things, they are accumulated within the heart? It is due to our sinful activities. The more we become sinful, the more dirty things will cover our consciousness, and it will be difficult to understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. One who is freed from the reaction of sinful life... Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Persons who are engaged in pious activities, they do not do anything which is vicious. Therefore they remain pure, without any contamination. Therefore pious activities are recommended. For common men it is recommended in the śāstra that "You take your bathing in the Ganges." That will make him pious. If he simply takes his bathing daily, regularly, automatically he'll be pious. Or go and see the temple and offer your obeisances. Everything will be taken.

This small boy, he has nothing, no understanding what is Kṛṣṇa, but because he's dancing, because he's chanting, sometimes he's ringing the bell, these are pious activities. Automatically they'll do. So many people. Therefore temple is required. Temple is required. The innocent persons, those who are neophyte, for them, temple worship is essential. By seeing the Deity, by offering obeisances to the Deity, by taking caraṇāmṛta, by ringing the bell, by dancing, by taking little prasādam, by touching the feet of Vaiṣṇava or touching the body of Vaiṣ..., in this way they're getting piety. This chance is given therefore to the ordinary... There is no question of becoming muni in the beginning. How it, one can be? It is not possible.

Therefore Deity worship, temple worship, essential for the common general people. Simply by their coming, visiting and doing something, they'll be pious. So... And other pious activities-to hear about Kṛṣṇa. The sound vibration. Even one does not understand what is spoken here, but Kṛṣṇa... Just like I am speaking in English. Those who cannot understand English, they do not understand what I am speaking. But in the middle I am talking of Kṛṣṇa. So that Kṛṣṇa hearing is sufficient: "Kṛṣṇa." My Guru Mahārāja, when some article was presented to see whether he approved for publication, he would simply say, or see, how many times he has uttered "Kṛṣṇa" and "Caitanya Mahāprabhu." That's all. If he has uttered in his writing "Kṛṣṇa," "Caitanya," like that, so if he hears that many times he has written-"That's all right. That's all right." It is so nice.

And that's a fact. (sic:)

tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

[SB 1.5.11]



Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. Any composition where there is somewhere or sometimes the glorification of the Supreme Lord, any literature... Tad-vāg-visa..., janatāgha-viplavaḥ. Such kind of literature is revolutionary. Revolutionary. Viplavaḥ. Viplava means revolution. What kind of viplava? Just like in the revolution one political party gains victory over another political party, or one kind of... We understand revolution means political revolution. One kind of political thoughts are overpowered by another kind of political thoughts. That is called revolution. So the English word is revolution, and the Sanskrit word is viplava. So tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. If such literatures are presented... Just like we are presenting. We are not very big scholar. Our... We have no such qualification that we can compose very nice literature. There may be so many mistakes or... Whatever it may be. But it is revolutionary. That is a fact. It is revolutionary. Otherwise, why big, big scholars, professors, university authorities, librarians, they are taking? They are thinking they know that this literature will revolutionize the whole world. Because there is, in the Western world, there is no such thought. They agree. So why it is revolutionary? Because there is an attempt to glorify Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nothing more. There is no literary career.



So this is accepted. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo yasmin prati-ślokam abaddha... Śloka [SB 1.5.11]. To write Sanskrit śloka, it requires erudite scholarship. There are many, many rules and regulation. It is not that you compose anything and you become a poet. No. There are sufficient rules and regulations, one has to follow. Then one can compose. Just like you see, there is meter:

tathā paramahaṁsānāṁ

munīnām amalātmanām

bhakti-yoga-vidhānārthaṁ

kathaṁ paśyema hi striyaḥ

[SB 1.8.20]



There is meter. Every śloka, there is meter. So even it is not written to the standard meter, and sometimes there are broken, so still, because there is glorification of the Supreme Lord... Nāmāny anantasya. Ananta is the Supreme, Unlimited. His names are there. Therefore my Guru Mahārāja accepted. If anantasya, of the ananta, the Supreme, the name is there-"Kṛṣṇa," "Nārāyaṇa," "Caitanya," like that-so śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ. Sādhavaḥ means those who are saintly persons. Such kind of literature, although it is written in broken language, they hear it. Hear it. Because there is glorification of the Lord.



So this is the system. Some way or other, we should be attached to Kṛṣṇa. Mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha. That is our only business, how we can be... It doesn't matter, in broken language. Sometimes... There are many Sanskrit..., I mean to say, not properly pronounced. Just like we do. We are not very expert. There are many expert Sanskrit pronouncers, the veda-mantra. And we are not so expert. But we try. We try. But the Kṛṣṇa name is there. Therefore it is sufficient. Therefore it is sufficient.

So Kṛṣṇa comes. What is the mission of Kṛṣṇa? That we were talking in this morning. What is the mission of Kṛṣṇa? Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. This is the Kṛṣṇa's karma. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. We come here, and Kṛṣṇa also comes here. So what is the difference? The difference is we are forced to come here by the laws of nature according to our karma. We do some activities, sinful or pious, mostly sinful. So we create another life, and we are forced to enter into such body. It may be now I am in the human form of body. Next life, according to my karma, I may be forced to enter into the dog's li..., dog's body. So we are forced. There is no, I mean to say, choice. I cannot say (to) nature that "Do not put me into the dog's body. Kindly put me into the king's body." No. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. This decision will be taken by superior authority. You cannot dictate that "I shall become like that." No, that is not possible. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa.

So we are forced to come here and suffer or enjoy the fruits of our last karma. That is one thing. But Kṛṣṇa is not like that. Kṛṣṇa does not come, being forced by nature or for His karma. Na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti na me karma-phale spṛhā [Bg. 4.14]. Kṛṣṇa says that He also works, karma, to show example, but He is not affected by the result of the karma. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti na me karma... Neither He has got any desire to work for something to gain something. He is full. Why He should try for gaining...? We work something. We work to gain something, to make some profit. But Kṛṣṇa hasn't got to do any profit. He is self-sufficient. Whatever He wants, immediately present. Omnipotent, omniscient. Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do like that. Therefore why does He come? He has got a different mission. What is that? Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām. He says, "I come for this purpose, to rescue the sādhus, the devotees, and to cut down the demons." Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8].

So vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, this is not main business. For killing the demons, one cyclone wind is sufficient. If Kṛṣṇa orders Varuṇa that "You make a heavy cyclone in this quarter," hundreds and thousands of demons will be killed within a second. So this is not the purpose, for... He does not come for killing. But because killing business is another business, when He comes to protect the devotees, so He automatically, there are some demons: "Kill them also." Just like you go somewhere. Now, your not business to purchase something, but when you see, "Oh, it is nice. It is cheap price. All right, purchase it." So you did not go to a friend's place to make some business, but when you see, sometimes you do that. Similarly, it is not Kṛṣṇa's business. That, Kṛṣṇa has got many, many agents. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44].

This durgā power is there. You have seen the picture of Durgā. She has got ten hands and different types of weapons. Now the Durgā-pūjā will be performed. You can see the Durgā deity. So ten hands, the material nature. Ten hands means ten directions: north, south, east, west, and then the four corners, eight, and up and down. So ten directions. So this material nature, Durgā, is controlling the whole universe, ten directions. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā [Bs. 5.44]. Ekā. Chāyeva. But how she is working? Not independently. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva. She is working just like shadow. The original body and the shadow body, they are two different. But the shadow body moves if the original moves. So therefore this word is used, chāyeva. This vast power, material nature... It is a very powerful... Sṛṣṭi-sthiti. It can create; it can destroy. At any moment, if there is some earthquake, the whole sea water may come and cover the land portion, and within the sea you can see one island has come out. Everyone has got this experience. So sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya. One side, pralaya; one side, creation. So this can be done by the material nature. But how she is working? She is working under the direction of somebody else. That is Govinda. And Govinda also says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "She is working under My direction."

So... So far killing or destroying is concerned, that Durgā power, Kṛṣṇa's power, that is sufficient. That is sufficient. He doesn't require to come to kill the demons. She is engaged. You have seen that Durgā is killing the demon, that asura. You have seen the Durgā's picture? The asura is there and the lion is there, and she has taken a bunch of hair of the asura, and the trident is pushed on his chest, and the lion has captured him. So he is overpowered. So the asura is overpowered, but if the asura makes more attempt to save himself, then there are, only two hands are engaged of Durgā to kill the asura, one catching his hair and one the trident. Only two hands are engaged. But if he shows more power, then there are eight hands more, reserved with different types of weapons. So you cannot overcome the ruling, or the control, of the material nature. That is not possible. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. So asura, to kill the asuras, however powerful they may be... We have seen. There were so many asuras in this world. There were Lenin, there were Stalin, there were Hitler, there were Hiraṇyakaśipu. So many. But they could not survive. It is not possible. They'll be finished.

So asuras, to kill him... Paritrāṇāya sādhūn..., vināśāya... To kill the duṣkṛtām, these asuras, Kṛṣṇa does not require to come. He comes only to give protection and pleasure to the devotees. That is his aim. Therefore it is said that paramahaṁsānāṁ munīnām amalātmanām. For them, bhakti-yoga-vidhānārtham. For increase their bhakti-yoga. If you are a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, you are in distress by the demons, and if Kṛṣṇa saves you, then you become more: "More I am devotee, more I am devotee." You see. So Kṛṣṇa came so many times. Just like His devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja was in trouble by his father. So He came. Similarly, Vasudeva and Devakī was in trouble by Kaṁsa, therefore He came. So paritrāṇāya sādhūnām [Bg. 4.8]. They are sādhus, they are devotees. For them He comes. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnām. So why He's interested to save him? Now, bhakti-yoga-vidhānārtham, to show to the people that bhakti-yoga is so strong, so nice, that it will protect you from all kinds of dangers. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad..., svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. If you execute a little of bhakti-yoga, you can be saved from the greatest danger. Bhakti yoga is (so) nice. Buddhi-yogam imaṁ śṛṇu. These are discussed.

So bhakti-yoga means that no more interested in the material affairs. Bhakti, that is the bhakti-yoga. But he is only interested in Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakti-yoga. Mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āś... Nothing except Kṛṣṇa.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



So here Kṛṣṇa comes to teach bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam... [Bg. 18.66]. That is bhakti-yoga. When we do not want anything except Kṛṣṇa, that is bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga-vidhānārthaṁ kathaṁ paśyema hi striyaḥ. Kuntī appeared to be as woman. So woman generally, they are not interested in spiritual matter. That is the fact. Therefore, if they are somehow or other interested... That is also accepted. Kṛṣṇa says, striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. Striyo vaiśyās..., these three names, why He has taken specifically? So women, they are not very much interested. Generally. Maybe a special woman. But they are... Otherwise, they sometimes become devotee. Devotee... Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. As soon as they become devotees, they also promoted. But generally, they are not interested. The vaiśyas, the mercantile men, they are interested after money. The woman is interested after sense gratification. And śūdra means they are ignorant rascals. Therefore He has mentioned these three names: striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ [Bg. 9.32]. But even they, although they are not interested, even they become interested, te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. Not that even though they become interested, they keep behind. No. On the... With the equal force with men, they also promoted.



So Kuntī, out of her humbleness, meekness, she is presenting herself that "We are woman, striya." But she's not ordinary woman. She's devotee. Similarly, any devotee woman is as good as Kuntī. So out of humbleness, she says, presenting herself as woman, less intelligent, "How we can see You, Kṛṣṇa? You are meant for the paramahaṁsa. You are meant for the bhakti-yogī. You are meant for the great muni. You are so many things... You are meant for persons whose heart is cleansed. How we can see You? We are woman." That is her humbleness. She knows perfectly well what Kṛṣṇa is.

So following her footsteps, any woman can also understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is ready to be understood by anyone. Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ... [Bg. 9.32]. Simply we have to follow the path how to appreciate Kṛṣṇa, how to understand Kṛṣṇa, how to see Kṛṣṇa, how to talk with Him, how to walk with Him. These things are there. That is called bhakti-yoga. Where you learn this science of bhakti-yoga-that we have mentioned, Nectar of Devotion, the perfect science of bhakti-yoga. So if one is interested in seeing Kṛṣṇa, then there is no hindrance, there is no block. Anyone. Striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim.

Thank you very much. (end)



730413SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.21

-

New York, April 13, 1973



Devotee:



kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya

devakī-nandanāya ca

nanda-gopa-kumārāya

govindāya namo namaḥ

[SB 1.8.21]



"Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who has become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devakī, the boy of Nanda and the other cowherd men of Vṛndāvana, and the enlivener of the cows and senses."



Prabhupāda: So in the beginning Kuntīdevī said that namasye puruṣaṁ tvādyam īśvaraṁ prakṛteḥ param: [SB 1.8.18] "I offer my obeisances unto the person, puruṣam, who is prakṛteḥ param, who is beyond this material manifestation." Kṛṣṇa is complete spirit soul, Supersoul. He has no material body. So in the beginning Kuntīdevī gave us this understanding that God, the supreme puruṣa... Puruṣa means person. He's not imperson. Puruṣa. But He's not a puruṣa of this material world, not a personality of this material creation. That is to be understood. The impersonalists cannot accommodate in their poor fund of knowledge how the Supreme Absolute Truth can become a person, because whenever they think of person they think of a person of this material world. That is their defect. So they have poor fund of knowledge. Why God should be a person of this material world? So that was cleared in the beginning. Prakṛteḥ param, beyond this material creation, but He is a person.



So now that personality, although alakṣyam, invisible, now, by the grace of Kuntī, we can understand that although the Supreme Person is invisible, now He has appeared to be visible, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore she says: kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya [SB 1.8.21]. Vāsudeva conception. Sometimes the impersonalists, they have vāsudeva conception, means all-pervading. So Kuntīdevī is pointing out, "That Vāsudeva is Kṛṣṇa, all-pervading." Kṛṣṇa, by His Vāsudeva feature, He is all-pervading. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. This feature of Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa, the original person, has got three features: as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; as all-pervading Paramātmā, Supersoul; and impersonal Brahman effulgence. So those who are interested in bhakti-yoga, they have no business with the impersonal Brahman effulgence. That is for common men. Common men. Just like you can try to understand: those who are inhabitants of the sun planet, what they have got to do with the sunshine? That is a most insignificant thing for them, sunshine. Similarly, those who are advanced in spiritual life, they are interested in the person, puruṣam, Vāsudeva. Puruṣam. That realization takes place, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, after many, many births. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante: [Bg. 7.19] at the end of many, many births. These impersonalists who are very much attached to the Brahman effulgence, such persons, they are called jñānīs. They are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by dint of their knowledge, but they do not know that their knowledge is very imperfect and limited. And Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, is unlimited. You cannot approach the unlimited by your limited knowledge. That is not possible. So, by the grace of devotees like Kuntīdevī, we can understand that here is Vasudeva. The all-pervading Absolute Truth, Paramātmā, Vasudeva, is here. Kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya [SB 1.8.21]. So this vāsudeva realization is possible by the impersonalists after many, many births. Not very easily.

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



Sudurlabhaḥ, "very rare," mahātmā, "broad-minded." But one who cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, they are cripple-minded. They are not broad-minded. If one becomes broad-minded, then, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, he can understand Kṛṣṇa.



Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Brs. 1.2.234]. The process is sevonmukha, service. Service, beginning with the tongue, vāsudeva realization is possible. The service, the first service is śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and hear repeatedly and take prasāda. These are two business of the tongue. So you'll realize. Very simple method. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam... Kṛṣṇa will reveal, not that by your endeavor you can understand Kṛṣṇa, but your endeavor in the loving service, that will make you qualified. Kṛṣṇa will reveal. Svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is very much anxious to take you back home, back to Godhead. But we are stubborn. We do not wish. So He's always finding out the opportunity how you can be taken back home, back to Godhead. Just like affectionate father. Rascal son left his father, loitering in the street and have no shelter, no food, suffering so much. The father is more anxious to take the boy home. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the supreme father. All these living entities within this material world, they're exactly like the misled child of a big, rich man, loitering in the street. Therefore the greatest benefit to the human society is to give him Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Greatest... You cannot give any benefit; any kind of material profit will not satisfy the living entity. If he's given this Kṛṣṇa consciousness... Just like the same process. A bewildered boy is loitering in the street. If he's reminded, "My dear boy, why you are suffering so much? You are the son of such and such very rich man. Your father has got so much property. Why you are loitering in the street?" And if he comes to his consciousness: "Yes, I am the son of such and such big man. Why shall I loiter in the street?" He goes back home. Yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6].

Therefore this is the best service, to inform him that "You are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. You are son of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is opulent, six kind of opulence. Why you are traveling, why you are rotting in this material world?" This is the greatest service, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But māyā is very strong. Still, it is the duty of every kṛṣṇa-bhakta to try to enlighten everyone to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like Kuntīdevī is pointing out. First of all she said, alakṣyaṁ sarva-bhūtānām antar bahir avasthi... [SB 1.8.18]. Although Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person, is without and within, still, to the rascals and fools, He is invisible. Therefore she is pointing out: "Here is the Lord, kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya [SB 1.8.21]." He is the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He's very much pleased to become the son of Devakī. Devakī-nandanāya. Devakī-nandanāya is mentioned in Atharva-Veda also. Kṛṣṇa comes as Devakī-nandana, and His foster father is Nanda-gopa, Nanda Mahārāja.

So Kṛṣṇa likes to be related with His devotee as father and mother. Here, in this material world, we try to make our relationship with the Supreme as father, but Kṛṣṇa wants to become the son. Therefore nanda-gopa-kumārāya [SB 1.8.21]. He takes pleasure to become a devotee's son. Ordinary men, they want God as father, but that is not very pleasing to Kṛṣṇa. Father means... To become father means always botheration: "Give me this, give me this, give me this." You see. Of course, Kṛṣṇa has got immense potencies to supply. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. He can supply everyone as much he wants. He's supplying food to the elephant. He's supplying food to the ant. Why not to the human being? But these rascals, they do not know. They're working day and night like ass to find out bread. And if he goes to church, there also: "Give me bread." They are only bread problem. That's all. Although the living entity is the son of the richest opulent person, but he has created his bread problem. This is called ignorance. He thinks that "If I do not solve my bread problem, if I do not drive my trucks day and night..."Whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh. whoosh. Such a nonsense civilization. You see. Bread problem. Where is bread problem? Kṛṣṇa can supply. If He can supply food to the elephant in Africa... There are millions and millions of African elephants, you know, and they are supplied food.

The Bhāgavata says don't waste your time for this bread problem. Don't waste your time. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Don't waste your time how to solve your economic problems. This is nonsense. Of course, it is very revolutionary. People will hate me. "What Swamiji's speaking?" But actually this is the fact. This is another madness. Suppose you have got your rich father, enough food. Where is your economic problem? This is madness. There is no economic problem. If you are, if you know that "My father is the richest man of the city," then where is my economic problem? Actually, that is the position. We have no economic problem. Everything is there, complete. Pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. Everything is complete there. You want water. Just see: there are oceans of water. You want purified water. You cannot. Although the ocean water's so much, when there is scarcity of water, you have take help of Kṛṣṇa. He'll evaporate the water, He'll make it cloud. Then when it falls down, then it becomes sweet. Otherwise you cannot touch. Everything under control. Everything is full-water, light, heat. Everything is complete. Pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate, pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. His stock is never finished. Simply you become obedient and the supply is there. You can understand.

These Kṛṣṇa consciousness persons, they have no problem, economic problem. Everything is sufficiently supplied by Kṛṣṇa. In Los Angeles, the neighbors, they are very envious, that "You do not work. You have no anxiety. You have got four cars. You are eating so nicely. How is that?" They inquire from our devotees. That is the actually the fact. We are spending so much money, we have got so many centers. The calculation is about $70,000 we are spending. Who is supplying? Somehow or other, we are getting. So there is no problem. You simply become sincere servant of Kṛṣṇa. Everything is there. This is the test. They are envious of us that we do not work. Still, we have got so much. "So why don't you come and join us?" That they will not do. "You come with us, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." "No, no, no. That I cannot do." All right, then work with your trucks: whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh. They have made their own position dangerous and others' position also. They say... At any moment, there may be accident. This is the civilization. Nonsense. This is not civilization. Civilization means calmness, peace, prosperity, śānti. In peace and prosperity one should be Kṛṣṇa conscious always. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. In the animal life, or other than human life, we had worked so much only for morsel of food, day and night, working. But still the food is there. Simply avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. Avidyā. This material world is full of ignorance. So therefore our endeavor should be how to come out of this ignorance. Tasyaiva hetoḥ. For that reason, we should work only. How to come out of this ignorance, that "I am this material body. I have to work day and night, and then I shall get my food, and I shall live." This is ignorance. Tasyaiva hetoḥ pra...

So this ignorance, this life of ignorance we have passed in the, I mean to say, the forms other than the human being. Animal life, bird's life, beast's life. Now this life should be peaceful, calm and quiet. And jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā, simply for inquiring about the Absolute Truth. That should be the business. Simply. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Simply sit down. Just like we are sit down. We are sitting down and inquiring about Kṛṣṇa. This is life. And what is this life? Working day and night like the ass? No. That is not life. Therefore Bhāgavata says your life should be engaged for this purpose: tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Kovida means intelligent. Then: "How my economic problem will be solved?" The answer is: tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham. You are after happiness. Are you after distress? "No, sir." Why distress comes upon you? You are not anxious for distress, calamities. Why do they come upon you? Similarly, so far your happiness is also concerned, that will also come upon you. Because your life, according to your karma, is mixed up with some portion of happiness, some portion of distress. If the distress comes without any invitation, the happiness also will come without invitation. Without any invitation. Because you are destined already that so much happiness, so much distress you will have. Destined.

So you cannot change it. Try to change your lord, this material condition of life. That is your only business. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ...Bhramatām upary adhaḥ. You have tried. bhramatām upary adh... Upari means higher planetary systems. Sometimes we get our birth in higher planetary system as demigods, and sometimes, adhaḥ, as animals, as cats and dogs, germ of the stool. This is going on. This is going on according to our karma. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said: ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Only fortunate living entity gets this opportunity of association of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's devotee. Then his life becomes sublime.

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



This bhakti-latā-bīja, the seed of devotional service, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.



So Kuntīdevī is pointed that "Who is the person, alakṣya, invisible?" Here, Kṛṣṇa. "Kṛṣṇa? There are so many Kṛṣṇas." Vāsudevāya, the son of Vasudeva. "There are many Vāsudevas." No, nanda-gopa-kumārāya [SB 1.8.21], nanda-gopa-kumārāya, the foster son of Mahārāja Nanda. Three times she's pointing: "Here is Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa who officially takes His birth as son of Devakī and Vasudeva, but He enjoys the company of mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja-the childhood company. This is Kṛṣṇa's pastime.

So ānanda-līlāmaya-vigraha. Ānanda-līlā, Kṛṣṇa's līlā, pastimes are all jubilant. Ānanda-līlāmaya. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). He is by nature ānandamaya. Kṛṣṇa, you'll never find Kṛṣṇa is very unhappy. Kṛṣṇa is never unhappy. Kṛṣṇa is always happy. Therefore nanda-gopa-kumārāya govindāya [SB 1.8.21]. He is happy, and whoever, whoever associates with Him, he's also happy. Govindāya. We are after sense gratification. Go means senses. So if you associate with Kṛṣṇa, you enjoy your senses affluently. Just like the gopīs are dancing with Kṛṣṇa. So there is no scarcity of sense gratification also. But that is not this sense gra..., gross sense gratification. That is spiritual sense. That is spiritual sense. Ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya [Bs. 5.32]. We chant every day. That sense, you get, sense gratification is ānanda-cinmaya, cinmaya, in the spiritual world. Not this third-class ānanda with these bodily senses. This is not ānanda. This is an illusion. This is illusion. We are thinking that "I'm enjoying," but that is not ānanda. This ānanda is not fact, because we cannot enjoy this material sense pleasure for long. Everyone has got experience. It is finished. It is finished. But spiritual enjoyment does not finish. It increases. That is the difference. Ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya govindam ādi-puruṣam [Bs. 5.32].

So you have to associate with Govinda. Here is, also, it is said, govindāya namo namaḥ: "I offer my respectful obeisances to Govinda." So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice-you become directly in contact with Govinda. This Deity worship is also directly in contact with Govinda. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. This vigraha, the Deity of Kṛṣṇa, that is also Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Because Kṛṣṇa is alakṣya, invisible, He has become visible for your facility, as you can see. Still... It is not that Kṛṣṇa is stone or Kṛṣṇa is wood or Kṛṣṇa is metal. Kṛṣṇa is always Kṛṣṇa. But He appears... Because you cannot see except wood, stone and metal, He appears like that, wood, stone or metal. But He's not wood, stone or metal. You'll get the same facility as Kṛṣṇa personally if you associate, when you associate. You will associate with Kṛṣṇa. But at the present moment, because Kṛṣṇa is invisible, therefore He has very kindly taken a form which is visible by you. This is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Do not think, "Oh, here is Kṛṣṇa, stone Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa is everything. Kṛṣṇa is everything. So Kṛṣṇa is stone also, but He's not that stone that cannot act. Kṛṣṇa can act also in the stone form also. Kṛṣṇa act also in metal form also. And you will perceive that. Svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. The so-called stone also speaks with you. There are many instances like that.

So we should take to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement according to the śāstra. Śrī... I am very pleased that you are doing nicely, dressing the Deity very nicely. More and more, in this way offer Kṛṣṇa nice prasādam, nice foodstuff, nice dress. Keep the temple very clean. Śrī-mandira-mārjanādiṣu. Mārjana means cleansing. Either you dress Kṛṣṇa or cleanse the temple, the effect is the same. Don't think that "I am a cleanser and he is a dresser." No. The dresser and the cleanser are the same. Kṛṣṇa is Absolute. In any way, be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. Your life will be successful. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

So by the grace of Kuntīdevī we can understand that Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. Vāsudeva... Another meaning of vasudeva is that when you come to the platform of vasudeva. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam. Sattvam. Sattva, goodness. First of all, we have to come to the platform of goodness. But here, in the material world, the goodness is also sometimes contaminated by other low qualities, ignorance and passion. So by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ.. [SB 1.2.17]. Just like you are hearing about Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, try to hear about Kṛṣṇa always, twenty-four hours chant about Kṛṣṇa. In this way, the dirty things will be cleansed. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam means always. Not that bhāgavata-saptāha, official. No, not like that. That is another exploitation. In the Bhāgavata it is said, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Nityam means daily, twenty-four hours. Either you read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or carry out the order of your spiritual master. This is also order. Bhāgavata is spiritual master. Vaiṣṇava, he's also bhāgavata. Ācāryas, bhāgavata. Grantha-bhāgavata and person, person bhāgavata. So person bhāgavata or book bhāgavata, you always serve. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Then you will be fixed up. Naiṣṭhikī. Nobody can move you. Bhagavaty uttama-śloke, unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So in this way, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should be realized by you by the process prescribed and try to give to the people. This is the greatest welfare activities in the world, to awaken Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is, of course, practically, you can see, four or five years ago, none of you were in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but it has been awakened. Now you are Kṛṣṇa conscious. So others can be awakened also. There is no difficulty. The process is the same. So by following the footprints of devotees like Kuntī, we shall be able to understand as she's pointing out: kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya devakī-nandanāya ca, nanda-gopa-kumārāya [SB 1.8.21]. This is Kṛṣṇa's identification. Just like we take identification of a person: "What is your father's name?" So here we're giving, presenting God with His father's name, with His mother's name, with His address. We are not impersonalists, vague idea. No. Everything complete. Perfect. The identification. If you take advantage of this propagation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you are certainly benefited.

Thank you very much. (end)



741001SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.21

-

Māyāpura, October 1, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who has become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devakī, the son of Nanda and the other cowherd men of Vṛndāvana, and the enlivener of the cows and the senses." [SB 1.8.21]



Prabhupāda: So in the last verse, it is..., it has been explained by Kuntī that Kṛṣṇa is meant for the paramahaṁsa, muni, very, very exalted persons; they can understand Kṛṣṇa, bhakti-yoga-vidhānārtham, because such learned persons, such exalted persons, they can only understand what is bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is the topmost yoga. There are different kinds of yogas: karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, haṭha-yoga, many others. Yoga means "contact" or "having connection." So bhakti-yoga means directly connection with Kṛṣṇa, or God. That is bhakti-yoga. Other yogas, they are not directly connected.



Karma-yoga... Yoga means connection with Kṛṣṇa, or God, but when there is the word karma-yoga, it is adulterated. It is not pure yoga. Karma-yoga means,

yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

[Bg. 9.27]



That is karma-yoga. Whatever you doing... In the beginning one cannot take to pure bhakti-yoga. Therefore karma-yoga is recommended: "Never mind whatever you doing. In that position you can become a devotee." Karma-yoga, that is. People are interested with different types of work. So therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yat karoṣi. "Never mind whatever you are doing." So how it becomes karma-yoga? Now, kuruṣva tad mad-arpaṇam: "You give it to Me." Suppose you are doing business, and you are earning lots of money. So Kṛṣṇa says, "All right, go on. You are attached to business. You go on doing that. But the money earned out of your business, you give it to Me." This is karma-yoga, not that you earn money and spend for your sense gratification. That is not karma-yoga. The rascals, they are saying this is karma-yoga. For sense gratification they are using, and that is karma-yoga. No. That is not karma-yoga. Here is karma-yoga: "It doesn't matter, whatever you are doing, but the ultimate result, you give it to Me."



In another place, Kṛṣṇa says, karmaṇy evādhikāras te mā phaleṣu kadācana: "You can go on. You can go on with your business, but don't expect the fruit of the business." Mā phaleṣu. He indirectly says, "The fruit should be given to Me." Mā phaleṣu kadācana: "Don't expect the fruit." Suppose you grow a nice mango tree, and there will be fruit, nice fruit. So according to Bhagavad-gītā, it is said, mā phaleṣu kadācana: "You don't take the fruits." "Oh? Such a nice mango tree I have nourished in so many years. Now the fruit is there, and Kṛṣṇa says, mā phaleṣu kadācana: 'Don't take the fruit.' Then who will take the fruit? It is will rot? It will fall down on the ground, and it will rot?" No. The idea is "You don't take, but you give it to Me." This is karma-yoga. It is not that it should be wasted. So that is karma-yoga. So those who are karmīs, very much attached to material activities, for them, this karma-yoga is recommended. Some way or other, be connected with Kṛṣṇa. It is not so meant... It is very great achievement that you work hard earn money and give it to Kṛṣṇa. That is a great sacrifice. So by karma-yoga, also, you can satisfy...

Because the main business is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Varṇāśrama. There are four varṇas and four āśramas: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsī. So these are the scientific divisions of civilized society. Unless there are these divisions, it is a chaotic condition; it is not very satisfactory. That is happening. Nowadays, there is no scientific division of the human society. Therefore there are so many chaotic conditions. So actual human civilization begins when we accept these eight departmental management of the society. That is human society. Otherwise it is animal society. So... So according to Vedic civilization, every department, division, has got a particular duty.

The brāhmaṇa, their duty is how to practice to control the mind, to control the senses, śamo damas titikṣā, to be tolerant, to be very simple, simple living, not very gorgeous living. Whatever is absolutely necessary, a brāhmaṇa will accept, not more than that. That is simplicity, simple living, high thinking. So this is brāhmaṇa's... Śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam. And then jñānam. Jñānam means to understand what is what. People are all in ignorance rascals. The brāhmaṇa should not be rascal. Therefore brāhmaṇa is given the title paṇḍita. Still in India they say, brāhmaṇa-paṇḍita. Brāhmaṇa must be a paṇḍita, a learned. A brāhmaṇa rascal is not brāhmaṇa. You are... "What you are?" "I am brāhmaṇa." "What do you do?" "Now, I pull ṭhelā." So that is not brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa means paṇḍita. He must be a learned man. Paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana dāna-pratigraha. These are the brāhmaṇa's occupational duty. He must be learned scholar himself, and he would try to make others also learned scholar, paṭhana-pāṭhana, not that "I know." If you know something better, means very valuable, you must distribute it. Otherwise, in Sanskrit language they are called jñāna-khala: "miser in knowledge." One who has got knowledge... Just like in the modern world, if one is scientifically advanced, he gives the knowledge to others. He goes from university to university and speaks about the new invention. So similarly, brāhmaṇa means that he must have full knowledge and he must distribute the knowledge, not that keep it for himself, reserved: "Nobody should know it." No. Paṭhana-pāṭhana. So jñānaṁ vijñānam.

Similarly, everyone has got particular type of business. Kṣatriya has got; vaiśya has got. So yat karoṣi, whatever you are doing, you must do it for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. Kṛṣṇa's satis... If you have got some knowledge, you distribute the knowledge for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. How you can do that? Whatever knowledge you have got, you try to describe Kṛṣṇa. Kavibhir nirūpitaḥ yad uttama-śloka-guṇānuvarṇanam [SB 1.5.22]. This is the first-class distribution of knowledge. Whatever you know, you try to explain Kṛṣṇa by that knowledge. Just like our Dr. Svarūpa Dāmodara. He's a scientist, and now he is trying to explain Kṛṣṇa through his scientific knowledge. Similarly, if you are a medical man, you can explain also Kṛṣṇa through medical science. If you are engineer, you can explain also Kṛṣṇa through engineering. Kṛṣṇa can be explained. But the person who is explaining, he must be intelligent. Because Kṛṣṇa is everything, so simply we must have the intelligence how to explain engineering and come to the conclusion of Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was doing that. He was teaching grammar. So when there was question of dhātu, He was explaining Kṛṣṇa. So the students, some of the students, they did not like that explanation. So therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had to wind up His school because they did not like.

So Kṛṣṇa can be... Kṛṣṇa is everything. Simply one must have sufficient knowledge how to see Kṛṣṇa through everything. That is mahā-bhāgavata. Sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti. Whatever he sees, Kṛṣṇa, because actually Kṛṣṇa is everything. So there..., bhakti-yoga is so nice that that is the perfect yoga. And Kṛṣṇa confirms it:

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



The first-class yogi is he who is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. The same way... If you are a medical man, if you think of Kṛṣṇa, how to prove that Kṛṣṇa is the best physician or Kṛṣṇa is the best surgeon through medical science, if one thinks like that, and if he tries to do it, he is first-class yogi even though he is a medical man. Similarly, everyone can become the first-class yogi if he takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



Now, the question is that some of the rascals, they take Kṛṣṇa as a black man. (aside.) Who is talking? Black man. Some, one government officer, I think, some rascal... His name is Mr. Anand. He has described Kṛṣṇa that "He was a black aborigine, and He became very powerful some way or other, and people worship Him as God." It was published in a government magazine. So there are so many rascals. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa... Means those who are demons, to defy Kṛṣṇa, that "This Kṛṣṇa is a crow" or "This Śrī Kṛṣṇa is a black man" or "Kṛṣṇa is śūdra..." Kṛṣṇa means so many things. Kṛṣṇa... Śūdras, they are also kṛṣṇa, called. The brāhmaṇas are called śukla, and the... So in this way, the rascal demons, they want to describe Kṛṣṇa in their own way so that Kṛṣṇa devotees may be unhappy, and that is their pleasure.

Therefore, to teach these rascals, Kuntī is pointing out, kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya: [SB 1.8.21] "You rascal, you don't take Kṛṣṇa otherwise. I am speaking of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva, Vāsudeva." Just like to identification in the court, if you give your name, then you must give the father's name, your village, your district, like that. That is identification. So therefore Kuntīdevī is pointing out: "It is no other Kṛṣṇa. The Kṛṣṇa whose father's name is Vasudeva, whose mother's name is Devakī, whose father's name is Nanda Mahārāja, whose mother's name is Yaśodāmāyi. That's all." When that Vallabha Ācārya... He wrote some essays and books, The Meaning of Kṛṣṇa. The Meaning of Kṛṣṇa. And he went to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he wanted some eulogization that he has so many meanings of Kṛṣṇa. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "No, no, I know Kṛṣṇa's name, only two or three. That's all." He said, "I know Kṛṣṇa is the son of Yaśodāmāyi, Yaśodānandana. Kṛṣṇa means the boy who sucked the breast of mother Yaśodā. I know that."

So here also, nanda, nanda-nandanāya... He (she) says, nanda-gopa-kumārāya [SB 1.8.21]. Kumāra. Kumāra means "who is not married." So Kṛṣṇa remained in Vṛndāvana up to sixteen years. Therefore He remained always kumāra, Nanda-kumāra, Nanda-nandana. Here it is explicitly said, Nanda-gopa. And who was Nanda? That is also explained. Nanda means that leader of the cowherds men or he was king, Nanda Mahārāja. King does not mean always one has to become a king of very big kingdom. No. Anyone who possesses... Still in India, anyone who possesses some land, he is called king, rāja. He is called rāja, the zamindar, one who possesses some land, in..., especially in the up-country. So Nanda Mahārāja, because he possessed some land... He was well-to-do, rich man. Because... (aside:) Where is water? He possessed cows and grains. Formerly, a man... Still now, also... Actually that is rich, riches. Gavayā dhanavān, one who has got many cows, he is to be considered as rich man. Dhānyena dhanavān. One who has got large quantity of food grains, he is dhanavān. Nowadays one who has got a bunch of paper, he is considered... And the paper is nothing. As soon as the government is failure, then the thousand-dollar note and hundred-dollar notes, it will have no value.

So actual, actual value, to keep cows, to have food grains or gold, jewelries, these are the signs of richness. But Kali-yuga is so cruel that if you have got gold, if you have got jewels, then government will take away. Dasyu-dharmabhiḥ. Formerly there were ordinary plunderers, thieves. Now, according to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the government will be composed of organized thieves. That is meant: dasyu-dharmabhiḥ, rājabhiḥ. Government officer means organized thieves in every country. That will be the situation. So you cannot keep now. You have to be satisfied with these papers. That's all.

So Nanda Mahārāja was rich because he possessed nine lakhs of cows, not... And Kṛṣṇa had to take care of. Although Kṛṣṇa was Nanda Mahārāja's son, king's son, still He had to go... When He was young, five, six years old, He had to take care, not only Kṛṣṇa, but all His friends. That was the system. Small boys, they would take care of the calves, and after sixth year, they would take care of the cows. So in this way, fifteen, sixteen years, they would pass. Then they would... They may go to school, but the ordinary vaiśyas... Nanda Mahārāja happened to be vaiśya, not kṣatriya. His father, Kṛṣṇa's father, was Vasudeva. He was kṣatriya. His uncle, Kaṁsa, he was kṣatriya. He belonged to the kṣatriya family because born as the son of Vasudeva, but because He was transferred in His..., just after His birth to Nanda Mahārāja, so in the boyhood, in childhood, he remained a vaiśya.

Actually Kṛṣṇa is neither vaiśya nor śūdra nor kṣatriya nor brāhmaṇa. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Prakṛteḥ param. That has been described by Kuntī. Prakṛteḥ? No. Namasye...? What is the beginning?

Devotee: Namasye puruṣaṁ tvādyam.



Prabhupāda: Ah. Namasye puruṣam... What is that verse?



Devotee: Ādyam.



Prabhupāda: Ādyam.



Devotee: Tvādyam.



Prabhupāda: Tvā. Tvā means "You." So īśvaraṁ prakṛteḥ param. He is beyond the jurisdiction of this material world, prakṛteḥ param. So He is neither brāhmaṇa... This brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahma..., they are these material designations. They are not actually fact. So, as Kṛṣṇa is not belonging to this material world... He belongs to the spiritual... Prakṛteḥ param. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, para. Para means "another," or "the superior." Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find that... You are seeing this material world up to the sky. Your vision is up to the sky, although you do not know what are these planets, how they are existing. You have no knowledge. But still, at least, you can get experience that this universe is covered by this round sky, and within this universe there are so many planets.



So... So Kṛṣṇa does not belong to these planets or this material sky. He belongs to the paravyoma. Again paravyoma means sky. And para means the superior, or spiritual. Therefore Kṛṣṇa does not... Kṛṣṇa belongs to everything because everything is Kṛṣṇa's, but He has got His special abode. That is Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka Vṛndāvana. That is situated in the spiritual sky, not in this material sky. A... In the material sky, the, that Goloka Vṛndāvana is there, replica, just Vṛndāvana, where we go. When Kṛṣṇa comes... Just like government, the governor or the king, when he is on tour in every city he has got a special house. What is that house called?

Devotee: Embassy.



Prabhupāda: Now... Just like... Similarly when Kṛṣṇa comes in this universe, He comes there, in Vṛndāvana, in Mathurā, in the Dvārakā. So... But the real... But there is no difference between that Vṛndāvana, Goloka Vṛndāvana, and this Vṛndāvana.



So these things are to be understood. Kṛṣṇa is para. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. In the Bhagavad-gītā we get this information. There is another nature exactly like this. But these so-called scientists, they are so ignorant, they cannot estimate that there is another nature, there are spiritual planets... This... They do not know even how many planets are there, how they are situated, how they are inhabited. They think simply this planet is full of living entities; in other planets, there is no living entity. But that is not the fact. Every planet, every planet is full with living entities. Even in the sun planet, moon planet. So this is a subject matter we have discussed many times. So Kuntī has already pointed out that Kṛṣṇa is īśvara and He's beyond the jurisdiction of this material world. That Kṛṣṇa, when He comes here... Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. He comes. Tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham. He comes. Then how He comes? He comes as the son of Vasudeva. Kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya [SB 1.8.21]. Vāsudeva, vāsudevāya. His name... Because He comes as the son of Vasudeva, therefore He is called Vāsudeva. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. If one knows that this Vāsudeva is everything, then he is the most exalted mahātmā.

So these things are to be understood. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And if we remain fool... No. Everything is there. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in Bhagavad-gītā, everything is there about Kṛṣṇa. Anyone can understand if he's little intelligent. And as soon as you understand Kṛṣṇa, then you are liberated person.

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna

[Bg. 4.9]



So why should you not understand Kṛṣṇa? Everything is given there. Why you should...? At least, the intelligent class, the Americans and Europeans, they are very intelligent materially. They have proved their intelligence. Why not spiritually? If they are materially intelligent, brain is there, you can utilize it either for material purpose or... Now, so far, you have done for material purposes. You have done enough, so many machineries and so many things. But there is no happiness. You take to..., apply your brain and intelligence to understand Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful. That I have said many times, that you American boys or American people, you are fortunate, so many ways. How? Now, because you have got the result of pious activities.



What is the result of pious activities? Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. You have... You were born in very rich nationality, in America. You were born of rich fathers. Nobody is poor; poverty is unknown there. I have studied. If, by voluntarily, one becomes poverty-stricken, that is another... But actually there is no poverty, so far I have studied. That is result of pious activities. To take birth in poor family, low family, is the result of sinful activities. So because you are born in rich nationality, rich family, that is good sign. Janmaiśvarya. And opulence. You don't care for money. Money is nothing for you. This... We, we, we take money so carefully. But you spend money without any... So these are the results... Janmaiśvarya-śruta. Education. And śrī, beauty. These are ... So now you utilize this. Because one is fortunate if he gets all this opportunity, so you take this opportunity and utilize it for understanding Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful.

And I am hoping also that if you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and... It was the duty of the Indians. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, that

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



Of course, I am Indian, so I have tried my best to give you this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It was the duty of the Indians to preach this cult. But even they are not doing, so you can take up, and for the benefit of the human society, you simply preach about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇāya. We are speaking of this Kṛṣṇa, not that Kṛṣṇa, the "aborigine-Kṛṣṇa" or "the black Kṛṣṇa." "No, kṛṣṇa means black." No, Kṛṣṇa means many things. Kṛṣṇa means also attractive. Does not mean... Kāla-Kṛṣṇa does not mean that He's black. He's... "Your Kṛṣṇa is black." Yes, my Kṛṣṇa is black, but at the same time all-attractive. So many beautiful gopīs all became attracted. So many queens all became attracted. So this blackness of Kṛṣṇa is not this ordinary. Therefore in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said that kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobham [Bs. 5.30]. Kṛṣṇa's blackness is not ordinary blackness. Asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam. Although He's blackish like the black cloud, but sundara, very, very beautiful. How much beautiful? Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobham [Bs. 5.30]. He's so beautiful that if you bring millions and millions of Cupids... Cupid is supposed to be very beautiful. Still, He will surpass. So Kṛṣṇa... Śyāmasundaram. Śyāma means black, and still, very, very beautiful. That is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa.



So therefore to understand Kṛṣṇa perfectly, Kuntī is pointing out that Kṛṣṇa who is the son of Vasudeva, that beautiful Kṛṣṇa, that Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya [SB 1.8.21]. Then Vāsudeva may be... There may be Vāsudevas. Then mother's name also. Devakī-nandanāya: "That Kṛṣṇa is born of Devakī and Vasudeva, not others." Then there cannot be any mistake. If both the father's and mother's name... And again, he's (she's) pointing out: nanda-gopa-kumārāya: "That Kṛṣṇa who was carried to Vṛndāvana, and He remained as foster son of Mahārāja Nanda." And then he (she) says, govindāya, govindāya, that "He was a cowherd boy, played as a cowherd..." Govinda. Go means cows, and go means indriya, senses. So He was pleasure to the cows. The cows were very much pleased with Kṛṣṇa. As soon as Kṛṣṇa will call them, they will immediately come.

And this govinda word is explained in the Brahma-saṁhitā in so many ways. Govindam. Therefore this reference is given there, govinda. What is that...?

sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.44]



Govinda is not ordinary thing. That Govinda... Which Govinda? Now, this material energy, Durgā, who is working so wonderfully... Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktiḥ. She has... This material energy has got so much power that it can create, it can destroy, it can maintain, so much power. But don't think that this material energy is working independently. And then how is...? How she is working? Chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. Just she is working just like shadow. The... Then what is the reality? Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So we are worshiping that person who is the original director of this material... Because we are captivated by the three guṇas of material energy, we think this material energy, material world, is everything, because we are foolish. Nābhijānāti mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam. Tribhir guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ. They have been captivated by the three material... They cannot understand that behind this, there is Kṛṣṇa.



So this govinda word can be explained in so many ways. Kṛṣṇa can be... You can try to explain this verse year after year. Still, it cannot be ended. It is so nice verse. But you... We should try to understand Kṛṣṇa. There are so many ways to understand Kṛṣṇa. Some way or other, simply if you understand that Kṛṣṇa is īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1], that much, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead-if you are convinced on this subject matter-then your life is successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



730414SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.22

-

Los Angeles, April 14, 1973



Devotee:



namaḥ paṅkaja-nābhāya

namaḥ paṅkaja-māline

namaḥ paṅkaja-netrāya

namas te paṅkajāṅghraye

[SB 1.8.22]



"My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus, and whose feet are engraved with lotuses."



Prabhupāda: Lord's feet, there are flags, lotus flowers, chariot. These are the symbolic representations. God is person, but His personality is distinct from our personality. So these specific marks are there on His lotus feet. And paṅkaja-nābhāya, another meaning, paṅkaja-nābhāya means originally a lotus stem came out from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and Brahmā was born in that lotus flower, the origin of creation. So Kṛṣṇa's all parts of the body, as reference to the paṅkaja. Paṅkaja means lotus flower. Paṅka means mud, and ja means generate. Paṅkaja, the lotus flower, is so important. Still, it is generated from mud. So Kṛṣṇa likes paṅkaja very much, lotus flower. So if we see lotus flower, we can immediately remember Kṛṣṇa. If... Just like if you love your child, if you see any garment, a small ship, shoes or any play things, immediately you remember your child: "Oh, this is my child's shoes. This is my child's playing things. This is my garment." So it is the custom of love.



If you actually love God, Kṛṣṇa, then you can remember Him at any time, always, always. There is no difficulty. Here Kuntīdevī describes paṅkaja, with reference to lotus flower. And Kṛṣṇa describes Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā, raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: [Bg. 7.8] "I am the taste of the liquid." So Kṛṣṇa can be remembered by tasting water. Even those who are drinking... If he thinks that "This taste of drinking is Kṛṣṇa," he will one day come out a great saintly person. Such a nice thing, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if you have cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if you follow the description given by the śāstras. So I can request that even the drunkards that "You can become Kṛṣṇa conscious." The drunkard, what to speak of others? Because Kṛṣṇa says, raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: "I am the taste of the liquid." Generally, liquid, water is taken. So liquor is also liquid. Liquor is bad because it creates intoxication. Otherwise, it is made from sugar, molasses, molasses with sulphuric acid fermented, so far I know. We were in the chemical line. Molasses fermented with sulphuric acid and then distilled. That is called spirit, or liquor. So thing is, nothing is bad, but because if a thing creates bad effects, then it is bad. Then it is bad. So I shall request even the drunkards... In your country, there are many drunkards. There is no scarcity. So if you'll kindly remember when drinking wine that this nice taste of drinking is Kṛṣṇa... Just begin with it. You'll come out one day a saintly person, Kṛṣṇa conscious. It's so nice, practical.

So Kṛṣṇa is available, any circumstance, if we want to catch Him. That's all. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. He's... If one is actually very serious to search out Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi [Bs. 5.35] **. He is within this universe, not only within the... He's within your heart. He's within the atom even. So it is not difficult to find Him out, but you must know the process, how to find Him out. And this process is very simple. And the process we are distributing by the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to everyone, without any charge. The process is chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. As soon as you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, immediately you understand Kṛṣṇa. As soon as you see the lotus flower, if you hear this verse... This Sanskrit verse is meant for understanding ourself. It is not for simply selling our books. Every one of you... We are repeating this verse again and again so that you are expected to chant these mantras. Not that the book is kept... "I'm very learned scholar." What kind of learned scholar? "If I find the book, then I can speak." That is not scholarship. You must chant.

Therefore we are teaching in our Dallas children simply to learn Sanskrit. We have nothing to do anything else. They are not going to be technologists, or servant of everyone. No. We want some generation who can preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So if they learn simply English and Sanskrit, they will be able to read this book, and that is sufficient. We don't want anything. All informations are there. Throughout the whole world, whatever knowledge is there, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, everything is there. There is literature, there is poetry, there is philosophy, there is religion, there is love of Godhead, there is astronomy. Everything is there. Śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. Vidyā bhāgavatāvadhiḥ. If one simply reads this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, his education is the topmost. Vidyā bhāgavatāvadhiḥ. There is something topmost, ultimate. So for education, vidyā, this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If one studies Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he is well versed in every subject matter.

So we want to create a new generation in your country so that in the future there'll be fluent speaker in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and preach all over the country, and your country will be saved. This is our program. We have come here not to exploit your country, but to give you something substantial. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So read Bhāgavatam, pronounce the verses very nicely. Therefore we're repeating. You hear the records and try to repeat. Simply by chanting the mantra, you'll be purified. Simply by chant... Even you do not understand a single word of it, simply if you chant, this vibration has got such power. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If you simply chant and vibrate this verse, these verses, these ślokas, it is puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. There is, there is no question of understanding. Puṇya-śravaṇa. Puṇya means pious, and śravaṇa means hearing, and kīrtana means chanting. One who is chanting this verse, and one who is hearing this verse, he is becoming pious automatically. Pious. To become pious one has to endeavor so much, do this, do that, but if you simply hear these verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā.

Therefore, as a rigid principle, in every temple there should be class for hearing and chanting. Without hearing and chanting, to become leader it is impossible. You can, you can become leader in the material world, but not in the spiritual world. Śravaṇa-kīrtana kare...

mālī hañā kare sei bīja āropaṇa

śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana

[Cc. Madhya 19.152]



Bhakti-latā-bīja. It is a seed of developing your original consciousness. Just like in the seed there is potency, in a small seed, mustardlike, but if you sow it, in due course of times it comes out a big banyan tree. As much potency in that seed... Where is that scientist? Just prepare a seed in which there is a big, gigantic banyan tree. Where is your science? But that is not possible. Kṛṣṇa says, bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām: [Bg 7.10] "I am that seed." So anyone can appreciate. Suppose you... The banyan seed, you have seen the fig fruit. There are hundreds and thousands of seeds. And each seed, there is a banyan tree. Each seed. If you simply study a fig of banyan tree, you can study the whole cosmic manifestation. If you simply think over... This is a small seed, insignificant. And there are millions of seeds like that, millions of fruits. And each seed containing the potency of fructifying into big banyan tree. So who has made it? How much His brain is sharp that He has made it? It is, it is, it is done by brain. It has not come out automatically. This is rascaldom. Whatever... What is coming, rascaldom... No. There is brain. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The Vedānta-sūtra says that everything is coming from Him, coming from His brain. Big brain. Kṛṣṇa has got big brain. We haven't got such brain. Still we rascals, we claim that "I am as good as Kṛṣṇa. I am God." What nonsense. You are God? You cannot create anything.



So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice. Here Kuntīdevī, a great devotee, is giving us opportunity to become Kṛṣṇa conscious: simply concentrating your mind on lotus flower. That's all. Lotus flower. As soon as you see a lotus flower, you will immediately think of namaḥ paṅkaja-nābhāya. "Oh, Kṛṣṇa's navel is just like lotus flower. From the navel of Kṛṣṇa there was a stem of lotus flower, and from that lotus flower, Brahmā came out. And Brahmā created this universe. This universe means so many planets, so many seas, mountains and cities, motorcars, everything. Within that lotus flower, the beginning is..." Namaḥ paṅkaja-nābhāya. And namaḥ paṅkaja-māline [SB 1.8.22]. So such wonderful lotus flower which contains the seedling of the whole universe... That is not only one. Paṅkaja-māline. Just like here is a garland. There are so many flowers. So Kṛṣṇa is not so poor that simply producing one lotus flower, He's finished. No. There is a garland of lotus flowers, big garland. Or as many lotus flowers as you want. This is God. Yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48]. Unlimited. Everything is unlimited. Kṛṣṇa's creation... We are very much concerned with one planet, this, but Kṛṣṇa's creation is unlimited number of planets. As you see unlimited number of hairs on your head; you cannot count. Can you count how many hairs are there? This is Kṛṣṇa's creation. You cannot count. So what to speak of this hair-anything you take. You take one tree: unlimited number of foliages. You cannot count. Similarly, unlimited number of planets, unlimited number of universes, everything unlimited. Therefore He is unlimited. Namaḥ paṅkaja-nābhāya namaḥ paṅkaja-māline namaḥ paṅkaja-netrāya [SB 1.8.22]. Kṛṣṇa's eyes are compared with the petals of lotus flower. Ālola-candraka-lasad-vanamālya-vaṁśī [Bs. 5.31].

So if you simply think only one verse, as it is explained here, and the paṅkaja, lotus, in reference with Kṛṣṇa's body, you can meditate the whole life how Kṛṣṇa is beautiful, how Kṛṣṇa is wise, how Kṛṣṇa's creation, how... This is meditation. Thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Yoginaḥ means... Yogi means he's always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Mat-paraḥ. That is yogi. These rascals are not yogi, thinking something impersonal and being harassed. Kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām [Bg. 12.5]. They are simply, they are simply laboring, adhikataraḥ, more and more. They cannot get anything substantial. Therefore after meditation: "Come on, give me cigarette. Come on. My throat is now dried up. Give me cigarette." That is not meditation. Meditation means, this is: namaḥ paṅkaja-netrāya.

So if you think of Kṛṣṇa always, satataṁ cintayanto mām [Bg. 9.14], "always thinking of Me," yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ, and endeavoring to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness with vow, then we have to remain purified. Because Kṛṣṇa is purified. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. You cannot approach Kṛṣṇa impurified. But if you think of Kṛṣṇa always, in this way, meditate upon Kṛṣṇa, then you'll be purified. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. That meditation can be possible by hearing and chanting. Then thinking will automatically come. That is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam [SB 7.5.23]. Smaraṇa means remember. If you chant and hear, then remembrance will automatically come. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam. Then you will be engaged in worshiping His lotus feet. Arcanam. Then you'll be engaged in arcanam, the temple worship; vandanam, offering prayers; dāsyam, you'll engage yourself as servant; sakhyam, you'll become friend of Kṛṣṇa; ātma-nivedanam, and surrender everything to Kṛṣṇa. This is the process.

So each and every verse you should chant very perfectly, nicely, meditate upon it. That is the process of progress, advancement in spiritual life. We should get all these verses by heart, and chant, and offer prayer to the Lord, vandanam. Vandanam. These are meant for such purpose.

namaḥ paṅkaja-nābhāya

namaḥ paṅkaja-māline

namaḥ paṅkaja-netrāya

namas te paṅkajāṅghraye

[SB 1.8.22]



Everything is Kṛṣṇa's, with reference to paṅkaja.



Thank you very much. (end)



730415SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.23

-

Los Angeles, April 15, 1973



Devotee:



yathā hṛṣīkeśa khalena devakī

kaṁsena ruddhāticiraṁ śucārpitā

vimocitāhaṁ ca sahātmajā vibho

tvayaiva nāthena muhur vipad-gaṇāt

[SB 1.8.23]



"O Hṛṣīkeśa, master of the senses and Lord of lords, You have released Your mother, Devakī, who was long imprisoned and distressed by the envious King Kaṁsa, and me and my children from a series of constant dangers."



Prabhupāda: So this is the position of devotees, that Devakī who happens to be the mother of Kṛṣṇa... She's not ordinary woman. Who can become the mother of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? The most advanced devotee, so that Kṛṣṇa has agreed to become her son. In his previous life, the husband and wife, they underwent severe austerities, and when Kṛṣṇa appeared before them and wanted to give them benediction, they wanted a son like God. So where can be another person who is equal to God? That is not possible. God means there is no equal, there is no greater. Asamordhva. That is God. God, there cannot be any competition, that "You are God, I am God, he is God, he is God." No. These are dogs. They are not God. God means without competition: one. God is one. Nobody is great... asamordhva. Nobody is greater than Him. Nobody is equal to Him. Everyone is lower. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. The only master is Kṛṣṇa, God; and everyone, servant. Never mind. Even if he's Brahmā, Viṣṇu or Śiva, big, big demigods. And what to speak of others?



Śiva-viriñci-nutam [SB 11.5.33]. In the śāstra it is said that He's offered respect by Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā. They are the topmost demigods. There are demigods. Above the human beings, there are demigods. As we are humans, being above the lower creatures, lower animals, similarly, above us there are demigods. And the most important demigod is Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva. Lord Brahmā is the creator of this universe, and Lord Śiva is the destroyer of this universe. And Lord Viṣṇu is the maintainer. Lord Viṣṇu is Kṛṣṇa Himself. So for the maintenance of this material world there are three guṇas, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So each one of them has taken charge of one department. So Lord Viṣṇu has taken the department of sattva-guṇa, and Lord Brahmā has taken the department of rajo-guṇa, and Lord Śiva has taken the department of tamo-guṇa. They are not under the influence of these guṇas. Just like a, the superintendent of jail. He's not a prisoner; he's controlling officer. Similarly Lord Śiva, Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Brahmā, although they are controlling each department, they are not under the controlling department. We may not commit mistake.

So Hṛṣīkeśa. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller. Hṛṣīka. Hṛṣīka means senses. So we are enjoying our senses, but ultimately the controller is Kṛṣṇa. Suppose this is my hand. I'm claiming it is my hand: "I shall give you a good fist on your..." I'm very much proud. But I am not controller. The controller is Kṛṣṇa. If you, if He withdraws the power of the activity of your arm, you become paralyzed. Although you are claiming, "It is my hand. I shall use it," but when it is paralyzed, you cannot do anything. Therefore I may have possessed this hand by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, but I am not the controller. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore a sane man will think that ultimately if this hand is to be controlled by Kṛṣṇa, then it meant for Kṛṣṇa. This is the common sense understanding. I am claiming that "This is my hand, this is my leg, this is my ear." Even children says. You ask the children, "What is this?" "It is my hand." But we may claim, but actually it is not our hand. It is given for... Because I wanted to use my hands in so many ways, Kṛṣṇa has given: "All right, you take this hand. Use it." So it is gift of Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore a sane man is always conscious that "Whatever I have got in my possession, first of all, this body and senses, they are actually not mine. I have given all these possessions for utility. So if ultimately everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, why it is not utilized for Kṛṣṇa?" That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is intelligence. If I am given all these things for my use, for my sense gratification, but ultimately it belongs to Kṛṣṇa... Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. Everyone is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, so everyone's senses are also Kṛṣṇa's. So when, when the senses are utilized for Kṛṣṇa's service, that is perfection of life. And so long it is utilized for my sense gratification, it is māyā. Therefore bhakti means hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Hṛṣīkeṇa by the senses, this hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam, when you serve Hṛṣīkeśa, really master of the senses, that is called bhakti. Very simple description, definition of bhakti. Hṛṣīkeṇa..., hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam. Not hṛṣīka-sevanam. Hṛṣīka means senses. So when senses are used for sense gratification, that is māyā. And when senses are used for the gratification of the master of the senses, that is called bhakti. A very simple definition. Anyone can understand.

So generally, in this material world, everyone is using the senses for sense gratification. That's all. That is their bondage. That is māyā, illusion. And when he comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, purified, when he understands that actually these senses are meant for satisfying Kṛṣṇa, then he's liberated person, mukta. Mukta-puruṣa. Liberated person. Īhā yasya harer dāsye karmaṇā manasā vācā. When one comes to this position, that "My senses are meant for serving the master of the senses, Hṛṣīkeśa..." The master of the senses are, is sitting within your heart. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: "I am seated in everyone's heart." Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: [Bg. 15.15] "From Me remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness is coming." So why that? Because Kṛṣṇa is so merciful, if I want to use my senses in a certain way, not my senses... It is Kṛṣṇa's, given. So Kṛṣṇa gives the chance: "All right, utilize it." Suppose I have got tongue. If I want, "Kṛṣṇa, I want to eat stool. I want to taste stool," "Yes," Kṛṣṇa will say. "Yes, you take this body of hog, and eat stool." The master is there, Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. He gives you the body, reminds you, "My dear living entity, you wanted to eat stool? Now you have got a proper body. Now utilize. Here is stool also." Similarly, if you want to become demigod, that also Kṛṣṇa gives you chance. Anything... There are 8,400,000 forms of life. If you want to engage your senses in any type of body, Kṛṣṇa is giving you: "Come on. Here is the body. You take." But we become exasperated by using our senses. Ultimately we become senseless. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Don't do like this. Your senses are meant for serving Me. So you are misusing it. By misusing, you are being entrapped in different types of body; therefore to get relief from this tedious business of accepting one body and giving it up, again another body, again another... To continue this material existence, if you give up this process of sense gratification and surrender unto Me, then you are saved." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So at the present moment, our senses are contaminated. I am thinking, "I am American, so my senses should be utilized for the service of my country, my society, my nation." Big, big leaders, big, big so many things. So the real concept is that "I am American, so my senses are American senses. So it must be utilized for America." Similarly Indians thinking, others are thinking. But none of them do know it that senses belong to Kṛṣṇa. This is ignorance. No intelligence. They are thinking for the time being, that these senses, upādhi, designated... American senses, Indian senses, African senses. No. This is called māyā. It is covered. Therefore bhakti means sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. When your senses will be uncontaminated with all these designations, that is the beginning of bhakti. If I think, "I am American. Why shall I take Kṛṣṇa consciousness? It is Hindu God," that is foolishness. If I think "I am Muhammadan," "I am Christian," then you are gone. But if we purify the senses that "I am spirit soul. The Supreme Spirit Soul is Kṛṣṇa. I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa; therefore it is my duty to serve Kṛṣṇa," then you become free immediately. Immediately. You are no more American, Indian or African or this or that. You are Kṛṣṇized, Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is wanted.

Therefore Kuntīdevī says, "Hṛṣīkeśa, my dear Kṛṣṇa, You are the master of the senses, and for the sense gratification, we are fallen in this material condition of life, different varieties of life." So we are suffering, and suffering to the extent, even one becomes Kṛṣṇa's mother... Because this is material world, she's also put into suffering, what to speak of others? Devakī is so advanced that she has become the mother of Kṛṣṇa, but still she's put into difficulties. And difficulties by whom? By his brother, Kaṁsa. So this world is like that. Try to understand. Even you become Kṛṣṇa's mother, and even your brother, who is very nearest relative. So you, the world is such jealous, that if one's personal interest is hampered, everyone will be ready to give you trouble. This is the world. Everyone. Even if he's brother, even he's father. What to speak of others? Khalena. Khala means jealous. This material world is jealous, envious. I am envious of you; you are envious of me. This is our business. This is our business.

Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is for such person who is no more jealous, who's no more envious. Perfect person. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ vāstavaṁ vastu vedyam atra [SB 1.1.2]. Those who are jealous and envious, they are within this material world. And those who are not jealous, they are in the spiritual world. Simple thing. You test yourself, "Whether I am jealous, envious of my other associates, friends, everything?" Then I am in the material world. And if I am not jealous, then I'm in the spiritual world. Anyone can test. There is no question of whether I'm spiritually advanced or not. You can test yourself. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. Just like if you are eating, you'll understand whether you are satisfied, whether your hunger is satisfied. You haven't got to take certificate from others. Similarly, if you test yourself whether you are jealous, whether you are envious, then you are in the material world. And if you are not jealous, if you are not envious, then in the spiritual world. Then you can serve Kṛṣṇa very nicely if you are not jealous. Because our jealous, enviousness has begin, began from Kṛṣṇa. Just like the Māyāvādīs: "Why Kṛṣṇa shall be God? I am, I am also God. I am also."

So this is the beginning of material life, to become envious of Kṛṣṇa."Why Kṛṣṇa shall be enjoyer? I shall be enjoyer. Why Kṛṣṇa shall enjoy the gopīs? I shall become Kṛṣṇa and enjoy, make a society of gopīs and enjoy." This is māyā. Nobody can be enjoyer. Kṛṣṇa therefore says, bhoktāraṁ yajña... Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only enjoyer. And if we supply ingredients for His enjoyment, that is our perfection of life. And if we want to imitate Kṛṣṇa, that "I shall becoming God. I shall become an imitator enjoyer," then you are in the māyā. Simply our business is... Just like the gopīs' life. Kṛṣṇa is enjoying, and they're supplying the ingredients of enjoyment. Yes. This is bhakti. We are meant for... Kṛṣṇa is supplying... The servant and master. The servant is being supplied all the necessities by the master, but the servant's duty is to serve the master. That's all. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām... (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). These are the Vedic inform... Kṛṣṇa is supplying you immense..., all the necessities of life. There is no scarcity. There is no economic problem. You simply try to serve Kṛṣṇa. Then everything is complete. Because He's Hṛṣīkeśa. And so much... If Kṛṣṇa desires, there may be ample supplies. Just like in your country, there is ample supplies. In other country... I went to Switzerland: everything is imported. No supply. The supply is only, only snow. Take as much snow as you like. You see. Similarly everything is under the control of Kṛṣṇa. If you become devotee, then there is no snow supply-simply food supply. And if you don't become devotee, be covered with snow. That's all. Covered with cloud. Everything is under Kṛṣṇa's control.

So actually there is no scarcity. The scarcity is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious then everything is ample. There is no scarcity. This is the process. Tvayā hṛṣīkeśa... And here it is said: tvayā hṛṣī... Yathā hṛṣīkeśa khalena devakī. The world is full of dangers. But Devakī, Kuntīdevī says, "But because Devakī is Your devotee, You saved her from the distresses offered by her envious brother." As soon as the brother heard that "My sister's son, eighth son of my sister will kill me," oh, he was ready immediately to kill Devakī. So he was pacified by Devakī's husband. It is the duty of the husband to give protection. "So my dear brother-in-law, why you are envious to your sister? After all, your sister will not kill you. Her son will kill you. That is the problem. So I shall deliver all the sons to you, then you can do whatever you like. Why you are killing this innocent girl, newly married? She is your younger sister, just like your daughter. You should give her protection. What you are doing this?"

So Kaṁsa became pacified. He believed in the words of Vasudeva, that he'll deliver all the sons, "And if you like, can kill." He thought, "Let me save the present situation. After all, later on, mean, Kaṁsa gets a nephew; he may forget this enviousness." But he's never, never to forget. Yes. He killed all the sons and kept them in prison. śucārpitā ruddhā aticiram. Aticiram means for long time. So he was saved. Devakī was saved after all. Similarly if we take the position of Devakī and Kuntī... Kuntī, just like with her sons, Pañca-Pāṇḍava, five Pāṇḍavas... After she became widow, the whole plan was, Dhṛtarāṣṭra's, "How to kill these children of my younger brother? Because, by chance, I was blind, so I could not get the throne of the kingdom. My younger brother got it. Now he's dead. So at least my sons, they should get the throne." That was his policy, Dhṛtarāṣṭra's policy: "I could not get." This is material propensities. "I shall be happy. My sons shall be happy. My community shall be happy. My nation shall be happy." These are extended selfishness. Nobody's thinking Kṛṣṇa, how Kṛṣṇa will be happy. Everyone is thinking in his own terms: "How I shall be happy, how my children shall be happy, my community shall be happy, my society shall be happy, my natio..." This is the struggle for existence. Everywhere you'll find it. This is material existence. Nobody's thinking how Kṛṣṇa will be happy.

Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very sublime. Try to understand from Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. And hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], and try to engage your senses for the service of the master of the senses. Then you'll be happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



741003SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.23

-

Māyāpura, October 3, 1974



Nitāi: "O Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses and the Lord of lords, You have released Your mother Devakī, who was long imprisoned and distressed by the envious King Kaṁsa, and myself and my children from a series of constant dangers."



Prabhupāda:



yathā hṛṣīkeśa khalena devakī

kaṁsena ruddhāticiraṁ śucārpitā

vimocitāhaṁ ca sahātmajā vibho

tvayaiva nāthena muhur vipad-gaṇāt

[SB 1.8.23]



So Kṛṣṇa... Actually, Kuntī is presenting the characteristics of Kṛṣṇa. He is transcendental, puruṣaṁ prakṛteḥ param. Then He is person. In so many ways, he, she has already described. Now... That is identification. Now Kṛṣṇa's activities... Because we have to know Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. His birth and His activities, both of them are transcendental, not material, because He is puruṣaṁ prakṛteḥ param. He is the person beyond this material nature who is not a created being of this material nature. That we should understand. Puruṣaṁ prakṛteḥ param. The original creator.



That means Kṛṣṇa existed before the creation. Because He existed before the creation, therefore His activities, His form, His qualities, they're not material. Prakṛteḥ param. But He comes upon this earth or in this material world. His activities are to save the devotees and to kill the demons, simultaneous. That we have already explained. His real activity is to give protection to the devotees. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, he was very much disturbed by the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. So to give him protection, He appeared as Nṛsiṁhadeva. Similarly, here Kṛṣṇa appeared. Why? To give relief to Devakī and Vasudeva, the Pāṇḍavas. They were in very great danger by kaṁsena khalena, envious demon Kaṁsa. And similarly, the Pāṇḍavas were also in difficult by the envious Dhṛtarāṣṭra and company, his sons.

So Kṛṣṇa comes-paritrāṇāya sādhūnām [Bg. 4.8]. That is His mission. So how He saved the honest devotees, that is being described by Kuntī. This is studying of Kṛṣṇa, about His transcendental activities. You have to know how He takes birth and how He acts. If you study these two things of Kṛṣṇa's appearance, then you become liberated, these two things only, that why does He come, how does He come, how He acts, what is His position. His position is prakṛteḥ param. He is not a living being like us. We are not prakṛteḥ... Although we are prakṛteḥ param, but at the present moment we are under the clutches of prakṛti. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. We... just like a person in the prison. He is also a citizen. He's not meant for living in the prison; he is actually meant for living outside the prison. But some way or other, he has come in contact with the criminal department and is put into the prison. Similarly, usually, the citizens and the king or president, they are not inhabitants of the prison house. Similarly, we, along with Kṛṣṇa, as Kṛṣṇa is prakṛteḥ param, similarly, we are also prakṛteḥ param, but we have got the aptitude to fall down in the prakṛti.

Kṛṣṇa hasn't got that aptitude. He's a master. Just like "King can do no wrong." This is the British Constitution. You cannot accuse the king in any way, neither you can judge. That is British Constitution. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa, as it is stated in the Īśopaniṣad, apāpa-viddham. He cannot be criminal like us. He's above. He cannot be charged with any criminal charges. Apāpa-viddham. Pāpa does not touch Him. Although it appears that He is doing something which is pāpa, but that is not pāpa. We have to understand Kṛṣṇa's position. Prakṛteḥ param. That is... That means prakṛteḥ param. He is not subjected to any sinful life. Therefore His name is Acyuta. Rathaṁ sthāpaya, sthāpaya me acyuta. Acyuta means "one who does not fall."

The... We fall down, we, because we are very small, spiritual sparks, and Kṛṣṇa is the whole fire. And the fire and the spiritual, fire, sparks from the fire, their quality-the same. They can burn. As the big fire can burn, similarly, the small spark, if it falls down on your cloth, that portion, it will immediately burn. It will become back, black. So the quality is the same. But when it falls down, it's burning quality becomes extinguished. We have got practical experience. Burning quality becomes extinguished. So when we fall down from the spiritual world, we come to the material world, our spiritual quality becomes extinguished. That we have to revive. That we have to revive.

That is stated by Kṛṣṇa in Bhagava...,

vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā

man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ

bahavo jñāna-tapasā

pūtā mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ

[Bg. 4.10]



When we become purified, again we revive our spiritual quality, then mad-bhāvam āgatāḥ: "Then he comes back to My nature." That is back to home. This is the process. It is not very difficult because Kṛṣṇa says, bahavaḥ: "many." "Many" means it is not difficult. Not that... Because we, by nature, we are spiritual, simply extinguished... Just like a lamp is extinguished. You can burn it immediately with a real matches, not false. You can burn it. The capacity is there. Similarly, our spiritual qualities are there already. It is permanent. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. That Brahman quality is already there. It is not to be attained. Simply this non-Brahman covering has to be removed.



That is sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. That covering is designation. We are thinking, "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am śūdra," "I am this," "I am that." These are coverings. Actually I am ahaṁ brahmāsmi. Kṛṣṇa is also Parabrahman. Brahman... By quality, He is Brahman; we are also Brahman. But He is Parabrahman. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). He's singular number; we are plural number. That is the Vedic instruction. He is the singular number eternal, and we are plural number eternal. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. He is singular number living entity, and we are plural number living entity. Therefore in the dictionary you'll find, this Oxford Dictionary, "the Supreme Being." God means "the Supreme Being." He's a being. He's not a stone. He's a living being. Even the dictionary accepts. He's not a stone, dead stone. That is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavata, janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] "The Supreme Absolute Truth is the original source of all creation." Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Everything that we see, matter and life, everything comes from Him. But whether He is matter or life? That is explained: yes, He is life. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. He is life because He knows. So who knows? A dead stone cannot know. Unless one is a living being, he cannot know.

Therefore it is said that anvayād itarataś ca abhijñaḥ. How does He know? Now, svarāṭ. Because to know means we require some master, some teacher... But because He is the Supreme Being, He does not require any teacher. Svarāṭ. Svarāṭ means independent. Vedāhaṁ samatītāni [Bg. 7.26]. He knows everything automatically. That is the difference between God and ourself. Just like Kṛṣṇa said that "I spoke this philosophy to the sun-god," and Arjuna became doubtful: "What Kṛṣṇa is saying? He is my contemporary. I do not know how He knows." So he questioned that "Kṛṣṇa, how can I believe You, that you spoke this, this philosophy to the sun-god millions and millions of...?" So Kṛṣṇa explained, "Yes, at that time, you were also there because you are My constant friend. But the difference is you have forgotten; I have not forgotten. That is the difference." Svarāṭ. Abhijñaḥ. We are not fully abhijñaḥ. We do not know.

I claim, "These hairs, my hairs, my head." But I do not know how many hairs are there. So many things. The nail is coming from my body. I do not know how it is coming. I am eating foodstuff. I do not know how it is being turned into blood and other secretions, and it is being transferred through the veins, through the pipes, here and there, and so many mechanical machine. It is machine. It is going on. But this machine is not my creation. This machine is created by this material nature. This machine is manufactured in the womb of mother. According to my karma, I enter into a particular type of mother's womb, and this machine is made by the prakṛti, by the nature. Just like this flower. There is machine. The seed will fructify, and a particular type of flower from the seed will come because the machine is like that. Just like typewriter machine you can type, but typewriter machine, you cannot go. That you have to accept the motorcar machine. This is also machine. That... Similarly, there are different types of machine, and from that machine, this body is coming out. Bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni yantrārūḍhāni māyayā [Bg. 18.61].

Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, "Kṛṣṇa is situated everyone's heart." And He's studying the inclination of the living entity, that he wants to enjoy this material world like this. So parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He hasn't got to do anything personally. He orders the material nature, "This living entity wants to enjoy like this. Give him the, this machine." So you get this machine. We have got this machine. A living entity, he does not discriminate of eating; whatever he gets, he eats. So Kṛṣṇa says that "He wants to eat everything. So give him this machine, hog's body, so that there will be no discrimination." "He wants to remain naked. All right. Give him this body for five thousand years, standing naked as tree." The life was meant for understanding Kṛṣṇa, but he is cultivating the culture of naked civilization, how to become naked. "So all right, next time you'll remain naked for many thousands of years, standing in one place as tree." This is going on. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15].

So we have to understand the activities of Kṛṣṇa. He's not dull-headed, nirākāra. Why nirākāra? He is acting in so many ways, and who acts in different ways unless he's a person? This is the conclusion. Unless He's a person, how He can act in so many different ways, according to circumstances? Just like we are receiving so many letters from different centers. So unless I am a person, how can I give direction? It is not a dull stone. So Kṛṣṇa is not dull stone. Therefore we have to study Kṛṣṇa's activities. And if we can study Kṛṣṇa's activities, if we can understand Kṛṣṇa's birth and activities, janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9], immediately we become liberated.

So these books, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, are there, and many other books, Purāṇas and others... They are simply describing the activities of Kṛṣṇa so that you can understand Kṛṣṇa. That... There is a verse in Caitanya-caritāmṛta: anādi bahirmukha jīva nāhi jñāna, kṛṣṇa... [Cc. Madhya 20.117]. Means "From, since a very, very long time, he has forgotten Kṛṣṇa." Just like anyone you can ask, in this country even, and what to speak of others, that "Do you know Kṛṣṇa?" So you'll find so many, I mean to say, major portion, people, will say, "No, we do not know what is Kṛṣṇa." Just like our Śyāmasundara's daughter, Sarasvatī. She preaches, "Do you know what is Kṛṣṇa?" Even one knows, because he (she) is child: "No, no. I do not know." "Oh, Supreme Personality of Godhead," she will say. She is so intelligent. She will say. So similarly, we can do. We can do Kṛṣṇa's service like this. Even a child can do. You go. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. That becomes... You becomes spiritual master. If you take this vow, that "I'll preach only Kṛṣṇa," then you are spiritual master. You become spiritual...

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



Just like that child, Sarasvatī's, preaching, "Do you know Kṛṣṇa?" He says, "No." "He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Simply say like that, "He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead," and "Chant His holy name, Hare Kṛṣṇa." If you do this, then you are preacher; you are spiritual master. It is so nice. You don't require to become very... Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. He does not say that you become a learned Vedic scholar. That is the goal of Vedic scholarship. If you simply know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then your Vedic study finished. You are M.A., doctor of Kṛṣṇa philosophy, simply if you know this. You may not know in details, but if you simply believe, firmly convinced, that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is my master. He is my savior," in this way, if you accept, then you become perfect, and you become liberated.



So here one thing is specifically mentioned, that muhur vipad-gaṇāt. Muhuḥ means twenty-four hours, or always, almost twenty-four hours. Muhuḥ. Muhuḥ means "again and again, again and again." So vipat. Vipat means "danger." And gaṇa, gaṇa means "multi," not one kind of danger but different kinds of danger. So the muhur vipad-gaṇāt, who is suffering? Now, Kuntī. And who else is suffering? Now, Devakī. Devakī is the mother of Kṛṣṇa, and Kuntī is the aunt of Kṛṣṇa. Both of them, not ordinary women. To become mother of Kṛṣṇa or to become aunt of Kṛṣṇa, it is not ordinary thing. It requires many, many lives' tapasya. Then one can become mother of Kṛṣṇa. So they were also suffering muhur vipad-gaṇāt, always vipat. Although Kṛṣṇa was their very, very easily obtain, obtainable personality, mother, but still... Devakī gave birth to Kṛṣṇa, but the danger was so horrible that she could not keep her son. It has to be immediately transferred. Just see how much vipat, how much vipat. The mother of Kṛṣṇa could not keep her son on the lap. Every mother wants, but because there were Kaṁsa khalena, she could not keep. And to the Pāṇḍavas, Kṛṣṇa was constant companion. Wherever there are Pāṇḍavas, Kṛṣṇa is there. Kṛṣṇa... Draupadī is in danger. She was to be naked by the Kurus, Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana. The Kṛṣṇa supplied cloth. So for a woman in the assembly of so many men, if she is to be naked, it is the greatest danger. It is the greatest danger, and Kṛṣṇa saved. Similarly, Kuntī was saved... The dangers will be described in the later verses. She says, vimocitāhaṁ ca sahātmajā vibho: "I was released from so many dangerous positions, not only myself, but along with my sons."

So fact is that even Kuntī or Devakī, so intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa, but they had to face so many dangers, so what to speak of others? What to speak of others, ourself? So when we are danger, we are in danger, we should not be discouraged. We should take courage that even Kuntī and Vasudeva and Devakī, they were also in danger, although they were very, very intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa. So we should not be disturbed by the dangers of this material world. If we are actually Kṛṣṇa conscious, we should face the danger and depend on Kṛṣṇa. Avaśya rakhibe kṛṣṇa viśvāsa pālana. This is called surrender, that "I may be in danger, but Kṛṣṇa... I have surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. He must save me." Keep this faith. Don't be disturbed when you are in danger, because this world is such... Padaṁ padaṁ vipadām. Every step there is danger. Just like we are walking on the street. Immediately there is some pinprick, thorn. And by pinprick of that thorn, it may become a boil; it may become dangerous. So even by walking on the street, by talking on the street, by eating our food, there... And in English it is said, "There is many dangers between the cup and the lip."

So you should always remember that this material world is simply full of dangers. If you think that "We are very safe; we are very expert; we have made this world very happy," then you are fool number one. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. But if you take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, these dangers are nothing. That Kuntī will say, that vimocita. Vimocita means released from the danger. Aham. Sahātmajā: "With my..."

So this is the study of Kṛṣṇa, that if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, a sincere servant of Kṛṣṇa, don't be agitated by the dangerous condition of this material world. You simply depend on Kṛṣṇa, and He'll save you.

Thank you very much. (end)



730416SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.24

-

Los Angeles, April 16, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse)



viṣān mahāgneḥ puruṣāda-darśanād

asat-sabhāyā vana-vāsa-kṛcchrataḥ

mṛdhe mṛdhe 'neka-mahārathāstrato

drauṇy-astrataś cāsma hare 'bhirakṣitāḥ

[SB 1.8.24]



Prabhupāda: Word meanings.



Pradyumna: "Viṣāt-from poison; mahā-agneḥ-from the great fire; puruṣa-ada-the man-eaters; darśanāt-by combating; asat-vicious; sabhāyāḥ-assembly; vana-vāsa-exiled to the forest; kṛcchrataḥ-sufferings; mṛdhe mṛdhe-again and again in battle; aneka-many; mahā-ratha-great generals; astrataḥ-weapons; drauṇi-the son of Droṇācārya; astrataḥ-from the weapon of; ca-and; āsma-indicating past tense; hare-by the Personality of Godhead; abhirakṣitāḥ-protected completely. Translation. My dear Kṛṣṇa, Your Lordship has protected us from a poisoned cake, from a great fire, from cannibals, from the vicious assembly, from sufferings during our exile in the forest and from the battle where great generals fought. And now You have saved us from the weapon of Aśvatthāmā."



Prabhupāda: So Kuntī is remembering all the dangers that she had passed before getting the kingdom. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. These Pāṇḍavas, they were great devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa. And in the material world, because people are interested in material things, so they were put into so many dangerous condition of life. That was the policy of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, how to kill the sons of Pāṇḍu and usurp the kingdom for his own sons. That was his policy from the very beginning. But they were very obedient because Dhṛtarāṣṭra was their guardian.



So Dhṛtarāṣṭra constructed a house of lac. Lac means as soon as you touch one match stick, immediately takes fire. So he asked his nephews and sister-in-law, Kuntī, that "For sometimes you go. I have constructed a very nice house. You can go and live there." Vidura informed that "This is the policy: Dhṛtarāṣṭra wants you to burn into ashes by going that house." Duryodhana could understand that Vidura had already informed. Therefore he was very angry. These are politics. So although they knew that "This is the plan of my uncle to send into that house and set fire," but they agreed, "Yes," not disobedient to the order of the superior. In this way the house was set into fire, but they digged a subway within that house, and they escaped.

So that is one incidence. Another incidence is giving them poison cakes when they were at home. That also they escaped. Then puruṣāda-darśanāt. They met one Hiḍimba Rākṣasa, man-eater demon. So Bhīma fought with him and killed him. Similarly, asat-sabhāyāḥ, in the assembly of asat... Asat means those who are not gentle, not gentlemen. In the sabhā, in the assembly, there was Dhṛtarāṣṭra, there was Bhīṣmadeva, Droṇācārya, all elderly persons, and there was trick of playing chess. So somehow or other, Draupadī was taken as bet: "If we lose, then Draupadī is no longer our wife. It is up to you." So lost the game. So immediately Karṇa and Duḥśāsana captured her: "Now you are not your husbands'. You are our property. We can deal with you as we like."

So Karṇa was insulted during Draupadī's svayaṁvara. In the svayaṁvara... Svayaṁvara means big, big princess, very qualified princess, they used to select her own husband. Just like in your country, the selection of husband is given to the girl, as she likes. This is not very good for common, but those who are uncommon, highly qualified, one who knows how to select, to such girl the facility was given to select her husband and under very strict condition. Just like Draupadī's father made it condition-there was a fish on the ceiling, and one has to pierce the eye of the fish not directly seeing but seeing the shadow in the water down. So there were so many princes. As soon as such declaration is there, all the princes come to combat. That is kṣatriya principle.

So in that assembly of Draupadī's svayaṁvara there was Karṇa also. Draupadī knew... Draupadī's real purpose was to accept Arjuna as her husband. But she knew that Karṇa is there. If Karṇa competes, then Arjuna will not be able to succeed. Therefore she said that "In this competition, except the kṣatriyas, nobody can compete." That means Karṇa at that time was not known that he was a kṣatriya. He was the son of Kuntī before her marriage. So people did not know. It was secret. So Karṇa was maintained by a carpenter. Therefore he was known as a śūdra. So Draupadī took advantage of this and said that "I do not wish that any carpenter shall come here and compete. I don't want that." So Karṇa was not allowed. So Karṇa took it as great insult.

Now, when Draupadī was lost in the game, he was first of all forward. He was Duryodhana's great friend. "Now we want to see naked beauty of Draupadī." So there were elderly persons in the meeting. Dhṛtarāṣṭra was. Bhīṣma was there, Droṇācārya. Still, they did not protest, "Oh, what is this, that you are going to make naked one lady in this assembly?" They did not protest. Therefore asat-sabhāyāḥ, "assembly of uncultured men." Uncultured man wants to see a woman naked. But that has become a fashion nowadays. A woman is not to be, supposed not to be naked in anyone's, before except her husband. This is Vedic culture. But because these rascals wanted to see Draupadī naked in that great assembly, so they were all rascals, asat. Sat means gentle, and asat means rude. So asat sabhāyāḥ, "In that assembly of rudes, You saved"-Kṛṣṇa saved. Draupadī was being naked, her sari was being taken away, and the sari would not be finished. Kṛṣṇa was supplying sari.

So they became tired in trying to make her naked. (laughter) And she never became naked, and heaps of cloth was stacked. They could understand, "It is impossible." And Draupadī was also first of all trying to save her cloth. And what she can do? She is woman, and they were two men. Karṇa and Duḥśāsana was trying to make her naked. So she was crying and praying to Kṛṣṇa, "Save my honor." But she was trying also herself to save. When she thought that "It is impossible to save myself, my honor, in this way," then he (she) left the hands. She simply got up her arms and prayed, "Kṛṣṇa, if You like, You can save."

So this is the position. So long we try to save ourself, then that is not very good. If you simply depend on Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, if You save me, that is all right. Otherwise kill me, as You like." You see? Mārobi rākhobi-jo icchā tohārā. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, "I surrender unto You." Mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor, "My dear Lord, whatever I have got, my possession... And what I have got? I have got this body. I have got my mind. I have got a little home and my wife, my children. This is my possession." So mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor. "So whatever I have got-this body, this mind, this wife, these children, this home, everything I surrender unto You." Mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor, arpiluṅ tuwā pade, nanda-kiśor. Kṛṣṇa is known as Nanda-kiśora.

So this is surrender, no reservation, fully surrender, akiñcana. Therefore Kṛṣṇa..., a devotee is called akiñcana. Akiñcana. Kiñcana means something, something reserved for me. Of course, actually that should be position, but still... In the material world one should not imitate, but as Rūpa Gosvāmī has shown the path, that whatever possession you have got, 50% for Kṛṣṇa, 25% for the relatives-they also expect something-and 25% for personal emergency. This example is shown by Rūpa Gosvāmī. Before his retirement he did it. But actually that everything was spent. When Sanātana Gosvāmī was arrested, it was spent. So this is full surrender. When Draupadī fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa without trying herself to save her, then unlimited yards of cloth was supplied, and she could not be made naked. But because the attempt was made in an assembly of crude, rude men, therefore it is said, asat-sabhāyāḥ.

Vana-vāsa-kṛcchrataḥ. And then next game was that if they lose the game, they will go, they would go twelve years in the forest. So that was also happened. For twelve years. And the condition was: after twelve years, one year they should remain incognito. If they are detected that "They are living in such and such place," then again twelve years. So hard condition. And that also performed. In that incognito condition they married Draupadī. Arjuna was at that time in a incognito. He went there as a brāhmaṇa, in the dress of a brāhmaṇa. Because if he went there in the dress of a kṣatriya they would be detected again. "Oh, here is Arjuna." Then again they will have to go again for twelve years.

So these things are there described in the Mahābhārata. Mahābhārata means... Mahā means great, greater, and bhārata means India. It is the history, history of greater India, Mahābhārata. They take it as stories, as mythology. That is nonsense. It is history. Mahābhārata is the history. So we take it as history. All these Purāṇas, Mahābhārata, they are history. But not this chronological history. Chronological history, if you keep, then how many pages you have to keep, so many things? Simply selected incidences, they are described there, select, most important incidences. But that is history. So these very important incidents, they are described in the Mahābhārata.

Then mṛdhe, mṛdhe [SB 1.8.24]. Mṛdha means battlefield. Mṛdhe mṛdhe. Aneka-mahā-ratha astrataḥ. There were great, great fighters, mahā-ratha. These are just like in modern days they are given title, lieutenant, commander, commander-in-chief, like that. Formerly these titles were for the military man: eka-ratha, mahā-ratha, koṭi-ratha. Ratha means chariot. So if one could fight with one charioteer, he is eka-ratha. And if he could fight with one thousand charioteer, then he is called mahā-ratha. So all the commanders there in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra were mahā-rathas. Mahā-ratha. They are described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Especially Bhīṣma and Karṇa, Droṇācārya, they were very, very great commanders. Still, Arjuna could kill them by the grace of Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna was nothing in front of them. They were so great fighter. Arjuna was also mahā-ratha. Still, these commanders were very, very powerful. But by the grace of Kṛṣṇa he could kill Karṇa, he could kill Bhīṣma, he could kill Droṇācārya and came out victorious. And Parīkṣit Mahārāja, when he was talking with Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he also referred this, that "The battlefield of Kurukṣetra was just like ocean, and there were so many ferocious aquatic animals. But by the grace of Kṛṣṇa my grandfather crossed over it very easily."

This is very significant, that you may have many enemies or many fighters, very powerful fighters, but if you remain at the protection of Kṛṣṇa, then nobody can do you anything, harm. Rākhe kṛṣṇa māre ke: "If Kṛṣṇa protects you, nobody can kill you." But if Kṛṣṇa kills you nobody can give you protection. That is this, rākhe kṛṣṇa māre ke, māre kṛṣṇa rākhe ke. This is the... If Kṛṣṇa desires to kill you, nobody can save you. Just like a big man, a rich man, is suffering from disease. All first-class physician, medicine, hospital, available for him, but still, he dies. That means Kṛṣṇa desires that "This man must die." So these things will not help you. The so-called protective methods that we have discovered, they will be useless if Kṛṣṇa does not desire that you should live. They will be useless.

Just like Rāvaṇa. He as very powerful. But when Kṛṣṇa desired, Lord Rāmacandra desired, nobody could give protection. He was a great devotee of Lord Śiva, and he was praying Lord Śiva, "Please come and save me in this danger." So Lord Śiva did not come. And Pārvatī, Lord Śiva's wife, asked that "Why is that? Your devotee, such a great devotee, he has served you so much, and now he is in danger. He is asking your help. You are not going?" And Lord Śiva replied, "My dear Pārvatī, what shall I do? I cannot give him protection. It is not possible. Why shall I go?" So this is the position, that if God wants to kill you, nobody can give you protection. And if God wants to give you protection, nobody can kill you. This is the position. Rākhe kṛṣṇa māre ke, māre kṛṣṇa rākhe ke.

So Kuntīdevī is remembering one after another how Kṛṣṇa saved them. That is thinking of Kṛṣṇa, smaraṇam, that "Kṛṣṇa, You are so kind upon us. You saved us in so many big, big dangerous position. It is for You. Otherwise there was no hope." And the last is drauṇy-astra. Drauṇy-astra. This Aśvatthāmā, he executed very abominable task. He came... Of course, there was fight. Both the parties belonged to the same family. So everyone died. So only five sons of the Pāṇḍavas, they were living. So Aśvatthāmā thought that "If I kill these five sons of Pāṇḍavas and present the head to Duryodhana, he will be very much pleased." So what did he do? When the five sons were sleeping, inhumanly he cut off. He separated the heads of the five sons and presented to Duryodhana. Duryodhana was at that time in a incapable state. His, this waist was broken. He could not move. And he lied that "I have brought the five heads of the Pāṇḍavas, my dear Duryodhana." "Oh, you have brought?" He was very glad. But he knew how to test it. But when he pressed the head, it immediately became collapsed. "Oh," he said, "this is not Pāṇḍavas head. It must be their sons' head." Then he admitted, "Yes." He became fainted that "You have killed all the hopes. I hoped that in our family at least five sons will... You have killed also." So in that lamentment he died.

So he was arrested. He was arrested by Arjuna, and he was to be killed. Kṛṣṇa ordered that "Kill him. He is not a brāhmaṇa. He is less than śūdra." So when he was arrested, then he was let loose by the request of Draupadī that "I am suffering for the death of my sons, and this rascal is the son of our Guru Mahārāja, Droṇācārya, who has done so much for us. If he dies also, then mother guru will be very much unhappy. So let him go away." So, being insulted, he threw atom bomb, brahmāstra. The brahmāstra is something like atomic weapon, nuclear weapon. It can go to the enemy wherever the enemy is. It doesn't matter. It will go and kill him. That is called brahmāstra. So the brahmāstra was... He knew that "The rest of the Kuru family is Parīkṣit, the son of Abhimanyu. He is in the womb of Uttarā. So let me kill him also. Then everything finished."

So drauṇy-astra. So when that weapon was let loose, Parīkṣit Mahārāja mother, Uttarā, felt that she is going to discharge the womb. And she approached Kṛṣṇa, "Save me." And Kṛṣṇa entered the womb of Uttarā and saved the child, the posthumous child. So in this way the Pāṇḍava family was saved. Simply Parīkṣit Mahārāja remained. That also within the womb of his mother. And in mature time, when Parīkṣit Mahārāja came out, the grandfathers only (were) there. Parīkṣit Mahārāja's father was sixteen years old, and he went to fight. Seven big, big commanders killed him, seven. He was so great fighter, Arjuna's son. Subhadrā's son. This Subhadrā is here. The Subhadrā is sister of Kṛṣṇa. She was married to Arjuna, and she got only one child, this Parīkṣit Mahārāja. So as soon as Parīkṣit Mahārāja became grown up, the whole estate was entrusted to him, and all the Pāṇḍavas left home and went to Himalayas. This is the history of Mahābhārata.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741004SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.24

-

Māyāpura, October 4, 1974



Nitāi: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, Your Lordship has protected us from a poisoned cake, from a great fire, from cannibals, from the vicious assembly, from sufferings during our exile in the forest and from the battle where great generals fought. And now You have saved us from the weapon of Aśvatthāmā." [SB 1.8.24]



Prabhupāda: So in the last verse, Kuntī accepted, vimocitā ahaṁ ca sahātmajā vibho: "My Lord, there were so many dangers, and You saved us, along with my sons." Muhur vipad-gaṇāt: "One after another, dangerous position." So some of them are being described.



Viṣāt: "from poison." The Dhṛtarāṣṭra group, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and his sons, they conspired to give them poison. They were transferred to a house. They were so obedient because Dhṛtarāṣṭra happened to be the superior in the house, and he took care of the Pāṇḍavas when they were small children because their father died at an early age. So it was the duty of the elderly members of the family. After all, they were very respectable kṣatriya family. So the elderly members means Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Vidura and Bhīṣmadeva. Bhīṣmadeva was the grandfather of the family, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra was the elder brother of Pāṇḍava, and Vidura was also brother, Vidura, also elder. Pāṇḍu was the youngest, the father of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and... So it is, after all, a, what is called, varṇāśrama family, Vedic family. So the elderly people had the responsibility to raise the fatherless children. So Dhṛtarāṣṭra took charge as the eldest member. So māyā is very strong. He began to think that "Actually this kingdom belongs to me. I am the eldest son, but because I am born blind, therefore it was given to my younger brother. Now he is dead. Now he's dead, so the property belongs to me. Some way or other, it was transferred to my younger brother. Now the younger brother is dead. Then again I become proprietor. So at least I could not rule over the kingdom, why not my sons?" This was the beginning.

Just like one of our Godbrothers, he's thinking that "This institution was started by me and Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī as partners. Now the senior partner is dead. Therefore I am the sole proprietor. Who are these Godbrothers? Let them go away." So this is māyā, the same māyā Dhṛtarāṣṭra was thinking. And his brother-in-law, Śakuni, was very expert in conspiracy. So he was advising him, "Yes, you are the proprietor. At least your sons should be..." This is natural. Every... Everyone has got some affection for the family. So this is the beginning of the conspiracy. Otherwise, he was taking care of the children very nicely. But māyā was dictating that "You are taking care of the children of your brother. What about your own children?" "Yes, why not my children?"

So attempt was being made how to kill these boys. The first attempt was to administer poison. They... Dhṛtarāṣṭra constructed a house of shellac. So they were transferred: "My dear boys, for some days you can live in that house. That is very nice." So Vidura gave him hint, so, that "You are being sent there. Be careful for being killed. The house will be set fire." So Vidura was very favorable to the Pāṇḍavas. So they made a subway in that house, and when the house was set fire, they escaped through the subway. In this way, it is said, viṣān mahāgneḥ, set fire in shellac house... Just like nowadays this, what is called, plastic. It gets set fire very soon. Then puruṣāda, they took shelter in a house where there was a rākṣasa, cannibal. He was disturbing the whole village. So the settlement was that every day one family should hand over one man to him for eating, then he will not create disturbance. So the Pāṇḍavas were taking shelter in a house after escaping from the fire, and the... One day the turn came to that family that they would have to hand over one member of the family to that cannibal. So the Pāṇḍavas were present. They thought, "We are guest here, and they are in danger, so we must save them." This is obligation. If you become guest in a house, he's receiving you well, he's supplying you your necessities, so you are considered to be very intimate friend. So when they are danger, you must help. This consideration... Then it was decided that "This man should be hand over. Bhīma shall go." So when Bhīma was handed over to that cannibals, so he was killed. So... But it was a great danger.

So in this way, danger after danger. Then asat-sabhāyāḥ: "The assembly of crooked persons." Draupadī was lost in bet, betting. So Karṇa, he had some attraction for Draupadī from the beginning, when there was svayaṁvara. So Karṇa also went to contest, and he had very much attraction for Draupadī, but Draupadī wanted to get Arjuna as her husband. So she pointed out... Because she knew that "If Karṇa takes the contest, he will be victorious. Karṇa is more expert than Arjuna"; therefore she played a trick that "This svayaṁvara ceremony is meant for the kṣatriyas, not for others. I cannot accept my husband, anyone else except the kṣatriya.

So Karṇa is not a kṣatriya." Karṇa's history is that Karṇa is the pre-marriage son of Kuntī. Before her being married, she was born of Kuntī from the ear. Therefore his name is Karṇa. But still, out of social fear, Kuntī did not kill the child. Nowadays they kill. But he floated the child on a boat, and the boat was let loose, go anywhere. So one carpenter collected Karṇa and raised him. But he was kṣatriya. He was Kuntī's son, born by sun, sun-god, Sūrya. So Kuntī had the power of calling. He got the benediction from Durvāsā. Durvāsā gave her the benediction that "You can call any demigod, and at once he will come by this mantra." So when Kuntī was young, not married, so Durvāsā became the guest of her father, and she served Durvāsā Muni very nicely, attending as maidservant. Although she was king's daughter, but because Durvāsā was guest, he was taken care of very nicely. So Durvāsā became very pleased and gave her this blessing, that "You can call any demigod, as you like." So out of curiosity she chanted the mantra and called the sun-god, Vivasvān. So he came. So he wanted to give her a child, benediction. She said that "I am unmarried. I cannot have child." "No, this child will be born from your ear." Akṣata-yoni. Akṣata-yoni means a girl who has no union with any other man. That is called akṣata-yoni. So in this way Karṇa was born, but he was raised by a carpenter. Therefore he was not considered to be a kṣatriya. So Draupadī knew that Karṇa, if he contests, then he will be victorious, so she played a trick that "I cannot allow anyone else except the kṣatriyas to contest in this svayaṁvara."

So Karṇa had attraction for Draupadī, and he remembered the insult also, that "Draupadī has insulted me, not to allow to take part in the contest." Now that old grudge, he wanted to fulfill. When Draupadī was lost in the gambling, so this Duryodhana and others, they are... They were very friendly to Karṇa. So he advised, "Now this woman is lost. We can use her as we like." So they decided, "Yes, why not? So make her naked in this assembly." So it was decided that they would see this woman naked, naked beauty. Therefore, asat-sabhāyāḥ. This assembly was not of gentlemen. Asat. This word is used. Sat and asat. Sat means gentle, and asat means uncivilized. So they were so much uncivilized that they wanted, "Never mind. That woman was lost. It was a betting." Her husbands were quite competent, but because that they thought that "We are lost," they did not take any part: "You can use her as you like." But that was not the duty of gentlemen, a kṣatriya. Therefore it is mentioned as asat-sabhāyāḥ. A woman is asked to be naked in the assembly-that assembly is not gentlemen's assembly. That is meant for the uncivilized, crude. The woman is respected everywhere.

So in India, especially, women are still respected. Therefore Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, mātṛvat para-dāreṣu: "Any woman who is not your wife, she should be treated as your mother." This is moral instruction. Mātṛvat. At the present moment, they have invented the word bahinajī, "sister." No. In the Vedic culture, there is no such thing as "sister." "Mother," that is Vedic culture. Because mother is always respected, so any woman, if she is called "Mother..." The brahmacārī would go to the householder's house and address the ladies, "Mother. Mother, give us some alms." So from the childhood, a brahmacārī is trained to address all women as mother. Therefore, when they are young, they cannot see women in any other way. This is Vedic culture. So therefore it is said, asat. The woman, who is respected as mother, and this, in this assembly, Draupadī was to be naked by the order of Karṇa? It is uncivilized, unlawful. So Kṛṣṇa remembered this. When Karṇa was killed, it was not... He was not killed lawfully because he fell down from his chariot, and he was trying to repair the chariot, and Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna, "This is the opportunity to kill him. Otherwise you cannot kill him. Kill him immediately." So when Karṇa protested, "Arjuna, what you are doing? I am not fighting. I am repairing my chariot and you..." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes, you did unlawful action by making Draupadī naked. So you should be unlawfully killed. This is justice. This is justice to you." So everything has got so much history in the episode of Mahābhārata. Therefore it is called Mahābhārata, "Greater India." Mahābhārata.

So asat-sabhāyāḥ. Then again, vana-vāsa. Next betting was vana-vāsa, that "If this time you lose, then twelve years, for twelve years you'll have to go to live in the forest. And one year, incognito. If you are caught up within that one year, then again twelve years." Just see. So vana-vāsa-kṛcchrataḥ. There were so many dangers. So just imagine that the Pāṇḍavas, they had their wife, Draupadī... She is incarnation of goddess of fortune. And friend, Kṛṣṇa, who is always protecting them... But still, there are so many dangers. This is the instruction, that because Kṛṣṇa is protecting you, you cannot expect that you'll be out of danger. Danger you must meet, because..., then you'll know that this material existence is full of dangers. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. This we always remember. We should not be so fool that "I am living very now comfortably." No, sir. You are in danger. That is said by Kṛṣṇa. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. You do not take this material existence as comfortable at any moment. Then you'll not be able to make progress in spiritual life. As soon as you think that "I am very comfortable here," then you are spiritually fall down. That is māyā. As soon as...

So at the present moment, people are becoming implicated with māyā more and more because foolishly they are thinking that "I am now very comfortable. I have got this skyscraper building. I have got so much bank balance. I have got so nice wife. So I am comfortable." They are thinking like that. They do not know that it is not comfortable life. It is dangerous life because you have to change your body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Why don't you remember that? Because as soon as death will take place next moment... You are proprietor of this house; next moment you become dog of this house. If you have got very much attachment for the house, and at the same time your activities have been like dog's, then you get the body of a dog, and you may remain in this quarter and bark, "Gyeow! Gyeow! Gyeow! Gyeow! Gyeow!" That they do not know. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. When there is nice building, nice comfortable life, they do anything sinful without knowing that "I am not going to be escaped by these sinful activities. I will have to suffer for this. As I am enjoying now material comforts due to my some pious activities in the past, similarly, if I commit sinful life, then I'll have to suffer next life." That they do not know.

Therefore it is always dangerous. To enjoy in this material life is dangerous because you are creating next life very, very abominable. That... The only escape is... That will be explained by Kuntīdevī in the next verse, that they were in danger, but they were simply thinking of Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, we have no other shelter." This position should be taken. We are always in danger, and we should always think of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Then we are safe. Otherwise it is very dangerous. Even Kuntī and others, Pāṇḍavas.

Then mṛdhe mṛdhe aneka-mahāratha astrataḥ [SB 1.8.24]. Then at last, after all these tribulations, at last it was decided... Kṛṣṇa wanted to settle up that "You have given these Pāṇḍavas so much trouble. Never mind. But they are kṣatriyas. They cannot become vaiśya or śūdra or brāhmaṇa. So they must have some place to rule over. So you give these five brothers five villages so they can rule and live." "No, that is not possible. We are not going to leave a spot of land which can contain the upper portion of the needle without fight." So then there was fight. The Battle of Kurukṣetra was forced upon the Pāṇḍavas by the Kurus. Still, Arjuna was not willing to kill them. Just see. He's Vaiṣṇava. He never thought of, that "My, these cousin-brothers, they have given us so much trouble. Why I shall be sympathetic upon them?" No. Still, he was sympathetic. Why? Now, because he was a Vaiṣṇava. That is Vaiṣṇava. Para-duḥkha-duhkhī kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Vaiṣṇava is so tolerant. They suffer; still, they do not want others' suffering. So this is Vaiṣṇava.

So in that battlefield, mṛdhe mṛdhe, there were Bhīṣmadeva, Droṇācārya, Karṇa, Kṛpācārya. They were so big fighters, mahā-ratha. Mahā-ratha means... Mahā-ratha, ati-ratha, eka-ratha. A fighter who can fight with one man, he is called eka-ratha. And one who can fight with thousands of men, he is called mahā-ratha. And more than that, he is called ati-ratha. So these generals, Bhīṣmadeva, Karṇadeva, Karṇa and others, they were very, very powerful than Arjuna. Therefore Arjuna took the opportunity of killing Karṇa in a precarious position. Similarly, Bhīṣma was... Karṇa was almost dead when Bhīṣma was fighting. So Bhīṣma promised that "Today, either Arjuna will die or his dear friend, Kṛṣṇa, will have to break His promise. Then I'll give up this fight." So Arjuna was almost shattered, his chariot broken, and he was exasperated. So at that time Kṛṣṇa took one wheel and went to kill Bhīṣmadeva. So Bhīṣmadeva saw that "Kṛṣṇa has broken His promise. Therefore I give up this fight." Kṛṣṇa came to threaten him. That means He has broken His promise. "So I wanted to see that Kṛṣṇa breaks." This is also affection, love, between devotee... Just like in sporting, just like you want to see your friend defeated, but that does not mean you are enemy. In sporting, there is fight. That one party is defeated. That does (not) mean they are enemies. Next moment, they shake hands, sit together, dine together. It is like that.

So in this way Kṛṣṇa saved. Therefore mahāratha astrataḥ. And at last, Drauṇi, the son of Droṇācārya, Aśvatthāmā. He was so crooked that he killed the five sons of the five Pāṇḍavas, and at last, Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in the womb of his mother. He wanted to kill him also. Brahmāstra. Brahmāstra, atomic bomb nowadays. It is almost similar, but it is still dangerous because atom bomb, you release-it has no aim. It will kill with..., aimlessly. But the brahmāstra is so accurate that if you want to kill somebody, it will go there, wherever he is, and it will kill. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was in the womb of the mother. The brahmāstra entered the womb of the mother and was trying to kill this Parīkṣit Mahārāja in the womb, and Kṛṣṇa saved. He entered also within the womb and saved the child. Therefore it is said that drauṇy-astrataś cāsma hare 'bhirakṣitāḥ. Kṛṣṇa saved them in so many ways, so many ways. So that is being admitted. That is the behavior of Kṛṣṇa and His devotees.

So we should not be afraid. Because this place is dangerous, we should expect always danger. But if we are faithful to Kṛṣṇa, if we simply, I mean to say, expect help from Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will save you. These are the examples by the fight of Mahābhārata.

Thank you very much. (end)



730417SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.25

-

Los Angeles, April 17, 1973



Devotee:



vipadaḥ santu tāḥ śaśvat

tatra tatra jagad-guro

bhavato darśanaṁ yat syād

apunar bhava-darśanam

[SB 1.8.25]



"I wish that all those calamities would happen again and again so that we could see You again and again, for seeing You means that we will no longer see repeated births and deaths."



Prabhupāda: So that is very interesting verse that vipada, calamities, danger, that is very good if such danger and calamities remind me of Kṛṣṇa. That is very good. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam [SB 10.14.8]. A devotee, how he receives dangerous position? Danger must be there. Danger... Because this place, this material world is full of dangers. These foolish persons, they do not know that. They are trying to avoid the dangers. That is struggle for existence. Everyone is trying to become happy and avoid danger. This is the material business. Ātyantika-sukham. Ātyantika-sukham. Ultimate happiness. A man is working and thinking: "Let me work now very hard, and let me have some bank balance so when I shall get old, I shall enjoy life without any working." That is the inner intention of everyone. Nobody wants to work. As soon as he gets some money he wants to retire from work, and to become happy. But that is not possible. You cannot be happy in that way.



Here it is said: apunar bhava-darśanam [SB 1.8.25]. The real danger is... She is speaking of apunaḥ. Apunaḥ means... A means not, and punar bhava means repetition of birth and death. The real danger is repetition of birth and death. That has to be stopped. And not this so-called danger. This is all... The material world is full of dangers. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. Just like if you are on the ocean. If you are on the ocean, you might have very strong ship, very safe ship, but that is not safety. Because you are on the sea, at any time there can be dangers. Perhaps you remember from your country, there was, what is that, Titanic?

Devotee: Titanic.



Prabhupāda: Everything was safe, but on the first voyage it was drowned, and all important men of your country, they lost their life. So danger there must be because you are in a dangerous position. This material world itself is dangerous position. So our business is... That danger must be there. Now our business should be how to cross over the sea as soon as possible. So long you are on the sea, you are on the dangerous position, however strong your ship may be. That's a fact. So you should not be disturbed by the sea waves. Just try to cross over the sea. Go to the other side. That is your business. Similarly, so long we are in this material world, there must be dangerous calamities because this is the place of calamity. So our business is, even within these calamities, dangers, how we develop our Kṛṣṇa consciousness and, after giving up this body, we go back to home, back go Kṛṣṇa. That should be our business. We should not be disturbed by the so-called calamities. They are not so-called; they are factual.



So this question was there by Arjuna to Kṛṣṇa that: "Whatever You are speaking, it is all right. That I am not this body, I am soul. Everyone is not this body. He's soul. So on the annihilation of this body..." (Aside:) Stop that. "On the annihilation of the body the soul will exist. But when I see my son is dying, or my grandfather is dying, I am killing, how can I solace me that my grandfather is not dying, my son is not dying, the, simply it is changing? Because I am accustomed to think like that. So there must be grief." So Kṛṣṇa replied: "Yes, that's a fact. So that you must have to tolerate, that's all. There is no other remedy." Tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata.

Kṛṣṇa never said that these are not facts, what Arjuna explained that: "I know that when my son is dying, my son is changing the body, or my grandfather is dying, changing the body, I know this, but still, because I am affectionate on the skin, so I must suffer." The Kṛṣṇa replied: "Yes, the suffering is there. Because you are also on the bodily concept of life. So suffering must be there. So there is no other remedy than to tolerate. There is no other remedy." Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14].

Just like in your country it is very chilly in the morning to take bath, a little difficult task. But does it mean that those who are devotees, they will stop taking bath? No. Even it is chilly, cold, one must take bath. The duty must be done. The duty must be done. Even it is little suffering. That is called tapasya. Tapasya means we must prolong or proceed with, with our Kṛṣṇa consciousness business in spite of all dangerous and calamitous condition of this world. This is called tapasya. Tapasya means voluntarily accepting the difficulties of life. Sometimes tapasya, in the system of tapasya, in hot season, summer, in scorching heat of the sun, still they ignite some fire all around and sit down in the midst and meditate. There are some processes of tapasya like that. In chilly cold one goes into the water up to the neck and meditates. These things are prescribed in tapasya.

But Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu does not give you such prescription. He gives you very nice program: chant, dance and take prasādam. Still we are unwilling. We cannot accept this tapasya. You see. We are so fallen. Su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam [Bg. 9.2]. This is a kind of tapasya which is very easy to do and it is very pleasant. Still, we are not agreeable. We shall rot in the street, lie down anywhere and everywhere and still, I shall drink and have sex and lie down. So what can be done? We are giving good facilities. Come here, chant, dance and live very peacefully and take kṛṣṇa-prasādam. Be happy. But people will not accept. That is called misfortune.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore said: etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says: nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktiḥ. In the transcendental holy name of God, Kṛṣṇa, there is all potencies. As Kṛṣṇa has got unlimited potencies, similarly in the name, holy name of Kṛṣṇa, there is unlimited potency. So nāmnām akāri bahudhā. And there are many names of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has got thousands and thousands of names. Kṛṣṇa name is the chief name. Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. And there is no hard and fast rule, that you have to chant in this time or that time. No. Any time. Any time you can take. And the name is identical with Kṛṣṇa. On this logic, the name, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, is Kṛṣṇa. He's no other than Kṛṣṇa. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa is living in Goloka Vṛndāvana and the name is different. Just like in material world we have got this conception. The name is different from the fact. But in the Absolute world there is no such difference. That is called absolute. Name is as potential as Kṛṣṇa is potential.

So you have got this tongue. You can chant Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Immediately you become directly in touch with Kṛṣṇa. Immediately. Because the name Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa-person is not different. Identical. So even if you think that Kṛṣṇa is far, far away... Kṛṣṇa is not far, far away. Kṛṣṇa is not far, far away. Kṛṣṇa is within you. He's not far away. He's far away, at the same time nearest. So even if you think that Kṛṣṇa is far, far, His name is there. You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa becomes immediately available. Aniyamitaḥ. And for making Kṛṣṇa available in this shortcut way, there is no hard and fast rule. You can chant any time. Immediately you get Kṛṣṇa. Just see the mercy of Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that: etādṛśī tava kṛpā. "My dear Lord, You have given Me so nice facilities to contact You, but durdaiva, but My, I am so unfortunate, I have no attachment for these things. I have no attachment. I have got so many attachments for other things. But I have got no attachment for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. This is My misfortune." Kṛṣṇa has given so much facilities, that He is present before you by transcendental vibration in His name, and the name has got all the potencies of Kṛṣṇa. So if you remain in contact with the name, you get all the benefit of Kṛṣṇa's benediction, but still, I am not inclined to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. this is misfortune.

So a devotee never takes dangerous position as very reverse position or very calamitous position. He welcomes. Because a surrendered soul, he knows either danger or festival, they are all different demonstration of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. In the śāstra it is said that just like there are two kinds, two sides, religiosity and irreligiosity, just the opposite. But in the śāstra it is said the religiosity is just the front portion of God, and irreligiosity is the back portion of God. So God's front portion or back portion, is there any difference? God is absolute. Therefore a devotee, either in opulence or in danger, he is not disturbed. He knows both these things are Kṛṣṇa. Either in dangerous position... "Now Kṛṣṇa has appeared before me as danger."

Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu and Prahlāda Mahārāja and Nṛsiṁhadeva. Nṛsiṁhadeva is dangerous to Hiraṇyakaśipu, and He is the Supreme Friend to Prahlāda Mahārāja, the same Personality. Similarly God is never dangerous to the devotee. Devotee is never afraid of dangers. He's confident that the danger, that is another feature of God. "So why shall I be afraid? I am surrendered to Him." So Kuntīdevī says that: vipadaḥ santu. Vipadaḥ santu tāḥ śaśvat. Because he, she knows how to remember Kṛṣṇa at times of danger. So he is, she is welcoming danger. "My dear Lord, I welcome such dangers when I can remember You." Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, he was always thinking of Kṛṣṇa when his father was putting him in dangerous position. So if you are put into the dangerous position and if that dangerous position gives an impetus to remember Kṛṣṇa, that is welcome. That is welcome. "Oh, I am getting this opportunity of remembering Kṛṣṇa." So how it is welcome? It is welcome because seeing Kṛṣṇa means I am advancing in my spiritual life so that I'll not have to suffer any more of these dangerous positions.

Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. If you become advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then the result will be, after giving up this body, Kṛṣṇa says, tyaktvā deham, after giving up this body, punar janma naiti, you don't take birth again in this material world. That is wanted. Suppose I am very comfortable at the present moment. My body is kept in a very comfortable position, but there is death, and there is another birth. So after giving up this body, if I get the body of a cat and dog, then what is the meaning of this comfortable position? Because death is sure, and janmāntaṁ tataḥ dehāntaram. Dehāntaram means you have to accept another body. If you do not know what kind of body you are going to get... You can know it. That is stated in the śāstra, that if you have got such and such mentality, you get such and such body. So in a comfortable position, if I keep myself in the dog's mentality, then I am going to get my next life as dog. Then what is the value of this comfortable position? I may be in comfortable position for twenty years, thirty years, fifty years, or utmost, one hundred years. And after that comfortable position, when I give up this body, if, due to my mentality, I become a cat and dog and mouse, then what is the benefit of this comfortable position?

These, they, people do not know that. They think, especially in this age that: "I am now in comfortable position. I have got enough money. I have got enough estate. I have got enough comforts, enough food. So as soon as the body's finished so I am not going to take birth again. So long I am living, let me enjoy life." This is the modern philosophy, hedonism. But that is not the fact. Kuntī is therefore anxious: apunar bhava-darśanam [SB 1.8.25]. Apunar bhava, not to repeat. If you see always Kṛṣṇa, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Your consciousness should be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought.

Therefore we give different varieties of engagement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We should not divert our energy. Now when we are selling book, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are selling book. But if we think that the selling book may be diverted into selling jewelry, that is not very good idea. That is not very good idea. Then we become again jeweler. Punar mūṣika bhava. Again become mouse. We should be very much careful. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be diverted. Then you are gone to hell. Even there is danger, even there is suffering in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we should tolerate. That is the instruction of... We should welcome such danger. And pray to Kṛṣṇa. What is that prayer? Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇaḥ [SB 10.14.8]. "My dear Lord, it is Your great mercy that I am put into this dangerous position." That is the viewpoint of devotee. He doesn't take danger as danger. He takes: "It is Kṛṣṇa's mercy." What kind of mercy? Now bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam. "Due to my past activities, I was to suffer so much. But You are mitigating that suffering, giving me little suffering."

Just like a token punishment. Sometimes in the courts a big man is culprit. So say, if the judge wants 100,000 dollars, he can pay immediately. But he asks from Him: "You just give one cent." Because that is also punishment. But minimizing. Similarly we have to suffer on account of our past deeds. That's a fact. You cannot avoid. Karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54]. But those who are in devotional service, those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, their sufferings are minimized, a token. Just like one was to be killed. So instead of being killed with his knife, he gets some little cut on the finger. In this way, karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca...

Those who are in devotional service, they are: ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa assures that: "I give you protection from the reaction of sinful life." So when there is very, very grievous criminal activities behind his, sometimes it is like that. Instead of hanging him, there may be little cut by the knife on the finger. This is the position. So why should we be afraid of danger? We should simply depend on Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because if we live Kṛṣṇa conscious, in any circumstances, then my benefit is that I am not coming again in this material world. Apunar bhava-darśanam [SB 1.8.25]. The repeatedly, as you think of Kṛṣṇa, as you see Kṛṣṇa, as you read of Kṛṣṇa, as you work for Kṛṣṇa, some way or other, if you remain in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is your benefit. And that benefit will save you from taking birth again in the material world. That is real benefit. And if I am become little comfortable by so-called other engagement, and if I forget Kṛṣṇa, and I have to take birth again, then what is my benefit? We should be very much careful about this.

Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be disturbed at any circumstances. Even there is heavy suffering, that is the instruction of Kuntīdevī. Kuntīdevī's welcome, welcoming: vipadaḥ santu tāḥ śaśvat tatra tatra. Let there... Because, before winning the battle of Kurukṣetra, all these Pāṇḍavas were put into so many dangerous positions. That is already described in the previous verses. Sometimes they were offered poison, sometimes they were put into the house, lac, and it was set fire. Sometimes big, big demons, man-eaters, and big, big fighters. Every time... They lost their kingdom, lost their wife, lost their prestige. They were put into the forest. Full of dangers. But within all those dangers, Kṛṣṇa was there, with all those dangers. When the Draupadī was being naked, Kṛṣṇa was there supplying cloth. Kṛṣṇa is always there.

Therefore Bhīṣmadeva, while he was dying... He was grandfather of the Pāṇḍavas. So when the Pāṇḍavas came to see him on his deathbed, so he cried that: "These boys, my grandsons, they're all very pious. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the topmost pious person. His name is Dharmarāja, the king of religiosity. He is the eldest brother. And Bhīma and Arjuna, they are devotees and so great hero. They can kill thousands of men. They're so powerful. So Yudhiṣṭhira, Yudhiṣṭhira is there, and Bhīma is there. Arjuna is there, and Draupadī is directly the Goddess of Fortune. There was this injunction that wherever Draupadī will be there, there will be no scarcity of food. In this way, the combination was so nice and over and above them, Kṛṣṇa is always with them, and still they are suffering." So he began to cry that: "I do not know what is the arrangement of Kṛṣṇa that such pious men, such devotees, they are also suffering."

So don't think that: "Because I have become a devotee, there will be no danger, no suffering." Prahlāda Mahārāja suffered so much. The Pāṇḍavas suffered so much. Haridāsa Ṭhākura suffered so much. But we should not be disturbed by those sufferings. We must have firm faith, firm conviction that: "Kṛṣṇa is there. He'll give me protection." Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. Don't try to take benefit of other shelter than Kṛṣṇa. Always take to Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa says: kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati. "My dear Arjuna, you can declare it to the public that My devotees are never vanquished." Why declaration was advised to be made by Arjuna? Why He did not declare Himself? There is some point. Because this declaration, if Kṛṣṇa makes, there may be violation because sometimes He violates His promise. But if His devotee promises, it will be never violated. That is Kṛṣṇa's business. "Oh, My devotee has declared this. I must see that it must be executed." That is Kṛṣṇa's position. He's so much attached to His devotee. Therefore He said that: "You declare. If I declare, people may not believe it. But if you declare, they'll believe it. Because you are devotee. Your declaration will never be..."

Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. Kṛṣṇa wants to see that: "My devotee's promise is fulfilled. My promise may not be fulfilled, may be broken." So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness in, at all circumstances, even it's the most dangerous position. We must keep our faith in Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, and there will be no danger.

Thank you very much. (end)



741005SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.25

-

Vṛndāvana, October 5, 1974



Nitāi: "I wish that all those calamities would happen again and again so that we could see You again and again, for seeing You means that we will no longer see repeated births and deaths."



Prabhupāda:



vipadaḥ santu tāḥ śaśvat

tatra tatra jagad-guro

bhavato darśanaṁ yat syād

apunar bhava-darśanam

[SB 1.8.25]



So the people do not know this philosophy: apunar bhava-darśanam. Punar bhava... Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. The rascals, they cannot understand that what is our real difficulty or suffering. Mūḍha. Therefore the mūḍhas, they do not know it, that what is our actual suffering.



We understand from Bhagavad-gītā, na jāyate na mriyate, that "This living entity is never born, never dies." This information we get, very simple information. We are taking information from whom? Kṛṣṇa, jagad-guru, the supreme guru, the original guru. Guru means Kṛṣṇa's representative. A guru cannot be manufactured. Guru means... Kṛṣṇa is jagad-guru, and one who speaks on behalf of Kṛṣṇa or one who speaks as Kṛṣṇa says, he is guru. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, āmāra ājñāya guru hañā: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] "You just become guru on My order." You cannot become guru automatically without following the order of jagad-guru. The government servant... Who is government servant? Who is strictly following the government order, that is government servant. Anyone can say, "I am government servant." No. How you can be? Similarly, guru means who is following the principles given by the jagad-guru. The... He's guru.

So the principle... What is that principle? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is principle. "You give up all these nonsense activities. Simply surrender." So one who has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa fully, no other business, he is guru. This is the definition of guru. There is no difficult to understand who is guru. One who follows strictly the principles laid down by jagad-guru, he is guru. So the jagad-guru says... Because we have to learn everything, especially spiritual subject matter, from guru. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. This is the injunction of the Vedas. If you want to understand Brahman... Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This life, human life, is meant for inquiring about the Absolute Truth: athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is not meant for any other purpose. This life, any life... There is no question of inquiring about "Where shall I eat? Where shall I sleep? Where shall I have sex? How shall I be saved from fear?" There is no such question. This is already arranged. These things are already arranged even for the birds and beasts. They are also living. They are also eating. They are also sleeping. They are also having sex life. They also defend them from danger. So by nature the arrangement is already there. So only thing is, difference, that in other life... There are 8,400,000... So eighty-million, 8,000,000 lives, they do not know except these things. And out of the four millions, eight million, four..., 400,000 human species, so mostly they are like animals. So unless one comes to the Vedic civilization, he's not human being. He's not human being.

So when one comes to the Vedic principle, then the question is athāto brahma jijñāsā. Vedānta-sūtra says, "Now you have come to the real platform. You inquire about Brahman." Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ [SB 11.3.21]. When one is inquisitive to inquire about the higher level questions, brahma-jijñāsā, then he requires a guru. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta: "You are now inquisitive about understanding higher level knowledge, so you must go to a guru." Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta. Who? Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Uttamam. Uttamam means this which is above this darkness. This whole world is darkness. So one who wants to go above darkness... Tamasi mā jyotir gama. The Vedic injunction is: "Don't keep yourself in darkness. Go to the light." That light is Brahman, brahma-jijñāsā.

So one who is inquisitive... The uttama... Udgata-tama yasmāt. Udgata-tama. Tama means ignorance. So in the spiritual world, there is no ignorance. Jñāna. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they simply say, jñāna, jñānavān. But jñāna is not stereotyped. There is varieties of jñāna. Just like in Vṛndāvana, there is jñāna, but there is varieties. Somebody wants to love Kṛṣṇa as servant. Somebody wants to love Kṛṣṇa as friend. Somebody wants to appreciate Kṛṣṇa's opulence. Somebody wants to love Kṛṣṇa as father and mother. Somebody wants to love Kṛṣṇa as conjugal lover, as paramour-never mind. So somebody wants to love Kṛṣṇa as enemy, just like Kaṁsa. That is also vṛndāvana-līlā. He is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa in a different way, how to kill Kṛṣṇa. Pūtanā, she also apparently came as lover of Kṛṣṇa, to offer her breast for sucking; but the internal desire was how to kill Kṛṣṇa. But that is also taken indirect love, indirect love. Anvayāt.

So Kṛṣṇa is jagad-guru. He is the original teacher. That teacher is teaching personally in the Bhagavad-gītā, and we rascals, we do not take the lesson. Just see. Therefore we are mūḍhas. Anyone who is unfit to take the lessons given by the jagad-guru, he is mūḍha. Therefore our test tube is: if one does not know Kṛṣṇa, if one does not know how to follow Bhagavad-gītā, we immediately take him as a rascal. That's all. Never mind he... He may be prime minister, he may be high-court judge, or... No. "No, he is prime minister. He is high-court judge. Still, mūḍhaḥ?" Yes. "How?" Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ: [Bg. 7.15] "He has no knowledge of Kṛṣṇa. He is covered by māyā." Māyayāpahṛta-jñānā āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Therefore he's mūḍha. So straightly preach. Of course, you may say all these things in soft language just to, not to make any agitation, but anyone who does not accept Kṛṣṇa as the jagad-guru and does not take His lessons, he is a rascal. Just like this mūḍha in Jagannātha Purī. He says that "You take next birth. Then you can..." That mūḍha, take him as rascal. Why? He is jagad-guru; he also says, "I am jagad-guru." But he is not jagad-guru. He has not even seen what is jagat. He is a frog. And he is claiming jagad-guru. So he's mūḍha. Kṛṣṇa says. He is mūḍha because he has not taken the lessons given by Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa personally says, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. Pāpa-yoni... Those who are born in the family of mlecchas, yavanas, or the śvapacas, they are called pāpa-yoni. But Kṛṣṇa says, "Even they, the born in the pāpa-yoni..." Yathā bījaṁ yathā, yathā bījaṁ yathā yoni. The father is the bījam. He gives the semina, and mother is the source of birth. So combination of father, mother... So pāpa-yoni. Therefore yoni. Yoni means source of birth. So Kṛṣṇa says pāpa-yonayaḥ, plural number, yonayaḥ. Yoni, this word, śabda, so the plural number, yonayaḥ... There are many different types... That is also mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. What are that? Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ ye 'nye ca pāpāḥ [SB 2.4.18]. These are mentioned, pāpa-yoni. And less than them, if there are still pāpa-yoni, śudhyanti yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ, if such persons take shelter of a pure devotee, he's śudhyanti. This is the shastric injunction. He becomes purified because the pure devotee knows how to purify the pāpa-yoni. He knows. That rascal is not a pure devotee. He does not know. Therefore he thinks, "Unless the birth is changed, how one can be purified?" He does not know the process.

Therefore śāstra says that the Māyāvādīs, rascals, they should not become guru because they do not know how to purify the disciple. The Māyāvādī rascals, they do not know. They think after changing this body, one becomes purified. No. Therefore śāstra says that ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ. A person, vipra, brāhmaṇa, he is expert in six kinds of brahminical business, ṣaṭ-karma. Ṣaṭ means six, and karma means activities. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipraḥ. Nipuṇa. Nipuṇa, very expert. He knows all the brahminical activities. What is that? Paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana dāna-pratigraha. He knows, he is educated. Brāhmaṇa means paṇḍita. He's personally educated, and he educates others. That is brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa does not keep himself educated. That education, that means he is brāhmaṇa, he makes others also brāhmaṇa. That is brāhmaṇa, not that "I remain brāhmaṇa. I remain Vaiṣṇava, and others may suffer." No. Paṭhana-pāṭhana. He must educate others. That is the business of brāhmaṇa. Para-duḥkha-duhkhī. That is Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava means who is unhappy by seeing other's unhappy.

Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, śoce tato vimukha-cetasa māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] "My Lord, so far I am concerned, I have no problem." Naivod..., udvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyāḥ. "This vaitaraṇya, this ocean of nescience..." What is explained here as punar bhava, this is nescience ocean, again and again, swimming. If you perpetually remain in the ocean, and if you have to perpetually struggle for swimming, because in the ocean you have no shelter... Land is your place, but if you are placed in the ocean, however expert... You may be very expert swimmer, but that does not mean that you are happy. You can go on struggling, swimming, very expert swimming, but that does not mean happiness. Similarly, here, in the ocean of nescience, all these rascals are swimming. They are making plans to become happy, but they are not happy. That's a fact. They can try to become happy. That is natural. Everyone unhappy, he wants to become happy. That is called struggle for existence. But they do not know except this. The Darwin's theory, because he's a rascal, he thinks that the struggle is the only business. His only observation is that the struggle is the only business: "Survival of the fittest." But he does not know how to become fit. He does not know. That is mentioned here, apunar bhava-darśanam [SB 1.8.25]. That is fitness, no more struggling, struggling stopped. So that process is not known.

So this is the lack of knowledge at the present moment. We do not take instruction from the jagad-guru, Kṛṣṇa, and still, we are M.A., Ph.D., "Doctor Frog." So this will not help. This will not help. He must know that this māyā... Just like a police. Police business is to give trouble to the criminal so that he can understand that "Government is most powerful. I cannot violate the rules and regulations of the government." This is police business. If you follow, if you obey the government's rules and regulations, then police has nothing to do with you. Police may be. Police department may be. Similarly, mām eva ye prapadyante, if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14], this māyā has nothing to do with you. There may be māyā, hundreds of māyā, thousands of māyā. That doesn't mean that māyā will bother you.

Therefore one who is Kṛṣṇa conscious, advanced in Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is not bothered with sex life. That is the prime factor of disturbing. So,

yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde

nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt

tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne



bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca



The Yāmunācārya said that "Since I have dedicated my life to Kṛṣṇa and I am getting more and more happiness by serving Him, since then, whenever I think of sex life, oh, I spite." So because māyā cannot touch him. This is the test. Yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde. You haven't got to ask anybody, "Whether I am advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Will you give me certificate?" You can have your certificate by yourself, whether you have no more any desire for sex life. That's all, not that he has become impotent. If required, he can give birth to hundreds of children, but he does not like it. That is. That is the certificate. And so long we'll have any such material desire, then Kṛṣṇa is so kind-He will give you chance to take birth again.

Therefore the aim should be... Real happiness is apunar bhava-darśanam. Apunar bhava. This is going on. The jagad-guru is teaching, na jāyate mriyate vā. It requires little intelligence, that "Kṛṣṇa, the jagad-guru, is teaching that living entity is never born and never dies. So why I am taking birth and I am dying?" This much intelligence they haven't got... Because they do not take the instruction of the jagad-guru... He is describing, na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit. Kadācit, at any time. Not that in the past he was dying. Kṛṣṇa says again in the Second Chapter that "All these soldiers and kings who have assembled there, so also you and Me, we existed in the past, we are existing now, and we shall continue to exist in the future." Therefore kadācit. Kadācit means "at any time." "Any time" means past, present and future. Time has got three factors. So at any time. Kadācit means at any time the living entity is never born, never dies. The... If this is the fact, why you do not think, "Then why I am dying? I must have to die. Death is as sure as anything."

So they have no even sense. They are so animalistic. Just like animal. He does not know that death can be avoided. So the animal civilization. This very question... In the Bhagavad-gītā, jagad-guru is teaching that try to understand this fact first of all. This is beginning of Bhagavad-gītā, tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. So there is no death, but you change your body just like you change your garment, you change your shirt and coat. Similarly, you change your body, but the thing is that this changing of body is not very happy task. Tomorrow... Today I am American, very happy, but tomorrow, if I change my body-I become a dog or even cow in America, I'll be sent to slaughterhouse. So changing of body is very risky. You Americans, human being, or Indian human being, anyway, you have got protection. But as soon as you change your body, American cow, then you are for slaughterhouse. Is it not a fact?

So change of body is very risky. Therefore Kuntī says, apunar bhava-darśanam: "Kṛṣṇa, by seeing You I can stop this again and again birth and death. Therefore let all the dangers remain so that we always seek to see You, because we have no other shelter. Whenever we are in danger, we simply ask Your favor. That is our business." So Kṛṣṇa was taking farewell from Kuntī to go back to Dvārakā. So that was the lamentation of Kuntī, that "Kṛṣṇa, You did so much for us. You saved us so many, from so many dangers. Now, because we are situated in our position-we have got the throne, we have got the kingdom-but You are going away? No, no, no, I don't want." Vipadaḥ santu. "Let us remain in danger always. Don't go. Please don't go. I prefer to remain in vipada." This is Kuntī's prayer. "I prefer because... Let there be all kinds of dangers in this life, but I, if, when I see You again and again, I advance. I advance in what?" Apunar bhava-darśanam: [SB 1.8.25] "That I'll not have to take birth again. So let there be dangers always so that I can see You again and again so that this business of taking birth and death again and again be finished."

Just like you have got a dangerous boil. You are applying so many medicines, but it is not curable. The doctor says, "You have to go, surgical operation. So that will be very troublesome, vipada. But a intelligent person will say, "Yes, you do it so that this trouble may be finished." So Kuntī wants that "Again and again, all these dangers may be repeated so that we can think of You, we can see You, so that no more this life of repetition..." But these people, they do not know. This is the real unhappiness. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. This rascal civilization, they do not know. They are taking risk of again and again taking birth.

nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti

na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

[SB 5.5.4]



So long you'll get this material body, you have to suffer. It is meant for suffering. As soon as you get this material body, this body or that body, you have to suffer tri-tāpa. So people do not know... (end)





730418SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.26

-

Los Angeles, April 18, 1973



Devotee:



janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir

edhamāna-madaḥ pumān

naivārhaty abhidhātuṁ vai

tvām akiñcana-gocaram

[SB 1.8.26]



"My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but only by those who are materially exhausted. One who is on the path of material progress, trying to improve himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high education and bodily beauty, cannot approach You with sincere feeling."



Prabhupāda: So these are the disqualifications. Material opulence, these things... Janma, to take birth in very aristocratic family or nation. Just like you American boys and girls, you are born of rich father, mother, nation. So this is, in one sense, it is God's grace. That is also... To take birth in nice family or in nice nation, to become opulent, very rich, to become advanced in knowledge, education, all, everything material. And beauty, these are the gifts of pious activities. Otherwise, why a poor man, he does not attract anyone's attention. But a rich man attracts. An educated man attracts the attention. A fool, rascal, does not attract attention. So similarly in beauty, in opulence, these things are materially very beneficial. Janmaiśvarya-śruta.



But when a person is materially opulent in this way, he becomes intoxicated. "Oh, I am rich man. I am educated man. I have got money." Becomes intoxicated. Therefore we advise... Because they're already intoxicated by these possessions. And again intoxication? Then, by nature, these people are already intoxicated. Intoxicated in this sense... Just like if you drink wine, you become intoxicated. You are flying in the sky. You are thinking like that. You have gone to the heaven. Yes. So these are the effects of intoxication. But the intoxicated person does not know that this intoxication, intoxication will be finished. It is within the time limit. It is not going to continue. That is called illusion. One is intoxication, that "I am very rich. I am very educated, I am very beautiful, I am very..., I am born in high family, in high nation." That's all right. But this intoxication, how long it will exist?

Suppose you are American. You are rich, you are beautiful. You are advanced in knowledge, and you are, you can be proud of become American. But how long this intoxication will exist? As soon as this body's finished, everything is finished. All, all intoxication. Just like... Same thing. You drink something, become intoxicated. But as soon as that intoxication is over, all your intoxicated dreams are over, finished. So this intoxication, if you remain in intoxication, hover in the sky and mental platform... These are mental platform, egoistic platform. Bodily platform.

But you are not this body, not this gross body and the subtle body. This gross body is made of earth, water, air, fire, sky, and the subtle body is made of mind, intelligence and ego. But you do not belong to these eight elements, apareyam. In the Bhagavad-gītā. This is inferior energy of God. Even one is very mentally advanced, he does not know that he's under the influence of inferior energy. He does not know. That is intoxication. Just like intoxicated person does not know in what condition he is. So this opulent position is intoxication. And if you increase your intoxication... The modern civilization is that we are already intoxicated and increase the intoxication. We have to become out of the intoxication situation, but the modern civilization is increasing, that "You become more intoxicated, more intoxicated, and go to hell." This is the position of the modern civilization.

So Kuntī says that this intoxication position, madaḥ, edhamāna-madaḥ [SB 1.8.26], increasing, pumān, such person, naivārhati, they cannot feelingly address: "Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava." They cannot feelingly. That is not possible. Their feeling, spiritual feeling, is lost. They cannot feelingly address because they do not know. "Oh, this God is for poor man. They cannot have sufficient food. Let them go to the church and ask: 'Oh, God, give us our daily bread.' We have got enough bread. Why shall I go to church?" This is their opinion. Therefore nowadays, in the days of economic development, nobody's interested in going to the church or temple. "What this nonsense? Why shall I go to the church for asking bread? We shall develop economic condition and there will be sufficient supply of bread."

Just like Communist country, they do so. The Communist country, they make propaganda. In the villages. They ask the people to go to the church and ask for bread. They, innocent people, they ask as usual: "Oh God, give us our daily bread." Then when they come out of the church, these Communist people ask: "Have you got bread?" They say: "No sir." "All right, ask us." And then they ask: "Oh Communist friend, give me bread." And the Communist friend has taken a truckload of bread: "Take, as much as you like, take. So who is better? We are better or your God is better?" They say: "No sir, you are better." Because they have no intelligence. They do not inquire that: "You rascal, wherefrom you have brought this bread? Have you manufactured in your factory? Can you manufacture grains, the ingredients of bread, in your factory?" Because they have no intelligence.

Śūdra, they are called śūdra. Śūdra means those who have no intelligence. They take it, as it is. But one who is brāhmaṇa, one who is advanced in intelligence, he'll inquire immediately: "You rascal, wherefrom you brought this bread?" That is the question of the brāhmaṇa. You cannot manufacture bread. You have simply transformed God's grain... The grain, the wheat is given by God, and you have simply transformed. But transforming something from something, that does not become your property.

Just like I give some carpenter some wood, some implement, and salary. And he makes a very nice, beautiful closet. To whom this closet will belong. To the carpenter, or the man who has supplied the ingredients? To whom it will belong? The carpenter cannot say that: "Because I have transformed this wood into such nice closet, it is mine." No. It is not yours. Similarly, who is supplying the ingredients, rascal? That is Kṛṣṇa's. Kṛṣṇa says: bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva... prakṛtir me aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. "This is My property." You have not created this sea, the land, the sky, the fire, the air. It is not your creation. You can transform these material things, tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ vinimayaḥ, by mixing and transforming. You take earth from the land, you take water from the sea and mix it and put it in the fire. It becomes a brick. And then you pile up all this brick and make a skyscraper building. But wherefrom you got this ingredient, rascal, that you are claiming this skyscraper yours? This is intelligent question. You have stolen the property of God, and you are claiming that it is your property. This is knowledge. This is knowledge.

So those who are intoxicated, they cannot understand. They think: "It is my property. I have stolen, I have stolen this land of America from the Red Indians. Now it is my property." But he does not know that he's a thief. He's a thief. Stena eva sa ucyate [Bg. 3.12]. In the Bhagavad-gītā. One who takes the property of God, and claims his own, he's a thief. Stena eva sa ucyate. Therefore we have got communistic idea, the devotee, Kṛṣṇa conscious person. We have got Kṛṣṇa conscious communistic program. What is that? That everything belongs to God. Just like they are thinking that everything belongs to the state. These communists, these Moscow, Moscowites, or the Russian, or the Chinese, they are thinking state-wise. But we are thinking not state-wise. We are thinking God-wise. Everything belongs to God. The same philosophy. You extend. Simply you require little intelligence, little intelligence. Why do you think that this state belongs to a few number of people? If you think that there are population, American population, this land of America belongs to this population. Why do you think like that? You think this is property of God.

So every living entity is a child of God. God is the Supreme Father. Kṛṣṇa says: ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā. "I am the seed-giving father of all living entities." Sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya [Bg. 14.4]. "In whichever form they may live, they're all living entities, they're My sons." Actually that is the fact. We all living entities, we are sons of God. But we have forgotten. Therefore we are fighting. Just like in a nice family, if anyone knows: "Father is supplying us food. So we brothers, why should we fight?" Similarly if we become God conscious, if we become Kṛṣṇa conscious, this fighting will be over. "I am American, I am Indian, I am Russian, I am Chinese." These all nonsense things will be over. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice. As soon as people become Kṛṣṇa conscious, this fighting, this political fighting, national fighting, will be over immediately. Because they'll come to real consciousness that everything belongs to God. And as the children, a child of the family has got right to take advantages from the father, similarly if everyone is part and parcel of God, if everyone is child of God, then everyone has got the right to use the property of the father. So that right is not that right, the right belongs to the human being. According to Bhagavad-gītā, this right belongs to all living entities. Never mind whether he's living being or animal or trees, or birds or beast or insect. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We do not think in terms of that simply my brother is good, I am good. And all bad. This kind of narrow, crippled consciousness we hate, we kick out. We think: paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find.

vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 5.18]



One who is paṇḍita, one who is learned, he sees every living entity on the equal footing. Therefore a Vaiṣṇava is so compassionate. Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau. They can actually do the beneficial work to the human being. They are seeing, actually feeling that all these living entities, they are part and parcel of God. Someway or other, they have fallen in the contact of this material world, and, according to different karma, they have assumed different types of bodies. So paṇḍita, those who are learned, they have no discrimination that: "This is animal, they should be sent to the slaughterhouse, and this is man, he'll eat it." No. A actually Kṛṣṇa conscious person, he's kind to everyone. Why the animals should be slaughtered. Therefore our philosophy is no meat-eating. No meat-eating. You cannot. So they'll not hear us. "Oh, what this nonsense? This is our food. Why shall I not eat?" Because edhamāna-madaḥ [SB 1.8.26]. He's intoxicated rascal. He'll not hear the real fact.



Just like in the state, because a man is lying street, poor man, has no help, can I kill him? Will the state excuse me? "No I have killed one poor man. He had no necessity. There was no need for him in the society. So why should he live?" Will the state excuse me that: "You have done very nice work."? No. That poor man is also the subject of the citizen of the state. You cannot kill. Why not expand this philosophy, that the poor animal-the trees, the birds, beasts-they're also sons of God. You cannot kill. You'll be responsible. You'll be hanged. Just like by killing one poor man on the street you'll be hanged. Never mind it is poor. Similarly in God's eyes, there is no such discrimination. What to speak of God, even a learned man's vision, there is no such discrimination, "This is poor, this is rich, this is black, this is white, this is..." No. Everyone is living entity, part and parcel of God.

Therefore Vaiṣṇava is the only benefactor for all the living entities. They try to elevate. A Vaiṣṇava tries to elevate all living entities to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau. Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, Gosvāmīs. Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau. A Vaiṣṇava has no such view that this is Indian, this is American, this is... Somebody questioned me somewhere that: "Why you have come to America?" Why not I shall come? I am servant of God, and this is kingdom of God. Why shall I not come? It is artificial to check me. If you check me, then you'll commit sinful activities. Just like government servant, police, has got right to enter any house, anyone's house. There is no trespass. Similarly a God's servant has got the right to go anywhere. Nobody can check. If he checks, then he'll be punished. Because everything belongs to God.

So in this way we have to see things as they are. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not a crippled idea. Therefore Kuntī says: janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna-madaḥ pumān [SB 1.8.26]. Those who are increasing intoxication, such persons cannot become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Such persons cannot become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Edhamāna-madaḥ. Because they're intoxicated. Just like a intoxicated person, he is now fully intoxicated and talking nonsense. If somebody says: "My dear brother, you are talking nonsense. Here is father. Here is mother." Who cares for it? He's intoxicated. Similarly all these rascals, intoxicated rascals, if you say: "Here is God," they cannot understand. Because intoxicated. Therefore Kuntī says: tvām akiñcana-gocaram. So it is a good qualification, when one becomes freed from these intoxicants. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī... Good birth, good opulence, good education, good beauty. They can be used. When the same person becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious... Just like you American boys and girls are doing. You were intoxicated. But when the intoxication is over, you are doing better service, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like when you go to India, they're surprised how these American boys and girls have become so mad after God. Because that, that teaches them that: "You rascal. You learn. Because you imitate from the Western countries. Now see here, the Western country boys and girls are dancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Now you imitate." That was my policy.

So it is being fructified now. Yes. So everything can be utilized, Good parentage, if you utilize. If you remain intoxicated, do not utilize it, then it is not very good asset. But you can utilize it for good purpose. If you asset, if you utilize the asset for Kṛṣṇa's purpose, it will be better position. The same example. Just like zero. Zero has no value. But as soon as you put one before zero, it becomes ten immediately. Immediately ten. Another zero, hundred. Another zero, thousand. Similarly these janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī. So long you remain intoxicated with, it is all zero. But as soon as you put Kṛṣṇa, it becomes ten, hundred, thousand, millions. Yes. That is the opportunity. So you have got this opportunity. You American boys and girls, you have got this opportunity. You have got zeroes. Put Kṛṣṇa. You become ten. Yes.

Thank you very much. (end)



741006SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.26

-

Māyāpura, October 6, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but only by those who are materially exhausted. One who is on the path of material progress, trying to improve himself with respectable parentage, great opulence, high education and bodily beauty, cannot approach You with sincere feeling."



Prabhupāda:



janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir

edhamāna-madaḥ pumān

naivārhaty abhidhātuṁ vai

tvām akiñcana-gocaram

[SB 1.8.26]



Akiñcana. Akiñcana means na kiñcana. Kiñcana means "something." So na kiñcana means "one who has nothing to possess." He is called na kiñcana. Or one who is fully convinced that "Nothing belongs to me," he is akiñcana. Here, in the material world, it is just the opposite. Everyone is thinking that "I have got something." I have seen long, long ago, maybe fifty years ago in Howrah station. I was going somewhere. So one man, his luggage was the half-burned some fuel wood and some rejected things. He was carrying as luggage half-burned fuel wood. He thought that "This is my possession. I have saved this." So he was taking to his home. That means everyone, even though it is very insignificant, still, everyone thinks that "I have got something." This is the material disease.



So this is the illusion. Therefore śāstra says, ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam. Janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. How a man becomes entangled in this material world, everything is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam. This material world means sex attraction, mithunī-bhāva. The man is searching after woman; woman is searching after man. This is material life, in human life, in bird's, beast's... Just these sparrows-they are trying to make some nest on this chandelier to enjoy sex and lay eggs. Therefore they require some place. The basic principle is sex. First of all sex life, then other necessities. First of all, seeing, man and woman. Then, when they unite, puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ [SB 5.5.8]. When they unite and they get children, then the hard knot of heart-"She, my wife. She's (He's) my husband. We cannot separated..." Hard knot. Hṛdaya-granthi. Already there is attraction. Now this attraction becomes more and more tight, after unity. Then we require a place to live together, "Home, sweet home." Yes, very sweet. The whole day and night, work. And this is moha. He is working hard day and night. There is not a single moment leisure, and still, he's: "Sweet home." This is illusion.

So ataḥ gṛha. As soon as a man and woman or a male-female, either bird, beast or human being or demigods, everyone... Then he requires home, gṛha, then land to produce food, gṛha-kṣetra, then children. Gṛha-kṣetra. Because when a man is married, the social life, if he has no children, that is means vacant home. Putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has said, avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyam: "One who is not educated, his life is zero." Avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyam. And diśaḥ śūnyā abāndhavāḥ: "And if you want to go to some foreign place, if that place is not a holy place..." Because according to Vedic system, they go on touring to see holy places, tīrtha-sthāna, or to a friend's house. "So if you are going to some foreign countries, if there is no friend and no devatā, then it is useless." Diśaḥ śūnyā abāndhavāḥ. Or putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam: "You are married, but you have no children. That is also vacant, zero." Putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam. Sarva-śūnyā daridratā: "But if you are poor, then everything is zero." Your vidyā is zero. Your home is zero. And your friend is zero because nobody will care you.

So real point is putram. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-suta. Suta means putra. And according to... (aside about birds?) Drive them. So required, married life requires children. Otherwise, it is vacant. So Bhāgavata says that ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8], that "I possess..." In another place it is said that we are thinking very secure: "I have got a nice body, stout and strong. I take daily exercise in the morning and I keep myself fit." Ataḥ... That verse is...? The...? Deha-kalatrādi. "I have got good wife..." Sainya means ātma-sainya, su, asatsu, ātmā... We are thinking, "I am in the family life. I am very happy. I am very secure. I have got my good wife, I have got my good children, and so many things... I have got good bank balance. So I am secure." So śāstra says, pramattaḥ tasya nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu. I was forgetting.

Deha and apatya. Deha means this body, and apatya means children. Dehāpatya-kalatra. Kalatra means wife. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu ātma-sainyeṣu [SB 2.1.4]. Just like when a king fights, he has got some soldiers, similarly, our life in this material world is simply fighting. There is always some danger. Just like Kuntī says, vipadaḥ santu śaśvat tāḥ. It is simply full of dangers. So when there is danger, we have to fight. That is material life. That is called struggle for existence. So how we are fighting? Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣu [SB 2.1.4]. This is our soldier. "I have got a good body, strong body, and I have got my children, my grown-up boys. I have got very good wife." Ādi. This is the ādi. This is the beginning of thinking, "I have got..." Kiñcana. This is kiñcana, "I have got something." Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu. They are considered as ātma-sainya: "They are my soldiers. Whenever I am sick, they will help me. If I go out, then who will help me? If I leave my home, then if I fall sick, who will take care of me? No, no. I am not going out of home." Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣu. That is my soldier. We are fighting with the soldier, accompanied by soldier.

Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api [SB 2.1.4]. Asat. They will not stay. I have got experience. Everyone has got... My... I was children; you were children. Now, I had father to take protection or other relatives, friends. But now they are gone. Asatsu. Everything is finished. So these soldiers, either as father or son, the father is finished; the son will be, also will be finished. Asatsu api. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api, teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanam. These soldiers will be killed. Teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. He knows; he has got experience. Still, he is blind, that "These soldiers will not be able to give me protection. When death will come, they'll not be able. But my real miserable condition is birth, death and old age and disease. So when I fall sick, they can help. They're eager to help. But real help they cannot give me." One should understand that. Ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api. They will be killed. Real protection is Kṛṣṇa. That we do not know.

So, so long we possess all these things... That is explained here, janma, aiśvarya, śruta, śrī. These are good material possessions: to born in high family, aristocratic family, or brāhmaṇa family, kṣatriya family. These were considered high parentage, heritage. Nowadays, everyone is śūdra. That is another thing. Nobody can be proud of his birth. So janma and aiśvarya. If we possess land, home and children, wife, bank balance, that is called aiśvarya. Janmaiśvarya-śruta. And education. "I am philosopher. I am scientist. I am this, poet." So education. That is called śruta. Śruta. Especially Vedic knowledge, śruti. So janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhiḥ. And śrī, beauty. So unless one is very happy or born in good family, unless one..., he cannot have bodily beauty. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna, edhamāna-madaḥ [SB 1.8.26]. The more we possess these things, then we become intoxicated. It is already illusion. Gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ [SB 5.5.8]. So that illusion becomes more and more stronger. And that is called madaḥ.

So they are not interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the position at the present moment. Everyone is trying that "I must have a good position in the society." People will say, "Oh, his house is very nice." Or everyone is trying to be educated to acquire money. In the Western countries, these are very prominent, janmaiśvarya-śruta. They are not very much interested about the janma, but aiśvarya, śruta, they are interested, and śrī. So everywhere, more or less, that is the... So these are disqualification for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In the material world they are very good qualification, advancement of material civilization. But here Kuntī says, janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna-madaḥ pumān, naivārhati: "He does not desire." Na eva, naiva, arhati.

Therefore the Vedic civilization is voluntary giving up, voluntary giving up. Big, big king, Mahārāja Bharata, the emperor of the whole world, Bhāratavarṣa. Therefore it is called Bhāratavarṣa. At the age of twenty-four years, he gave up his kingdom, his young wife. There are many, many instances. So to become voluntarily akiñcana, "I have nothing. I don't possess anything." Here in this material world, everyone is trying to possess more-more wealth, more education, more beauty, more family prestige, aristocracy. This is materialism. And spiritualism means just the opposite. Therefore people are not attracted to spiritualism. I have told you that I was thinking when I was dreaming that "Guru Mahārāja is asking me to come out, and I was going..." Did I say this story? Yes. So I was afraid: "Oh, I have to give up my family. And I become... I have to become sannyāsī? And I have to go behind my Guru Mahārāja? No, no, it is horrible." I was thinking. But he forced me to it. He is so kind that he forced me, somehow or other. That is mercy. I can understand now that how much merciful was my Guru Mahārāja that he forced me to take this life.

So therefore it was enquired by Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja... There is a verse in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that... This question was raised by Parīkṣit Mahārāja to Śukadeva Gosvāmī. So "Your Honor, we see just the opposite thing, that one who is devotee of Lord Viṣṇu, the wife, the husband of the goddess of fortune, they become gradually poorer." Because a Vaiṣṇava, generally, they remain humble and poor, brāhmaṇa also. "Whereas the worshiper of Lord Śiva..." Lord Śiva means..., at least, he voluntarily accepts all poverty. His wife is Durgā devī, so powerful. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā [Bs. 5.44]. She can make a new universe, she is so powerful. But this couple, Lord Śiva and Pārvatī, they have no house even to live. They live under the tree, so poor, no residential house even. "So when one becomes devotee of Lord Śiva, he gets material opulence. He becomes rich. He gets good wife. He gets all material opulences. And when one becomes the devotee of Viṣṇu, the husband of goddess of fortune, he becomes poor. Why this contradiction? This is contradiction. The worshiper of the Lord of Goddess of Fortune is becoming poorer, and the worshiper of the vagabond, who has no house even, lives underneath a bael tree... That is also not very good. And his devotee becomes so opulent materially. So why this difference?" These are statements. I have stated several times.

So Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Parīkṣit that "This very question was raised by your grandfather, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, to Lord Kṛṣṇa, and what He replied I'll say." So in that connection he gave quotation of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa said to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira... Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, by hint, asked Kṛṣṇa that "We are Your friend, and why we are put into such tribulations that we have lost our kingdom? We are now living in the forest. Our wife is insulted. Why?" So the reply was that yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ [SB 10.88.8]. Means... Kṛṣṇa said that "When I make one especially favored, then I take away all his riches to make him niṣkiñcana." Niṣkiñcana means one becomes almost poverty-stricken. Nobody cares for him. Then he become fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. Just like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, hā hā prabhu nanda-suta, vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta, koruṇā karoho ei-bāro, narottama-dāsa koy..., koruṇā..., nā ṭheliho rāṅgā pāy, tomā bine ke āche āmāra. This position is very nice, niṣkiñcana. "I have lost everything. I am now not cared by my family, my friends. So everything I have lost. Therefore I am forced to come to You, surrender. So don't kick me, kick me out. Please give me shelter because I have no other shelter." Tomā bine ke āche āmāra: "I... There is nobody else to take my care except Your Lordship." This is called niṣkiñcana.

So actually that is the position. So long we shall think that "For my protection, this arrangement is there for my protection. This arrangement is there...," that is not niṣkiñcana. Niṣkiñcana means when I'll think, I'll be actually under the understanding that "I have no other protection except Kṛṣṇa," and then I fully surrender, that is the best qualification for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore it is said, naivārhaty abhidhātuṁ vai tvām: "Unto You." Who are You? Akiñcana-gocaram: "You can be understood only by a person who has lost everything, who has lost everything." Then the Kuntī's purpose was that "When we lost everything, You were with us. And now we have got kingdom. We have got prestige. We have got so many things. Now You are going away to Dvārakā?" So tvām akiñcana-gocaram.

So this is Kuntī's realization. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna-madaḥ... [SB 1.8.26]. Therefore for spiritual advancement, if one is interested, they should not be too much attached to material things if you want to advance in spiritual life. Janmaiśvarya... Because this will be entanglement. The more and more we shall think, "This is mine. This is mine." Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This is illusion. Nothing belongs to him, but by illusion, he will think, "This is mine. This is mine." Just like we have got this nice, grand building in this district. If we think, "This is my building" or "My building," then there will be mishap. My Guru Mahārāja said. Personally he said that "When we were living in a rented house, if we could collect two hundred, three hundred rupees... We were living very nicely at Ultadanga. And since then-Jayavidatta has given us this marble palace, Gauḍīya-Maṭha-there is friction between our men. 'Who will occupy this room? Who will occupy that room? Who will be proprietor of room?' " Tīrtha Mahārāja... Kuñjabābā was giving one tablet, that "This is..." Everyone is planning in different way. So Guru Mahārāja said... He was personally instructing me that "If I could sell this marble of this temple, and secure some money, and if I could print some books, that would have been better. That would have been better."

Therefore I am so much after books. If we forget our position, if we become pound-shilling man, property man, then Kṛṣṇa will be finished, because Kṛṣṇa is akiñcana-gocara. Therefore we should always remember that we possess this nice house not for our comfort, but people will come because they are not accustomed. If we would have invited people, "Come and sit down on this Māyāpura ground," no, there was no possibility. Therefore we must possess Kṛṣṇa's temple very nice so that people will come, and we shall preach. That is philosophy, not that because we have got this nice house, therefore we should be very much attached. Attachment must be there-for Kṛṣṇa's service. The temple must be very cleansed. The establishment must be very nice. What for? For attracting devotees. This is the purpose, not for our personal benefit. That is the way. My Guru Mahārāja introduced these big, big palaces, temple. That is the contribution of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, because the Gosvāmīs, they worshiped Kṛṣṇa in a different method-going to Vṛndāvana, living underneath the tree, and one night underneath one tree, next night, next tree. This vairāgya is not possible for the Western people. Therefore we require this building. That is the contribution. Unless they live comfortably, it is not possible. And we have to preach all over the world.

So nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe. For Kṛṣṇa's... Therefore you'll find in India, there are many very big, big, costly temples, not personal house. You'll never find all over India. You go and see. They have spent lots of money for temple. That was the Oriental civilization. Even the Muhammadans, they would construct very costly mosque, but they would live in huts. That was the intention. One... When... Whenever one is a little bit rich, he'll find out how to spend it for Kṛṣṇa, not for his sense gratification. Just like this Madana-mohana temple was constructed by a big merchant. He approached Sanātana Gosvāmī: "Sir, what can I do for you? I want to serve you." So Sanātana Gosvāmī said, "My Madana-mohana... I am living underneath the tree, and my Madana-mohana is hanging. So if you can, you can construct a temple for Madana-mohana." Similarly, Mahārāja Mansingh approached Rūpa Gosvāmī. They never constructed big, big temple for their own living purpose, but Kṛṣṇa's purpose. That is the way. For Kṛṣṇa, we must have everything very gorgeous and first class, but not for me. That is akiñcana. Personally we should not possess anything, simply for Kṛṣṇa.

So that attitude should be maintained because here it is said, tvām akiñcana-gocaram [SB 1.8.26]. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu also, he said that niṣkiñcanasya. Here it is called akiñcana. And the same thing in different way, niṣkiñcana. Akiñcana."A" means negation, and "na" means negation. Niṣkiñcana. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. Bhagavad-bhajana, to advance in spiritual life, to be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's devotional service, that is the aim of life. That is the purpose of human form of life. So for him, he should always remain niṣkiñcana. Niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. So therefore Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī, he remained niṣkiñcana. And his disciple, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, he also remained niṣkiñcana although he possessed so many temples, because nothing was for his personal..., but for Kṛṣṇa.

So one may question that "Your Guru Mahārāja was sitting on the ground in a municipal lavatory..." Because he did not like that "Anybody should disturb me," he was sitting by the side of municipal lavatory. Because so many people will come for darśana and āśīrvāda, he did not like it. He did not like to be disturbed by these āśīrvāda. You see? They will not take any spiritual instruction. They are thinking that "Here is a saintly person, and he'll bless me. So I have got now one thousand. I'll take ten thousand." That's all. Therefore they come. They do not come to take any spiritual instruction. Therefore it is botheration. It is botheration. So Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja did not like this botheration. He was sitting by the side of a municipal lavatory so that "These rascal will not come out of the bad smell and will not disturb me." You see? So Mahārāja Mahīndrānandī, he was one of the... He had organized one saṅkīrtana festival. So he came to Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja and to invite him. So after many requests, Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja said, "Mahārāja, you have got many tenants. You are Mahārāja. Why you are trying to make me your tenant? Because you are rich man, you also want... As your tenants carries your order, so you also want me. So why you are...?" "No, sir, no. You are my lord. Whatever you say, I shall carry out." "Will you carry out?" "Why not?" So he said that "Don't go home. Sit down here. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." He fled away. (laughter) You see. So he was very humorous also, Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī, that "If you are so obedient, then I ask you, 'Don't go home. Better give up your dress and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa here.' "

So he was akiñcana. So similarly... Just like Rāmānanda Rāya. He was gṛhastha, very opulent, governor. He is also akiñcana because nothing was possessed by personal; everything for Jagannātha. This is distinction. On one side, Rūpa Gosvāmī, and one side, Rāmānanda Rāya. And Rāmānanda Rāya is the most confidential devotee of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, although he's a gṛhastha, because he is akiñcana, as akiñcana as Rūpa Gosvāmī. So we have to become akiñcana. Akiñcana. Then we shall realize Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is said, akiñcana-gocaram: "You are understandable only by a person who does not possess so-called material opulence." So we should always remember that whatever we are trying for material..., it is all for Kṛṣṇa, nothing for us. So that people may... Big, gorgeous temple means people will be attracted to come here, and we'll distribute Kṛṣṇa's prasādam. The aim is some way or other to turn them to convert them into Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then you remain akiñcana. And if we think that "We have got now very big house. We shall live comfortably and sleep comfortably," then na gocaram, then Kṛṣṇa will not be realized. Then that comfort will be realized only, not Kṛṣṇa. Akiñcana-gocaram. We should always remember this.

This is... Kuntī devī is saying, tvām akiñcana-gocaram [SB 1.8.26]. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu said also, niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. Bhagavad-bhajana, devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, if one is interested, he should not desire anything material possession. Material... Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajano... And Bhagavad-bhajana, why required? Now, pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya. We are rotting in this material world. We have to cross over the nescience ocean, and go to Vaikuṇṭha. That is bhagavad-bhajana. Bhagavad-bhajana does not mean to increase our material possessions. That is dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41]. These are material things. People become religious to increase their economic condition better, dharma artha, generally. They want to... Just like there are so many so-called saintly persons. They advertise that "If you give me one, I shall give you ten." Magic, gold manufacturing, or some cloth and they get more... People are after them. But akiñcana. We have nothing to give. So they do not come to us.

So Kṛṣṇa is akiñcana-gocaram. We should always remember that, that if we desire to be materially happy, and if we think, "Some material possession and prestige in the society and becoming a learned scholar... I shall be getting more and more adoration from the society. I'll be a big man," then Kṛṣṇa will be finished. Kṛṣṇa will be finished. Kṛṣṇa is akiñcana-gocara. That is the instruction of this verse. Naivārhaty abhidhātum. These persons, janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna [SB 1.8.26], increasing material opulence, they does not, they do not deserve approaching Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will be approached by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura when he says, tomā bine ke āche āmāra: "I have no other alternative than to take shelter at the lotus feet of Your Lordship. Please give me..." We should always remember this. Then we shall be able to make progress in spiritual life.

Thank you very much. (end)



730419SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.27

-

Los Angeles, April 19, 1973



Devotee:



namo 'kiñcana vittāya

nivṛtta-guṇa-vṛttaye

ātmārāmāya śāntāya

kaivalya-pataye namaḥ

[SB 1.8.27]



"My obeisances are unto You, who are the property of the materially impoverished. You have nothing to do with the actions and reaction of the material modes of nature. You are self-satisfied, and therefore You are the most gentle and are master of the monists."



Prabhupāda: So namaḥ akiñcana-vittāya. Materially impoverished. This is the first qualification of a devotee. One who does not possess anything of this material world, he simply possess Kṛṣṇa. That is akiñcana-vitta. Akiñcana means one who has lost everything of material possession. Because if you have got a, a small tinge of idea that "I want to become happy materially in this way," so long you have to accept a body.



The nature is so kind that in whichever way you want to enjoy this material world, she will give you a suitable body under the direction of the Lord. Because Lord is situated everyone's heart. So He knows everything, that you still want something material. He will give you. "Yes, you take it." Kṛṣṇa wants that you get full experience that by material gain, you'll never be happy. This is Kṛṣṇa's business. It's full freedom. Although we have got minute quantity of freedom, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has got full freedom, but the freedom quality is there in me because I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. The chemical composition. The drop of sea water has got a drop of salt also. Although it is not comparable with the salt containing in the sea water. But the salt chemical is there. This is our understanding. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Whatever we have got in minute quantity, the same thing, in fullness is there in Kṛṣṇa. In fullness. Just like Kṛṣṇa says: mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham.

Now we have got a propensity to take other's thing. You can say it is stealing. We have got that propensity. Why? Now Kṛṣṇa has got. Kṛṣṇa is known as the Butter-thief. The beginning, thiefing, stealing. So unless that stealing propensity's there, how I can get? But Kṛṣṇa's stealing and my stealing is different. Because I am materially contaminated, therefore my stealing is abominable. Whereas the same stealing in the spiritual absolute platform is so nice that enjoyable. Mother Yaśodā enjoying the activities of stealing by Kṛṣṇa. That is the difference. Material and spiritual. Any activities spiritual, that is all good, and any activity, material, that is all bad. This is the difference. Here, the so-called morality, goodness, they're all bad. And in the spiritual world, so-called immorality is also good. That you have to understand.

Just like to dance with others' wives at dead of night, this is immoral. Everyone knows. At least in the Vedic civilization, it is not allowed. A young woman is going to another young man at dead of night to dance with him. This will never be allowed in India. Still it is prohibited. But we find that all the gopīs as soon as they heard the flute immediately they came. So from material conception it is immoral, but from the spiritual conception, it is the greatest morality. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu says: ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā. "Oh, there is no better mode of worship than what was conceived by the vraja-vadhūs, the damsels of Vṛndāvana." Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very strict about women. In His family life also, He never played any joke with women. He was very joking. But all, all with men. He never played any joke with women. No. Perhaps only once He played joke with His wife, Viṣṇu-priya. When Śacīmātā was searching after something, she, He simply played a joking word: "Maybe your daughter-in-law has taken it." That is the only joking we find in His whole life. Otherwise, He was very strict. No woman could come, when He was sannyāsī, could come near Him to offer obeisances. They would offer obeisances from a distant place. But He says: ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā. He says that there is no conception of worshiping better than what was conceived by the vraja-vadhūs. And what was the vraja-vadhūs' conception? That they wanted to love Kṛṣṇa, at any risk. So this is not immoral. That we have to understand. Anything in relationship.

Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja is standing, and his father is being killed. Is it moral? Would you like to see your father being killed in your presence and you stand. You don't protest. Is that moral? Nobody will approve it, that this is moral. But actually it so happened that Hiraṇyakaśipu was being killed... The picture is here. And Prahlāda Mahārāja is trying to garland-the killer. "My dear Lord, Killer, You take this garland. You are killing my father. You are very good boy." You see. This is, this is spiritual understanding. Nobody will sanction that you, if you cannot protect your father, you must protest, you must cry that: "Here is my father is being killed. Come on, come on, come on. Help..." No. He's prepared with the garland. And when he was killed, he said to Nṛsiṁhadeva: "My dear Lord, now my father is killed. So everyone is happy. You now wind up Your angry mood." Nobody is unhappy. He said this very word. Modeta sādhur api vṛścika-sarpa-hatyā [SB 7.9.14]. Modeta sādhur api. A sādhu, a saintly person never approves that one should be killed. Never. Even an animal. A sādhu does not approve. Why animal should be killed? That is sādhu's business. But Prahlāda Mahārāja says: modeta sādhur api. A sādhu, a saintly person, is also pleased... When? When a scorpion or a snake is killed. They're also living entity. A sādhu is never satisfied seeing another living entity being killed, but Prahlāda Mahārāja says "Even a sādhu is pleased when a snake is killed or a scorpion is killed. So my father is just like snake and scorpion. So he's killed. Therefore everyone is happy." Everyone was... Such demon, who simply troubles the devotees, such demon, a very dangerous demon. So when such demon is killed, even saintly persons are satisfied. Although saintly persons, they do not want anyone should be killed. So Kṛṣṇa is akiñcana-vitta. One who has lost everything materially, for him, Kṛṣṇa is the only solace.

So Kṛṣṇa is so kind that if anyone wants material prosperity, and, at the same time, wants to become a devotee... That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta that: "Somebody wants Me. At the same time, he wants material prosperity. He's a fool. He's a fool." Therefore people are very much afraid, coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. "Oh, my material prosperity will be finished." Because they want, don't, do not want that. They want to stick to... Generally, they go to church, go to temple for material prosperity. "God give us our daily bread." This is material prosperity. Or "Give me this, give me that." But they're also considered as pious because they have approached God.

The atheist class, they do not approach. They say: "Why shall I approach God? I shall create my wealth, by advancement of science, I shall be happy." They are duṣkṛtinaḥ, most sinful, one who says like that, that: "For my prosperity, I shall depend on my own strength, my own knowledge." They are duṣkṛtinaḥ. But one who thinks that "My prosperity depends on the mercy of God," they're pious. They're pious. Because, after all, without sanction of God, nothing can be achieved. That's a fact. Tāvad tanur idaṁ tanūpekṣitānām(?). That is also statement of That we have discovered so many counter-acting methods for diminishing our distressed condition, but if it is not sanctioned by God, these counteracting proposition will fail.

The example is... Just like you have discovered nice medicine, very qualified physician. That's all right. But when a man is sick, ask the physician: "Can you guarantee the life of this patient?" He'll never say: "No, I can do so. I cannot do that. I try my best. That's all." That means the sanction is in the hand of God. "I am simply instrument. If God does not like that you should live, then all my medicines, all my scientific knowledge, medical knowledge, will fail." The ultimate sanction is Kṛṣṇa's. They, the foolish persons, they do not know. They are, they are, therefore they are called mūḍha, rascals. That whatever you are doing, that is very good, but, ultimately, if it is not sanctioned by God, by Kṛṣṇa, this will be all failure. They do not know that. Therefore they are mūḍhas. And a devotee knows that: "Whatever intelligence, I have got, I may try to become happy, if Kṛṣṇa does not sanction, I'll never be happy." This is the distinction between devotee and nondevotee.

So Kṛṣṇa says that: "Anyone who is trying to approach Me, to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, at the same time, he wants to become materially happy, he's not very intelligent." That means he's wasting his time. Our main business is how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is the main business of human life. But if we waste our time for material improvement, and forget chanting, then that is loss, great loss. So such mentality, Kṛṣṇa says: āmi vijña ei mūrkhe viṣaya kene diba. "So this rascal is asking some material prosperity from Me by discharging devotional service. Why shall I give him material prosperity? Rather, whatever he has got, I shall take it away." Yes. (laughter) It is not laughing. When it is taken away, we become very morose. But that is the test. That is stated by Kṛṣṇa Himself to Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja: yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad dhanaṁ śanaiḥ [SB 10.88.8].

Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja indirectly inquired from Kṛṣṇa that: "We are completely dependent on you, and still we are suffering materially so much, that our kingdom is taken away, our wife is insulted, we were attempted to be burned in a house." So Kṛṣṇa said: "Yes that is My first business." Yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad dhanaṁ śanaiḥ. "If I specially favor anybody, then I take away all his sources of income." Very dangerous. Yes. I have got my practical experience in this connection. Yes. That is Kṛṣṇa's special favor. I do not wish to narrate, but it is a fact. It is a fact. My Guru Mahārāja ordered me when I was twenty-five years old that: "You go and preach." But I thought: "First of all, I shall become a rich man, and I shall use that money for preaching work."

So that's a long history. I got good opportunity for becoming very rich man in business. And some astrologer told me that: "You should have become like Birla." So there was some chances, very good chances. I was manager in a big chemical factory. I started my own factory, the business was very successful. But everything was dismantled. I was forced to come to this position to carry out my order of my Guru Mahārāja. Akiñcana-vittāya. When everything was finished, then I took Kṛṣṇa, that: "You are the only..." Therefore Kṛṣṇa is akiñcana-vitta. When one becomes finished of all his material opulences

And now I am realizing that I have not lost. I've gained. I've gained. That's a fact. So to lose material opulences for Kṛṣṇa's sake is not loss. It is the greatest gain. Therefore it is said: akiñcana-vitta. When one becomes akiñcana, nothing to possess, everything finished, then Kṛṣṇa becomes the only riches for such person. Because he's devotee. Just like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says:

hā hā prabhu nanda-suta, vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta

karuṇā karaha ei-bāra



narottama-dāsa koy, nā ṭheliha rāṅgā pāy

tomā bine ke āche āmāra



This position, that: "Kṛṣṇa, except Yourself, I have nothing to claim. I have nothing, no possession. So don't neglect me because You are my only possession." This position is very nice. When we do not depend on anything material, simply depend on Kṛṣṇa. That is first-class position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is addressed: akiñcana-vittāya. "When one becomes impoverished materially, You are the only wealth." Akiñcana-vittāya. Namaḥ akiñcana-vitta,... nivṛtta-guṇa-vṛttaye. "The result is that when one takes You as the only possession, immediately he becomes free from the activities of this material nature." That means immediately he's posted on the transcendental position of the Absolute. Akiñcana-vittāya nivṛtta-guṇa-vṛttaye, ātmārāmāya [SB 1.8.27]. "At that time, he becomes happy with You, as You are Kṛṣṇa, You are happy with Yourself..."



Because Kṛṣṇa has no difference between body and self. He's simply self, spirit soul. So we have got now this body and self. I am self, but I possess this body. Then when actually we become dependent on Kṛṣṇa, as Kṛṣṇa is self-satisfied, similarly we can be also self-satisfied with Kṛṣṇa. Kaivalya, kaivalya-pataye namaḥ. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they, monists, they want to become one with the Supreme. As Supreme is self-satisfied, they also want to be self-satisfied by becoming one with the Supreme. Our philosophy is also the same, kaivalya. But we depend on Kṛṣṇa. We do not become one with, one with Kṛṣṇa. That is oneness. If we simply agree to abide by the order of Kṛṣṇa, there is no disagreement, that is oneness.

These Māyāvādī philosophers, they think that: "Why shall I keep my individual, separate existence? I shall become merged into..." That is not possible. Because we are created, not created, from the very beginning... We are separated part and parcel. We are separated parts and parcels. therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā: "My dear Arjuna, you, Me, and all these persons who have assembled in this battlefield, we were in the past individuals. We are, at present, individuals, and in the future, we shall continue to remain as individuals. We are all individual." Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). He's the Supreme nitya, Supreme Living Force amongst many, innumerable living forces. We are jīva, innumerable, ananta. There is no counting how many we are. Sa anantyāya kalpate. So this ananta, innumerable living entities, and Kṛṣṇa is also a living entity, but He's the chief. That is the difference. Nityo nityānā...

Just like there is leader. Leader is one, and followers, there are many. Similarly Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Living Entity, and we are subordinate, dependent living entities. That is the difference. Dependent, we can understand, if Kṛṣṇa does not supply us food, we starve. That's a fact. We cannot produce anything. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. So Kṛṣṇa is maintaining, and we are being maintained. Therefore Kṛṣṇa shall be the predominator, and we shall be predominated. That is our natural constitutional position. Therefore if we want to become predominator falsely in this material world, that is illusion, That we must give up. That we must give up. We shall always try to become predominated by Kṛṣṇa. That is successful life.

Thank you very much. (end)



730420SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.28

-

Los Angeles, April 20, 1973



Devotee:



manye tvāṁ kālam īśānam

anādi-nidhanaṁ vibhum

samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra

bhūtānāṁ yan mithaḥ kaliḥ

[SB 1.8.28]



"My Lord, I consider Your Lordship to be eternal time, the Supreme Controller, without beginning and end, the all-pervasive one. In distributing Your mercy, You are equal to everyone. The dissensions between living beings are due to social intercourse."



Prabhupāda: In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says exactly the same thing. This is explained by Kuntī, a devotee. The same thing is spoken by the Lord Himself. Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ, ye tu bhajanti māṁ bhaktyā teṣu te mayi [Bg. 9.29]. God cannot be partial. That is not possible. Everyone is God's son. So how God can be partial to one son and, better than the other son? That is not possible. That is our mistake. We write: "We trust in God," but we make discrimination. If you trust in God, then you must be equally kind and merciful to all living entities. That is God consciousness. So Kṛṣṇa says: "I have no enemies, neither I have got friends." Na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ.



Dveṣya means enemy. We, we are envious of our enemy and we are friendly to our friends. So Kṛṣṇa is absolute. Even He appears to be inimical to some demon, actually He's friend. When a demon is killed, that means his demonic activities are killed. He becomes a saint immediately. Otherwise how he's promoted immediately to the brahmajyoti? All these demons who were killed by Kṛṣṇa, they immediately merge into the brahmajyoti-nirviśeṣa. The only difference is, of course, the brahmajyoti, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. They are one. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. That is one truth, Absolute Truth, in different features only. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Originally Bhagavān, His plenary representation is Paramātmā who is situated in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. The plenary portion Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, He is in everyone's heart. That is Paramātmā. And Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. The ultimate issue is Bhagavān. So ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. Now He's equal to everyone. It is up to the devotees or persons who are trying to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth. According to their capacity of understanding, the Absolute Truth, God, is revealed, either as impersonal Brahman or localized Paramātmā or Bhagavān. It is up to me.

The same example as I have repeated many times. Just like we see sometimes the hills from our room. Here there are many hills in Los Angeles. But they are not distinct. When you are seeing the hills from a distant place, it looks like something cloudy. But if you go still further towards the hill, you'll distinctly find that there is something, hill. And if you come to the hill, then you'll find so many persons are working there, so many houses are there. There are streets, motorcars, everything, all varieties. So similarly, when one wants to know the Absolute Truth by his teeny brain, "I shall make research to find out the Absolute Truth," then you'll have vague idea, impersonal idea. And if you become a meditator, then you will find that God is situated within your heart. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. The yogis, the real yogis, they, by meditation, they see viṣṇu-mūrti within the heart. And those who are devotees, they meet the Supreme Person face to face just like we are meeting face to face, talk face to face, serve directly. The Supreme Personality of Godhead orders that: "You supply me this," and he supplies. That is the difference.

So samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu [Bg. 9.29]. He's equal to everyone. Now it is up to you to understand Him according to your capacity. So Kuntī also says the same thing in this verse: samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra [SB 1.8.28]. Samaṁ carantam. Carantam means moving. He is moving everywhere, outside, inside, simply we have to make our eyes clear to see Him. That is devotional service, to make our senses purified to perceive the presence of God. God is present everywhere. Antar bahiḥ. Antaḥ means within and bahiḥ means without. "Those who are less intelligent, they simply try to find out God within, and those who are advanced in intelligence, they can see You within and without." That is the difference.

Meditation is meant for the less intelligent class of men. Meditation means you have to control the senses. Yoga practice means yoga indriya-saṁyama. Our senses are very restless. By yoga practice, by, I mean to say, practicing different āsanas, so mind is controlled, the senses are controlled. Then we can concentrate upon the form of Viṣṇu with our heart. That is yoga system. Or those who are too much in bodily concept of life, for them the yoga system is recommended, practicing the bodily exercise, and find out the Supreme Lord within the heart. But bhaktas, those who are devotees, who are still more advanced, they don't require to control their senses separately, because to be engaged in devotional service means controlling the senses.

Suppose you are engaged in worshiping the Deity, in cleansing the room, in decorating the Deity, in making foodstuff for Deity, everything nicely... So your senses are already engaged. Where is the chance of your senses being diverted? The senses are already controlled. Because my senses, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Bhakti means simply to engage the senses in the service of the master of the senses. Hṛṣīkeśa means master of the senses, and hṛṣīka means senses. So now our senses are engaged for sense gratification. Sarvopādhi, upādhi yuktaḥ. So I am this body. So I must satisfy my senses. This is the contaminated stage of life. But when one comes to the understanding that I am not this body, I am spirit soul, part and parcel of God, so my senses, spiritual senses, should be engaged in the service of the Supreme Spiritual Being. That is wanted.

That is mukti. Mukti means: hitvā anyathā-rūpam. When we are conditioned, we give up our original constitutional position. Our original constitutional position is, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu says: jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Our original constitutional position is that we are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. So as soon as we employ ourself in the service of the Lord, immediately we become liberated. Immediately. there is no question of passing through some process. This very process, to engage oneself, engage one's senses in the service of the Lord, means he is liberated.

So this liberation is open for everyone. Samaṁ carantam. Kṛṣṇa does not say that: "You come to Me. You become liberated." No. He's open for everyone. He says: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. He speaks to everyone. Not that He's speaking to Arjuna only. He's speaking to everyone. Bhagavad-gītā is spoken not only for Arjuna. Arjuna is the, just like the target. But it is spoken for everyone, for all human beings. So one has to take advantage. Samaṁ carantam. He's not partial that: "You become..." Just like the sunshine. The sunshine is not partial that: "Here is a poor man, here is a low-class man, here is a hog. I shall not distribute my shining there." No. Sun is equal. One has to take advantage of it. The sunshine is there open, but if you close your door, if you want to keep yourself in airtight darkness, that is your business.

Similarly Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Kṛṣṇa is for everyone. Kṛṣṇa is ready to accept you as soon as you surrender. Samaṁ carantam. There is no restriction. Kṛṣṇa says: māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. They make distinction that this is lower class, this is higher class. So Kṛṣṇa says, "Even lower class, so-called lower class, it doesn't matter, if he takes to Me, then he's also eligible to go, come back to home, back to Godhead." Samaṁ carantam.

And He's the eternal time. Everything is going on within the time. The time... Our time calculation is past present, and future. This is relative. The other day we were discussing. This past, present, future is relative term. The, for a small insect, the past, present and future is different from my past, present and future. Relative term. Similarly Brahmā's past, present and future is different from my past, present and future. But Kṛṣṇa has no past, present and future. Therefore He's eternal. We have got past, present and future because we change this body. Now we have got this body... It has got a date. In such and such date I was born by my father and mother. Now this body will stay for some time. It will grow. It will produce some by-product. Then it will become old. Then dwindle. Then vanish, finish. No more this body. You accept another body. this body's finished. The history of this body, past, present, and future, finished. You accept another body. Again your past, present and future begins. But Kṛṣṇa has no past, present, futures because He does not change His body. That is the difference between ourself and Kṛṣṇa.

Just like Kṛṣṇa spoke to Arjuna that: "In the past, I spoke to the Sun-god about this philosophy, Bhagavad-gītā." So Arjuna could not believe it. Arjuna knew everything, but for our, our education, he put this question that: "Kṛṣṇa, we are contemporary, we are born practically in the same period. How can I believe that You spoke this philosophy to the Sun-god?" And the reply was that: "My dear Arjuna, you were also present there, but you have forgotten. I have not forgotten. That is the difference." Past, present, future, for persons who forget. But who does not forget, who remains eternally, there is no past, present, future.

Therefore, Kuntī is addressing Kṛṣṇa as eternal. Manye tvāṁ kālam. And because He is eternal, īśānam, He is full controller. Kuntī says: manye, "I think..." By the behavior of Kṛṣṇa, she could understand that Kṛṣṇa is eternal, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Controller. Anādi-nidhanam. Anādi-nidhana... There is no beginning, there is no end. Therefore vibhum. Vibhu means the Supreme, the greatest. Vibhu. We are aṇu, we are smallest, and Kṛṣṇa is the biggest. Kṛṣṇa is also, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is both the smallest and the biggest. We are simply smallest. But Kṛṣṇa is both. Kṛṣṇa, vibhu, greatest means all-inclusive. In the great, if you have got a big bag, you can hold so many things. In small bag you cannot do that.

So Kṛṣṇa is vibhu. He includes the time, past, present and future. He includes everything and He's everywhere. That is vibhu. Vibhu, all-pervading. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said that Kṛṣṇa... Because without Kṛṣṇa, the matter cannot develop. The scientists, the atheist scientists, they say that life comes out of matter. That is nonsense. No. Matter is one energy of Kṛṣṇa, and spirit is another energy. The spirit is superior energy, and the matter is inferior energy. The matter develops when there is superior energy.

Just like this country, America. The same America was two hundred years ago, three hundred years ago, the land, but it was not developed. But because some superior living entities from Europe came here, now America is so much developed. Therefore the cause of development is the superior energy. The inferior energy, there are so many vacant land lying still. Just like in Africa, Australia. They're called "undeveloped." Why undeveloped? Because the superior energy, living entity, has not touched it. As soon as the superior energy, living entity, will touch it, the same land will develop so many factories, houses, cities, roads, cars, everything, as we can develop.

Therefore the conclusion is that matter cannot develop out of itself. No. That is not possible. The superior energy must touch it. Then it will be, will, active. There are so many machines. That is matter. Inferior energy. Unless a operator comes to touch the machine, it will not act. First-class motor car, very costly motor car machine, but unless a driver comes, it will stand for millions of years there. There is no use. This common sense is lacking. The matter cannot work independently unless the superior energy, living entity, touches it. This is common sense. So how these rascal scientists say that life develops from matter? No. How it can be concluded? There is no such instances. They falsely say that... They do not have sufficient knowledge.

So these universes, they have also developed on account of Kṛṣṇa's presence. Therefore Brahma-saṁhitā says: aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-s... They are studying now atoms. So many things are going on, electrons, protons, Why? Because the Kṛṣṇa is there. This is really science. So Kṛṣṇa has no past, present and future. He is eternal time. He has no beginning. He has no end. And He is equal to everyone. Samaṁ carantam [SB 1.8.28]. Simply we have to prepare ourself to see Kṛṣṇa, to understand Kṛṣṇa. That is the business of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



741008SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.28

-

Māyāpura, October 8, 1974



Prabhupāda:



manye tvāṁ kālam īśānam

anādi-nidhanaṁ vibhum

samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra

bhūtānāṁ yan mithaḥ kaliḥ

[SB 1.8.28]



The Kuntīdevī is presenting his (her) conception of Kṛṣṇa, or God consciousness. Perfectly he's (she's) presenting that samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra: "Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is present everywhere. And He is equal, equally merciful or... In everything He equal to everyone." Just like the sun. The sun is equally distributing the sunshine. Now, in some country, we find there is cloud; sun is covered. There is no sunshine. The sun is shining, but due to our misfortune or something else, the sun is covered, and we cannot see. It is not that the sunshine is stopped. Sunshine is there. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's mercy is equally there. Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu [Bg. 9.29].



In another verse in the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa says, samo 'haṁ sarva bhūteṣu: "I am equal to everyone." Otherwise, how He can be God? God is not partial, that He is merciful upon me and not merciful upon you. God cannot be like that. Just like a state, government. Government is equal to everyone, all citizens. But why somebody is going to the university to take his M.A. degree, and why one is going to the prison house to be imprisoned and suffering for so many years and...? It is not the government's partiality, that somebody go to the prison house and somebody will go to the university and occupy responsible position. No. It is our fault that we do not take opportunity or the facilities offered by the government or Kṛṣṇa. It is our fault. Why there are so many discrepancies and nonequality? Somebody is very rich; somebody is very poor. Somebody is eating stool, and somebody eating nice prasādam, halavā. It is all due to the living entity's karma. Otherwise, God is equal to everyone. Samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra [SB 1.8.28]. God is not partial. Just like nowadays, these rascals, they say, "Why God is unkind to the poor man?" No. God is not unkind to the poor man. The poor man, he has become poor by his karma. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1].

Daiva-netreṇa. Daiva means superior, or godly. Netreṇa. Netreṇa means by the eyes, or netreṇa, by the leadership, leadership, or superintendence. Whatever we are doing... Because God is everywhere situated... Samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra. Kṛṣṇa is there, everywhere. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Īśvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is situated in everyone's heart. So we cannot conceal anything from God. In another place it is said, "Just like the sun is the eye of God..." Yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇām. Savitā. Savitā means sun, Sūrya, is the eye of Govinda. So if you are doing something, any part of the world, the sun is seeing. This is a crude example. Similarly, at night the moon is seeing, and Kṛṣṇa says that raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ [Bg. 7.8]. So Kṛṣṇa... The sunshine is also Kṛṣṇa. So if you think that "I am doing something for my sense gratification. Nobody is seeing. I am stealing some sugarcane from the field, and nobody's seeing," but how you can say nobody's seeing? The sun is seeing. How you can conceal? "No, I shall do it at night." Oh, the moon is seeing. So how can you conceal?

So parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He is so omnipotent that He can see from anywhere and everywhere what you are doing, what you are willing, what you want to do. You cannot conceal. That is not possible. Therefore it is said, daiva-netreṇa. You can bluff the material police, but you cannot bluff Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. If you are doing anything wrong, then it is being seen by the Supreme Personality. Samaṁ carantam. He's everywhere. Therefore those who are God conscious, as theists... That is the Indian culture. They think, "I am doing this nonsense. Kṛṣṇa, God, will see it." Even a... Even in ordinary person who has no education, still, he will admit, uparala dekhega(?): "God will see." That's a fact. That's a fact. So if everyone is God conscious, that "God is everywhere," then how he can act sinfully? It is not possible. If he is God conscious, if he knows that "God is everywhere, and He will see if I do something sinful by bluffing others..."

Therefore God consciousness is so important. If Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is spread and if it is taken by all people, then so many things will be automatically reformed. There will be no need of police. There will be no need of C.I.D. Because if one is God conscious, he'll not do anything wrong. But because people are not God conscious, they are doing so many wrong things that is has been almost impossible to govern the people. Therefore Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very essential to understand this fact, that samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra bhūtānāṁ yan mithaḥ kaliḥ [SB 1.8.28]. We have created so many religious system, so many religious system. And the Hindu is fighting with the Muslim, Muslim is fighting with the Hindu, that "My religion is better than your religion." Or any other, other countries also, the Jews fighting with the Christian; Christian, Jews; and the black fighting with the white; white fighting with the black. This Kali, that is the result of this material existence. Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **. That is the work of this material nature. Even if you want to live very peacefully, you'll not be allowed to live. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā durat... [Bg. 7.14]. It is not a place to live very peacefully. But if you think artificially that "We are very happy. We are advanced in material civilization and we have very comfortable life," where is comfort? There cannot be any comfort. Therefore it is the duty of māyā to remind you, always putting you in distressed condition. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. It is God... You cannot live peacefully, happily, within the prison house. Because you are condemned to this prison life, you cannot expect very comfortable life there.

So samaṁ carantam... This God is equally kind, equally merciful, but we fight. We, I mean to say, disagree in religious principle. That is due to Kali. Not this Kali. Kali means due to our fighting spirit. It is not God. God is equal to everyone. We fight because we have got misconception. So we think that this religion is better than that religion, or that religion is better than... Every religion must be good, provided one is God conscious. We say that. So many people question in the Western countries, "Whether one can attain perfection by following Christian religion?" Why not? You can also attain. But who is following? First of all, let me see who is following Christian religion. The Christian religion says in the beginning, first commandment, "Thou shalt not kill," and you are simply killing. So where is Christian? Christian religion is not bad. No religion is bad. But where is Christian? Where is Hindu? They are all godless rascals. Therefore there is misunderstanding. Otherwise, if everyone is God conscious, if everyone knows that God is present everywhere, "Whatever I do, He will see. He'll see as sunshine. He'll see as moonshine. He'll see as water..." Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya. No... Who can avoid water? Who can avoid sunshine? Who can avoid moonshine? Nobody can. So God says, "These things are I am." Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ [Bg. 7.8]. So how you can avoid God's vigilance? Then how you can commit sinful... They do not believe in-godlessness. They do not believe in existence of God. They have been taught like that, and they do not know what is God.

This is the misfortune of the present civilization. Present godless civilization... Therefore they have created simply chaotic situation all over the world. Therefore the movement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is very, very important and essential. Those who are sober, they are understanding it. Just like in Australia, the priestly class, they understood that this movement is trying to (?) people to see towards God, back to Godhead. You have advanced in civilization by so-called material advancement, scientific..., but what you have done? You have created simply chaos. Therefore we say... Our magazine is named Back to Godhead. "Now you have finished your business-now see back to Godhead." Just like if you do not see the sun, if you keep the sun backside, then you'll simply see a long shadow of your body, black shadow. That's all. But if you turn towards the sun, you'll not see the black shadow; you'll see all light. Simply you have to turn. So we have named this Back to Godhead very scientifically. You see towards God; then everything is light. "Where there is God, there is no nescience."

This is not manufactured. There is some verse in the Caitanya...

kṛṣṇa-sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra



Kṛṣṇa sūrya-sama. Kṛṣṇa is just like sun. There is no darkness. Can you expect any darkness in the sun planet? No. There is no possibility. Sun planet is always bright. So similarly, this is the example of the spiritual world, the sun planet, kṛṣṇa sūrya-sama. So if you go to the spiritual world, then everything is bright. Na tad bhāsayate sūryo na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ [Bg. 15.6]. That is the description of the spiritual world. Na tad bhāsayate sūryaḥ. In the spiritual world, there is no need of sun because everyone is brilliant; every planet is brilliant.



yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.40]



Everything is there. So if we become Kṛṣṇa conscious, there cannot be any darkness. There cannot be any ignorance. There cannot be any sinful life. Everything bright, everything peaceful. Therefore we must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness if we want to save from the clutches of māyā. And that is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:



daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

[Bg. 7.14]



This is the process.



So Kṛṣṇa, manye tvāṁ kālam īśānam. Eternal time. We are calculating past, present and future, but actually in the spiritual world, there is no such thing as past, present and future. We therefore sometimes question that "Wherefrom God came?" So many odd questions they say. But God is eternally existing. That is the fact. We cannot understand that. Because we are in the material world, we have no experience of the eternity, what is eternity. We have no experience. We see everything as generated, and then it stays for some time, then it is finished. That is our experience. Janma, mṛtyu, vṛddhi. They have... They have made past, present and future, but it is divided into six development. One takes birth, then it develops, then it stays for some time, then it produces some by-product, then diminishes, and then, I mean to say, finished. Ṣaḍ-vikāra. Ṣaḍ-vikāra. This body, ṣaḍ-vikāra. So eternity, eternity means there is no ṣaḍ-vikāra, the six kinds of changes. There is no birth. There is no death. There is no diminishing. There is no by-product. Everything eternal, eternally existing.

So that kālam, that eternal time, is Kṛṣṇa. Tvām. Manye: "I think that eternal time, You are, Kṛṣṇa." That's the fact. And īśānam. Īśānam means the Supreme Controller. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Controller means īśvara; īśvara means controller. He's the Supreme Controller. He's controlling the whole creation. Īśānam. Kālam īśānam. But who is controlling Him? No, He is not controlled. Anādi-beginningless. Neither endless or beginningless, anādi or nidhanam. And vibhum, the Supreme. This is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa. We have to take lessons from authorities. Here is Kuntī, authority. Therefore his (her) statements are recorded in the śāstra. What is śāstra? Śāstra means, is, the record of the statement of authorities. That is called śāstra. Just like in law court, you put lawbooks. What is that lawbook? Lawbook means the statement of the authorities. Similarly, śāstra... Śāstra means śās-dhātu. Śāstra. Śāstra means weapon, and śāstra means the lawbooks. So what is the lawbook? Lawbook means some authority which has given the law. So the government gives law. So similarly, śāstra means the statement given by the authorities.

So Kuntī is authority. Kuntī is authority. How she has become authority? Because she has followed the authorities, Brahmā, Nārada, Svayambhū... Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kapilaḥ kumāro manuḥ [SB 6.3.20]. Those who are strictly following the statements of the authorities, they are also authorities. Just like who is a lawyer? Lawyer is he who has studied law very nicely and following the law. That is lawyer, good lawyer. And third-class lawyer means one who does not know how to follow it. Good lawyer in the court-who can give reference from the lawbooks: "My Lord, you refer to such and such section of such and such law book, and you will find what I am stating." And the judge, when he sees: "Yes, it is all...," then his case is owned. So authority. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Mahājana. Authority means mahājana. Ordinary, common people is called jana, ordinary man. And those who are authority, they are mahājana. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ.

So the statements of Kuntī is recorded here, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, not that he's (she's) ordinary woman. Otherwise her statements should not have been mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So we have to accept what Kuntī says,

manye tvāṁ kālam īśānam

anādi-nidhanaṁ vibhum

samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra

bhūtānāṁ yan mithaḥ kaliḥ

[SB 1.8.28]



So misunderstanding of God... There is no misunderstanding of the authorities. The misunderstanding, the common man... Just like in Australia, when I spoke, there was no misunderstanding. There was agreement by the priests and myself. There was complete agreement. (aside:) You were with me? Or... No. You were not. They, after hearing my lecture for one hour, they agreed and clapped for ten minutes. So there cannot be any misun... Those who are actually... They questioned, "What is your opinion of Lord Jesus Christ?" and I said, "He preached God consciousness. He's our guru. Anyone who preaches the message of God, he is guru." So they very much appreciated, and actually it is so. Vaiṣṇava who is preaching, it may be in a different way, according to time and place and the party-they have to change something, deśa-kāla-pātra-but we have to see the essence. Wherever there is God consciousness, wherever is there understanding... Just like we sometime consult dictionary, a small dictionary, pocket dictionary, and a big international dictionary. Both of them are dictionaries. But according to time, deśa-kāla-pātra, for small child, that small dictionary is sufficient. Higher mathematics: higher mathematics and lower class ma... But the two plus two is always the same, in higher mathematics or lower mathematics. It is not that in the higher mathematics two plus two equal to five, no.



So the principle is the same. It is the distinction of deśa-kāla-pātra, things are... Just like the statement in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, they are meant for highly developed conscious persons. They are not for ordinary persons. Paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ vāstavaṁ vastu vedyam atra śrīmad-bhāgavatam, paramo nirmatsarāṇām [SB 1.1.2]. People are envious, envious: "Oh, he's Christian," "He's Muhammadan," "He is this," "He is that." No. A paramo nirmatsara, paramahaṁsa, he does not see, "He is Muhammadan," "He is Christian," "He is Jew." Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. He will see everyone equal, the part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa. Mamaivāṁśa. He says this... Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ: [Bg. 15.7] "All living entities are My part and parcel." Why he shall take the skin? Because the skin is made by Muhammadan or the skin is made by Christian or skin is made by Hindu... He's not the skin-observer. He is observed the within. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]. Within this body the spirit soul is there. This is the education of spiritual education in the beginning-just see inside, introspective, not outward seeing. Those who are seeing outwardly, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātu..., they are asses.

So one should be advanced by hearing the authorities, that God is equal to him. I say why there should be Hindu religion and Muslim religion or Christian religion? There cannot be. Just like gold is gold. And nobody can say, "This is Indian gold, this is American gold, this is Christian gold, and this is Muhammadan gold." Gold is gold. So actually one who is God conscious, for him, there is no such distinction, because he knows, samaṁ carantaṁ sarvatra bhūtānām: [SB 1.8.28] "God is present everywhere." Simply he has forgotten. That forgetfulness is applicable to anyone, either Hindu, Muslim or Christian. It doesn't matter. The, our business is to rectify that forgetfulness. Rectify. To remove that forgetfulness. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730421SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.29

-

Los Angeles, April 21, 1973



Devotee:



na veda kaścid bhagavaṁś cikīrṣitaṁ

tavehamānasya nṛṇāṁ viḍambanam

na yasya kaścid dayito 'sti karhicid

dveṣyaś ca yasmin viṣamā matir nṛṇām

[SB 1.8.29]



"O Lord, no one can understand Your transcendental pastimes which appear to be human and so are misleading. You have no specific object of favor, nor do You have any object of envy. People only imagine that You are partial."



Prabhupāda: So the Lord says in the Bhagavad-gītā: paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. So two purposes. When God incarnates, He has got two mission. One mission is paritrāṇāya sādhūnām and vināśāya duṣ... One mission is to deliver the faithful devotees, sādhu. Sādhu means saintly persons.



The sādhu... I have explained several times. Sādhu means devotee. Sādhu does not mean the worldly honesty or dishonesty, morality or immorality. It has nothing to do with material activities. It is simply spiritual, sādhu. But sometimes we derive, "sādhu," a person's material goodness, morality. but actually "sādhu" means in the transcendental platform. Those who are engaged in devotional service. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān [Bg. 14.26]. Sādhu is transcendental to the material qualities. So paritrāṇāya sādhūnām. The paritrāṇāya means to deliver.

Now if a sādhu is already delivered, he is on the transcendental platform, then where is the necessity of delivering him? This is the question. Therefore this word is used, viḍambanam. It is bewildering. It is contradictory. It appears to be contradictory. If a sādhu is already delivered... Transcendental position means he's no longer under the control of the three material modes of nature, goodness, passion and ignorance. Because it is clearly stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: sa guṇān samatītyaitān [Bg. 14.26]. He transcends the material qualities. A sādhu, devotee, Then where is the question of deliverance? The deliverance... He does not require deliverance, a sādhu, but because he is very much anxious to see the Supreme Lord eye to eye, that is his inner desire, therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. Not for deliverance. He's already delivered. He's already delivered from the material clutches. But to satisfy him, Kṛṣṇa is always...

Just like a devotee wants to satisfy the Lord in all respects, similarly more than the devotee, the Lord wants to satisfy the devotee. This is the exchange of loving affairs. Just like in your, in our ordinary dealings also, if you love somebody, you want to satisfy him or her. Similarly, she or he also wants to reciprocate. So if that reciprocation of loving affairs is there in this material world, how much it is greatly elevated in the spiritual world? So there is a verse that: "Sādhu is My heart, and I am also the sādhu's heart." The sādhu is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa is always thinking of His devotee, sādhu.

So the appearance and disappearance of Lord within this material world, that is called cikīrṣitam. What is the word meaning of cikīrṣitam?

Devotee: Pastimes.



Prabhupāda: Pastimes. It is Kṛṣṇa's pastime that He comes. He... When He comes, of course, He works something. The The work is to give protection to the sādhu and to kill the asādhu. But both the activities are His pastimes. He's not envious. He cannot be envious. The killing of the demons, that is also His affection. Just like sometimes we punish our children, we give him a very strong slap. That is not out of love. There is love. So when Kṛṣṇa kills a demon, the, the business is not on the platform of material jealousy or enviousness. No.



Therefore it is mentioned in the śāstras that even the demons, who were killed by Lord, they also get immediate salvation. The result is the same. Just like Pūtanā. Pūtanā was killed. Pūtanā wanted to kill Kṛṣṇa, but who can kill Kṛṣṇa? That is not possible. She was killed. But she was killed, but what was the result? The result was that she got the position of Kṛṣṇa's mother. Kṛṣṇa accepted her as His mother. She came with poison-coated nipple, that: "Kṛṣṇa will suck my nipple, and the child will die immediately." But that is not possible. She was killed. Kṛṣṇa sucked the nipple and the life altogether. But Kṛṣṇa took the bright side, that: "This woman, demon, she came to kill Me, but somehow or other I have sucked her breast milk. So she is My mother. She is My mother." So she got the position of mother.

These are explained in the Bhāgavatam, Uddhava explained to Vidura that Kṛṣṇa is so kind, God is so kind, even the person who wanted to kill Him with poison, she was accepted as mother. Such a kind God, Kṛṣṇa, that "Whom shall I worship others, except Kṛṣṇa?" This example is given. So actually Kṛṣṇa has no enemy. Here it is said: na yasya kaścid dayitaḥ. Dayitaḥ means favor. Nobody is favored. Na yasya kaścid dayito 'sti karhicid dveṣyaś ca. And nobody is His enemy. But who can be His enemy, who can be His friend?

Suppose we create friends. We expect some benediction or some profit from the friend and enemy means we expect some harmful activities by the enemy. But Kṛṣṇa is so perfect that nobody can do any harm to Kṛṣṇa, neither anybody can give anything to Kṛṣṇa. So where is the necessity of friend and enemy? There is no necessity. Therefore it is stated here: na yasya kaścid dayito 'sti. He doesn't require anyone's favor. He's complete. I may be very poor man. I expect some friend's favor, somebody's favor. But that is my expectation because I am perfect. I am not full. I am deficient in so many ways. So I am in needy always. Therefore I want to create some friend, and similarly I hate the enemy. So Kṛṣṇa, His being the Supreme nobody can do any harm to Kṛṣṇa, nobody can give anything to Kṛṣṇa. So why we are offering Kṛṣṇa so much comforts? We are dressing Kṛṣṇa, we are decorating Kṛṣṇa, we are giving nice food to Kṛṣṇa.

So the idea is... Try to understand this fact. Kṛṣṇa does not require your nice dress or nice flower or nice food. Kṛṣṇa does not require. But if you give Him, then you become benefited. It is Kṛṣṇa's favor that He's accepting. The example is given: Just like if you decorate the original person the reflection of the person in the mirror, it also appears decorated. So we are reflections. In the Bible also it is said that man is made after the image of God. So our, as Kṛṣṇa is transcendental, we... He has got two hands, two legs, one head. So man is made after God means we are reflections of the image of God. Not that we manufacture, imagine some form according to our form. That is mistake.

The Māyāvādī philosophy is like that. It is called anthropomorphism. They say that: "Because the... The Absolute Truth is imperson, but because we are persons, we imagine that Absolute Truth also person." Just the opposite. Actually that is not the fact. We have got this personal form as reflection of God. So in the reflection, if the original person is benefited, the reflection is also benefited. That is the philosophy. The reflection is also benefited.

So if you decorate Kṛṣṇa, so you become decorated. If you satisfy Kṛṣṇa, then you become satisfied. If you offer nice foodstuff Kṛṣṇa, then you eat them. Perhaps those who are outside the temple, they have never imagined such nice foodstuff. But because it is being offered to Kṛṣṇa, we have got the opportunity to take it. This is the philosophy. So you try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa in all respects. Then you'll be satisfied in all respects. This is...

Kṛṣṇa does not require your service. But He kindly accepts. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa is asking you that: "You surrender unto Me." It does not mean that Kṛṣṇa is lacking one servant, and if you surrender then He'll be profited. Kṛṣṇa can create millions of servants by His only desires. So that is not the point. But if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, you becomes saved. You become saved. That is your business.

Kṛṣṇa says: ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. You are suffering here. Just like without any shelter. You see so many people loiter in the street, no aim, no life. We go in the beach side. We see so many boys and girls, without an aim, loitering, do not know what to do, all confused. So... But if you take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, then you'll know: Oh, I have got now shelter." There is no more confusions. There is no more hopelessness. You can understand it very well. And I receive so many letters daily, how they are hopeful in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So Kṛṣṇa has come here, has descended, to collect some servant, that is not the fact. If we agree... Instead of becoming Kṛṣṇa's servant, we are servant of so many things. We are servant of our senses, and sense activities. Kāma, krodha, lobha, moha. Actually the whole world is serving the senses, servant of the senses. Godāsa. But if we engage the senses in the service of Kṛṣṇa, then we shall no longer remain the servant of the senses. We shall be the master of the senses. Because we, we, we shall not allow our senses to be engaged otherwise. That strength we shall get. Then we shall be safe.

So here Kuntīdevī is describing that: "Your appearance in this material world is not misleading, bewildering." We are thinking that: "Kṛṣṇa has got some mission, some purpose. Therefore He has appeared." No. It is His pastimes. It is pastime. Just like sometimes the governor goes to inspect the prison house. He has no business to go the prison house. He is getting report from the superintendent. He does not... Still sometimes he comes: "let me see how they are doing." It is called pastime. It is his free will. Not that he has become subjected to the prison laws and he has to come to the prison. No, not like that. But if the prisoners think: "Oh, here the governor is also in the prison. So we are equal. We are equal. I am also governor."

The rascal thinks like that. "Because Kṛṣṇa has come, descended, avatāra, so I am also avatāra." This rascaldom is going on. So here it is said: na veda kaścid bhagavaṁś cikīrṣitam. "Nobody knows what is the purpose of Your appearance and disappearance. Nobody knows." So tava, tava īhamānasya nṛṇāṁ viḍambanam. It is bewildering. Nobody can understand what is the real purpose. The real purpose is His free will. "Let Me go and see." He doesn't require to come to kill the demons. There are so many agents that if there is a strong wind, thousands of demons can be killed in a moment. So Kṛṣṇa does not require to come to kill the demons. And He does not require also to come to give protection to the devotee. By His simply will, everything is there. But He takes a pleasure pastime, "Let Me go and see."

Sometimes He wants to fight. Because the fighting spirit is also there in Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, where we get? Because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, all the qualities of Kṛṣṇa in minute quantity, they are within us. We are sample of Kṛṣṇa, but the, wherefrom we get this fighting spirit? The fighting spirit is there in Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, just like sometimes a big man or king, they engage some wrestler to fight. They, they pay the wrestler to fight with the king. But he's not enemy. He is giving pleasure to the king by fighting, mock fighting.

Similarly, when Kṛṣṇa wants to fight, who will fight with Him? Some of His devotee, great devotee will fight with Him. Not ordinary. Just like a king, if he wants to practice mock fighting, some very exalted fighter, wrestler will be engaged. Similarly... That is also service. Because Kṛṣṇa wants to fight, therefore some of His devotees come down to become His enemy. Just like Jaya-Vijaya. This Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa. Do you think they are ordinary living entity? If... That... Nṛsiṁhadeva, God Himself has come to kill him. Do you think they're ordinary? No, they're not ordinary. They're devotees. But Kṛṣṇa wanted to fight. In the Vaikuṇṭha world there is no possibility of fighting because everywhere there, everyone there is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. With whom He'll fight? Therefore He sends some devotee in the garb of enemy and Kṛṣṇa comes here to fight with Him.

At the same time, to teach us that becoming enemy, enemy of Kṛṣṇa is not very profitable. Better become friend. That will be profitable. Therefore it is said that: na veda kaścid bhagavaṁś cikīrṣitam. "Nobody knows what is the purpose of Your appearance and disappearance." Tava īhamānasya nṛṇāṁ viḍambanam. "You are in this world just like ordinary human being. This is bewildering." Therefore ordinary man cannot believe. "How God can become ordinary person like...?" Kṛṣṇa is playing. Although He was not playing ordinary person. He was playing as God. Wherever there was necessity...

Just like He married 16,000 wives. When He married He was one, and 16,000 girls offered the surrender to Kṛṣṇa that: "We are now kidnapped. If we go home, nobody will marry us." That is a strict Vedic system. If an unmarried girls goes out of home even for one night, nobody will marry her. Still it is going on. Nobody will marry her. So this is the old system. All the 16,000 girls who were kidnapped by Bhaumāsura... So they prayed to Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa came, killed the Bhaumāsura, delivered all the girls. So when Kṛṣṇa asked them: "Now you can safely go to your father's house," they replied: "Sir, if we go back to our father's house, what will be our fate? Nobody will marry us. Because this man, this rākṣasa, they kidnapped us." "Then what do you want." " We want that You become our husband." So Kṛṣṇa is so kind. "Yes." Immediately accepted. That is Kṛṣṇa.

Now, when they were brought at home, not that 16,000 wives will have to wait for 16,000 nights to meet Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself into 16,000 forms, and constructed 16,000 palaces, and establishment, on each palace... The description is there in the... That is Bhagavān. So those rascals, they cannot understand. They criticize Kṛṣṇa, that: "He was very lusty. He married 16,000 wives." Even if He's lusty, He's unlimitedly lusty. Because He's unlimited. Why 16,000? If He would marry 16,000,000s of wives still it is imperfect. That is Kṛṣṇa.

So for Kṛṣṇa there is no such thing that you can accuse Kṛṣṇa as lusty, sensuous. No. He showed favor to all His devotees. There are so many devotees Of Kṛṣṇa. Some devotee's asking Kṛṣṇa to become her husband. Some devotee's asking Kṛṣṇa to become his friend. Some devotee's asking Kṛṣṇa to become His son. And some devotee's asking to become his playmate. In this way, millions and trillions of devotees are there all over the universe. And Kṛṣṇa has to satisfy them all. He does not require any help from the devotees. But, as the devotees want... So these 16,000 devotees wanted Kṛṣṇa as their husband. Kṛṣṇa agreed. And that is... Just like common man. But as God, He expanded Himself into 16,000 forms.

So Nārada came to see. "Kṛṣṇa has married 16,000 wives. How He's dealing with them, let me see." So he, when he came here, he saw in 16,000 palaces, Kṛṣṇa is acting differently. And somewhere He's talking with His wife. Somewhere He's playing with His children. Somewhere He's getting marriage ceremony of His sons and daughters. So many, 16,000 ways He's engaged. That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, although... Just like He was playing just like ordinary child. But when Mother Yaśodā wanted to see His mouth open, whether He has eaten earth, dirt, He showed within the mouth all the universes. So this is Kṛṣṇa. Although He is playing just like ordinary child, ordinary human being, but when there is need, He shows His Godly nature.

Just like Arjuna. He was driving the chariot, but when Arjuna wanted see His universal form, immediately He showed him. Thousands and millions of heads and weapons. This is Kṛṣṇa. So na yasya kaścit. Otherwise Kṛṣṇa has no enemy. Kṛṣṇa has no friend. He is completely independent. He does not depend on enemy. But He plays like that for the benefit of the so-called friend and so-called enemy. He's Kṛṣṇa... That is Kṛṣṇa's absolute nature. When Kṛṣṇa favors either as enemy or as friend, the result is the same. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is absolute.

Thank you very much. (end)



741009SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.29

-

Māyāpura, October 9, 1974



Nitāi: "O Lord, no one can understand Your transcendental pastimes, which appear to be human and are so misleading. You have no specific object of favor, nor do You have any object of envy. People only imagine that You are partial."



Prabhupāda:



na veda kaścid bhagavaṁś cikīrṣitaṁ

tavehamānasya nṛṇāṁ viḍambanam

na yasya kaścid dayito 'sti karhicid

dveṣyaś ca yasmin viṣamā matir nṛṇām

[SB 1.8.29]



So Kuntīdevī is clarifying the matter that people may think that Kṛṣṇa was partial to the Pāṇḍava family and He was envious to the Kurus because He always took part on behalf of the Pāṇḍavas. That has been described. So just like worldly men, we, we make some friends, and we make some enemies. To somebody we are envious, and to somebody we are very friendly. This is material nature. The material nature means to become envious, generally. And if somebody satisfies my sense gratification, then he's friend. That is also temporary. As soon as the sense gratification process is disturbed, then again envious. The real nature is enviousness. So Kuntīdevī says that "Because You are playing the part of human being, and it appears that You are partial to somebody and You are envious to somebody, this is viḍambanam; this is Your misleading. Actually You are not like that. Actual... But because You are playing the part of the ordinary human being, not ordinary, but as human being, so Your dealing like that appears that You are, to some, to somebody You are very partial and somebody You are inimical."



But that is not the fact. People cannot understand Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa can be understood by the devotee only.

nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ

mūḍho 'yaṁ nābhijānāti

loko mām ajam avyayam

[Bg. 7.25]



Those who are mūḍhas, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is playing, although like that, ordinary human being. The mūḍhas cannot understand. Just like Kṛṣṇa killed Pūtanā, but she got elevation to the position of His mother. Superficially it appeared that Kṛṣṇa killed the Pūtanā, but Pūtanā, Kṛṣṇa took her as her (His) mother. Although she came to kill Kṛṣṇa with poison on her breast, but Kṛṣṇa thought that "This woman has come to kill Me, but because I have sucked her breast, she is My mother." So any way, the service side, Kṛṣṇa always accepts, a little service. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Svalpam asya. A little service to Kṛṣṇa is feasible, is helpful to save a man from the greatest danger.



So further she explains, na yasya kaścid dayitaḥ. Dayita means favorable. Na yasya kaścid dayitaḥ asti karhicid dveṣyaś ca yasmin. And nobody is envious. The Bhagavad-gītā also confirms, samo 'haṁ sarva bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29]. Kṛṣṇa is, as we discussed the other day... Just like the sun is equal to everyone, but we are not able to take the sunshine equally. Somewhere the sun is covered with cloud. Someone is sitting within the dark room. In this way, we are unable to take the sunshine equally. But sun is distributing equally. Na hi harati jyotsnā candraś caṇḍāla-veśmani. There is the... Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, caṇḍāla-veśmani. Caṇḍāla means untouchable, the dog-eaters. In the Vedic conception, the dog-eaters are untouchable. Actually they should be untouchable. Meat-eaters are untouchable, especially... There are different kinds of meat-eaters. Some eat the goats, some mutton, some cows, some hogs, and some dogs. Just like the Hindus: they eat goats, but they do not eat cows. Some religious conception. And the Muhammadans, they use, eat cows, but they do not eat pigs. Hārāma. The Muhammadans say, "To eat pig is hārāma." So everyone has got some distinction. But the caṇḍālas, they eat everything, up to the dogs. We have seen in Korea. And in China also, they eat dogs. Here, in India, Assam side, there are dog-eaters. So there are different kinds of flesh-eaters. And you'll find in Āyur Vedic dravya-gaṇa, there are so many different types of meats and fleshes described, and the eating such flesh, what benefit or harm is there, that is described. So formerly, how they were analyzed.

So Kṛṣṇa, although He's playing the part of human being, His activities are transcendental. Na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti na me karma-phale spṛhā [Bg. 4.14]. That is the distinction between Kṛṣṇa and ourself. He is killing. He has killed so many demons; from the very childhood His one side is killing-Pūtanā killing, Aghāsura, Bakāsura, this asura, that asura, then Keśī, and so many asuras He killed. But His killing and our killing is not the same. Na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti. And in the Īśopaniṣad is..., apāpa-viddham. That is Kṛṣṇa. If we imitate Kṛṣṇa... We cannot imitate. Therefore our business is to follow the words of Kṛṣṇa, not to imitate Him. That is suicidal. We shall follow the instruction of Kṛṣṇa as He is giving in the Bhagavad-gītā, but if we become so rascal to imitate His rāsa-līlā, then we'll go to hell. But the Māyāvādīs, they sometimes do that. That... In the Bhāgavata it is forbidden, that "Imitation of this..." Idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ. What is that verse, vraja..., that...? That "These pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is Viṣṇu, with the gopīs, they should not be..., not only they should be imitated, they should not be thought even within the mind, that 'We can also do like that.' " It is forbidden.

Then the question was... Parīkṣit Mahārāja questioned this: "Kṛṣṇa, He came to establish religious principles." Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. Paritrāṇāya sādhū..., vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya. So why Kṛṣṇa did this act, because it is forbidden to mix with others' wife or daughter? Without being married, according to Vedic culture, no man or woman can mix very intimately. That is even in the ordinary dealings. Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said that "Except your wife, all women are your mother." This is paṇḍita. Who is a paṇḍita, learned? Now,

mātṛvat para-dāreṣu

para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat

ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu

yaḥ paśyati sa paṇḍitaḥ



This is the description of paṇḍita. Paṇḍita... And in the Bhagavad-gītā, the paṇḍita is described: paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. This is paṇḍita. Nowadays it has become the custom that unless you have got a university degree, either you may be in knowledge..., māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ, you are not recognized as a paṇḍita. But in the Vedic scripture, the paṇḍita is different person. Anyone... This is the moral instruction by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita.



mātṛvat para-dāreṣu

para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat

ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu

yaḥ paśyati sa paṇḍitaḥ



He is giving the description of paṇḍita in three ways: "One who sees all women except his wife as mother-he is paṇḍita One who takes others' money as garbage on the street-he is paṇḍita. And one who sees everyone, even to the ant, like himself, that 'If I, if somebody pin, pricks pin on my body, I get, I suffer. I feel pain. So why shall I give pain even to an ant?' " Ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu. In a higher sense...



Just like Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava, Prahlāda Mahārāja. He is feeling for... Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. This is Vaiṣṇava's business, because a Vaiṣṇava, when he comes to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, he can understand that "What I was previously and what I am now." Actually one is... He's happy. He feels that... Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. "So why these people should suffer without Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" That is samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Therefore preaching required. He preaches. Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava, he remains compact in temple worship, that's all, to show the Deity and get some money and fill up the belly. My Guru Mahārāja condemned this process. Of course, it is condemned in this sense, that those who are thinking that "I have got this temple. Let people come here out of sentiment and they'll pay, and it will be a source of income for my filling up belly..." This is most condemned. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that ṭhākura dekhiyepayesara ujgarache, rastaya jara diye jivika bharyam kara bhalo(?). One should be honest. He should work for getting some money. Just like Arjuna. Kṛṣṇa never said that "Arjuna, you sit down. I am your friend. I shall do everything for you. You sleep." No. Arjuna was a kṣatriya. He should fight. That was the instruction of...

So kaniṣṭha-adhikārī is different. And madhyama-adhikārī, they feel for others that...

īśvare tad-adhīneṣu

bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca

prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā

yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ



And uttama-adhikārī, they have no such distinction. They see: "Everyone is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. That is all right." But madhyama-adhikārī has to make distinction. Kṛpā upekṣā. He is very kind to the innocent, but those who are envious, he does not care for them. Those who are envious, he does not care for them. He rejects them: "Let them become envious," these madhyama-adhikārī. And īśvare, unto the Supreme Lord-prema. They learn how to love Kṛṣṇa and how to make friendship with Kṛṣṇa's devotee. So this is madhyama-adhikārī and kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, uttama-adhikārī. There are different types of devotees, not all the same, according to the stages.



So ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu. A Vaiṣṇava feels for others. A Vaiṣṇava understands that "Those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, those who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, they are rotting under the spell of māyā. Let us do something for them." That is Vaiṣṇava. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja said, naivodvije para duratyaya, duratyaya-vaitaraṇyāḥ: "I am not afraid of the indefatigable vaitaraṇī." It is said in the śāstra that you have to cross the vaitaraṇī before going to the spiritual world. So Prahlāda Mahārāja said that "I am not afraid of this vaitaraṇī. It is very easy." Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ: [SB 7.9.43] "Because I know simply by glorifying Your Lordship, I am..., I can do that." Harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. That is quite possible. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. So a pure Vaiṣṇava like Haridāsa Ṭhākura can simply chant. Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised anyone, especially His confidential devotees... Just like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. He was advised that "You chant and don't eat very palatable food. Don't dress yourself very gorgeously." This instruction... But the chanting. Everyone was advised, whoever went to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "You chant."

So Prahlāda Mahārāja said that "I know..." Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. "I can... I have no problem because I have understood what is the value of chanting Your holy name. But I have got another business." What is that? Śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ: "I am simply concerned with these rascals who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious." Śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ: "They are busy that māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. These rascals, for māyā-sukha, temporary material happiness, they have made very, very gorgeous arrangement," very, very big, big skyscraper building and very, very nice road, very, very nice car, and nice dress, nice this, nice nightclub, this club-simply for māyā-sukhāya. "This happiness is temporary. Still, they have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, which will make their life successful and happy. They do not know." Māyā-sukhāya bharam. Bharam means humbug, humbugism. Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. "Those who have arranged like that, these rascals," śoce, "I am lamenting for them." This is Vaiṣṇava. Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye [Cc. Madhya 6.254].

So because you are preacher, you are being trained up to become preacher, especially in the Western countries, so it is your duty. I have several times requested you that "You American people, you are fortunate. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrīḥ [SB 1.8.26]. You have got the four things. Now, because these people are misusing these four material gains simply for sense gratification, māyā-sukhāya..." Māyā-sukhāya means sense gratification. Māyā... "They should be delivered from these clutches of māyā, and they should take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That is preaching. Preaching is required. That is the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, certainly He took His birth here, but He did not remain here. He did not remain here. He could have remained here very easily. His influence was very great. He was known as Nimāi Paṇḍita, very learned scholar. Everyone knew. And He was very respectful. Otherwise, how He could gather 100,000 people in one day to go to the Kazi's house? That means He was very influential. But still, He... There was good wife, young wife, most affectionate mother. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu could stay at His birthplace very nicely without any difficulty. And what will be difficulty? He's Kṛṣṇa Himself, Nārāyaṇa Himself. And there was Lakṣmī. But still, to show the example personally, āpani ācari prabhu jīvere śikhāya, He left home, He took sannyāsa, and He preached.

So preaching is so important. And Kṛṣṇa also says that,

ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

[Bg 18.68]



na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

[Bg. 18.69]



So Kṛṣṇa also, He was playing the part of ordinary human being, but He was, in His own life, He was demonstrating how Kṛṣṇa comes here, what for He comes, why He took part in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. These things are to be understood. Unless we understand these things, why Kṛṣṇa came, why He took part in the battlefield-and there are so many other things ordinarily done-then, if we simply take Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being... Mūḍha, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam.. [Bg. 9.11].. Because He's playing the part of human being, if somebody derides, mūḍha, then it is viḍambanam-he'll be cheated. That is explained here: tavehamānasya nṛṇāṁ viḍambanam. Viḍambana. They cannot understand. The devotees can understand. Kuntī could understand that "Although Kṛṣṇa is playing the part of human being, He is for everyone's good. He simply presents. As enemy or as friend, it is beneficial." Either He is playing the part of enemy or as friend, it is the same thing because He is absolute. In the Absolute world there is no such thing: "This is good; this is bad." Everything good in the absolute world. Kṛṣṇa's killing is as good as Kṛṣṇa's saving. It is the same thing.



So Kuntī could understand. The devotees can understand. So He has no partiality. Nobody should misunderstand that Kṛṣṇa has got partiality, no. This partiality and enmity, friendliness, these are material, duality. Here we cannot understand good unless there is bad. Therefore it is called relative world. We cannot understand father unless there is son. We cannot understand good man unless there is bad man. So these things, duality or relative world, they should exist in this material world. Therefore in order to approach to the spiritual world one should become above this duality, above this duality. This duality means the intermixture of the modes of material nature, traiguṇya. The Sanskrit word is traiguṇya. So Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna, nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. So how one can become above these nistraiguṇya, er, traiguṇya? You... Simply by devotional service, unalloyed devotional service. Anyone who is...

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



So we should be Kṛṣṇa conscious, always engaged in His... (end)





730422SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.30

-

Los Angeles, April 22, 1973



Devotee:



janma karma ca viśvātmann

ajasyākartur ātmanaḥ

tiryaṅ-nṝṣiṣu yādaḥsu

tad atyanta-viḍambanam

[SB 1.8.30]



"Of course it is bewildering, O Soul of the Universe, that You work, though You are inactive, and that You take birth, though You are the vital force and the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst animals, men, sages, and aquatics. Verily this is bewildering."



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa is addressed here as Viśvātman, the vital force of the universe. Just like in my body, in your body, that there is a vital force. The vital force is the ātmā, the living being, living entity or soul. So because the vital force, the soul is there, the whole body is working.



So similarly there is the supreme vital force. Supreme vital force is Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore where is the question of His taking birth, appearance and disappearance? In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said: janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. Divyam means it is spiritual. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā. Aja means unborn. Avyayātmā, without any destruction. So Kṛṣṇa is existing as in the beginning of this stotra, Kuntīdevī addressed Kṛṣṇa that: "You are within, You are without, still invisible." Kṛṣṇa is within, without. That we have explained. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart. Therefore He is within everything. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. He, He is within the atom even. And without also.

Viśvarūpa, as Kṛṣṇa showed, the Viśvarūpa, external feature. This gigantic cosmic manifestation. That is Kṛṣṇa's external body. These are described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The, the hills, the mountains, they are described as the bones. Just like we have got in our body some part raised by the bones, similarly these big, big mountains and hills, they have been described as the bones. And the big, big oceans they have been described as different holes in the body, down and up. Similarly the Brahmaloka is the skull, upper skull.

So one who cannot see God, they have been advised to see God in so many ways. These are the instruction in the Vedic literature. Because you can simply conceive of God, the great... The greatness... You also do not know how great He is. So in your conception of greatness... Just like the very high mountains, the sky, the big, big planet. So the description is there. You can think of. That is also Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you think that: "This mountain is the bone of Kṛṣṇa," that is also Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Actually that is so. If you think that big Pacific Ocean is the navel of Kṛṣṇa. These big, big trees, plants, they are hairs in the body of Kṛṣṇa. Then the head, the skull of Kṛṣṇa, is the Brahmaloka. The sole is the Pātālaloka. Similarly... This is mahato mahīyān. When you think of Kṛṣṇa as the greater than the greatest, you can think like this. And if you think Kṛṣṇa is both, smaller than the smallest. That is also greatness. That is also greatness. Kṛṣṇa can manufacture this gigantic cosmic manifestation and He can manufacture also a small insect, smaller than the point.

You have seen sometimes in the book you'll find one insect is running. The shape is smaller than the full stop. This is Kṛṣṇa's craftsmanship. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. He can create bigger than the biggest and the smaller than the smallest. Now human being, according to their conception, they have manufactured the 747 airplane, supposed to be very big. All right. According to your consciousness, you have produced something big. But can you produce a small airplane like insect flying? That is not possible. Therefore greatness means that who can become greater than the greatest and smaller than the smallest. That is greatness. If you can act one-sided... That is also not perfectly.

Supposing you can manufacture still more bigger. I don't think that the modern age they have manufactured the biggest. We get information from Bhāgavatam. Kardama Muni, the father of Kapiladeva, he manufactured a plane, a big city. A big city, with lakes, with gardens, with big, big houses, street. And the whole city was flying all over the universe. And Kardama Muni showed to his wife all the planets, all the planets. He was a big yogi, and his wife, Devahūti, was Vaivasvata Manu's daughter, very big king's daughter. So Kardama Muni wanted to marry, desired. So immediately Vaivasvata Manu... His daughter, Devahūti, she also said: "My dear father, I want to marry that sage." So he brought the daughter: "Sir, here is my daughter. You accept her as your wife." So she was king's daughter, very opulent, but coming to her husband, she had to serve so much that she became lean and thin, not sufficient food and working day and night.

So Kardama Muni became little compassionate that: "This woman has come to me. She is king's daughter, and in my protection she is not getting any comfort. So I shall give her some comfort." He asked wife: "How you'll be comfortable?" So woman's nature is a good house, good food, good dress and good children and good husband. This is woman's ambition. So he proved himself that the best husband she has got. So he first of all gave her all opulences, big, big house, maidservants, opulence. And then this airplane was manufactured by him, yogic process. Kardama Muni, he was a human being. If he could perform such wonderful thing by yogic process...

And Kṛṣṇa is the yogeśvara, the master of the all yogic mystic power. Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is addressed in the Bhagavad-gītā as Yogeśvara. A little mystic power, when we get, we become so big, important man. And now He's the master of all yogic mystic power. Yatra yogeśvaro hariḥ [Bg. 18.78]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that wherever Yogeśvara-Hari, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all mystic power, is there, and where there is Dhanurdhara Arjuna, Pārtha, so everything is there. Everything is there.

So we should remember this. That if you can keep yourself always in company with Kṛṣṇa, then all perfection is there. Yatra yogeśvaro hariḥ. All perfection is there. And Kṛṣṇa has agreed especially in this age. Nāma-rūpe kali-kāle kṛṣṇa-avatāra, Kṛṣṇa has incarnated in this age as the holy name. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that: "My dear Lord, You are so kind that You are giving Me Your association by, in the form of Your holy name." Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. "And this holy name can be chanted in any situation. There is no hard and fast rule." You can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa anywhere.

Just like these children. They also chant, they also dance. It is not at all difficult. While walking, just like our students, they take the beads. They're walking on the sea beach, still chanting. Where is the loss? But the gain is so great, that we are associating with Kṛṣṇa personally. The gain is so much. If you feel very much proud... If you are associating personally with President Nixon, how much proud you feel? "Oh, I am with President Nixon." So will you not feel very much proud if you are associating the supreme Nixon? Who can create millions of Nixons?

So this is your opportunity. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says: etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi. "My dear Lord, You are so kind upon Me that You are giving Your association always, constantly. You are prepared. You are giving Durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. But I am so unfortunate. I am not taking advantage of it." Durdaiva. Misfortune. Our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is simply requesting people: "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa."

There was a caricature-picture in some paper. Perhaps you remember. From Montreal or here, I don't remember. One old lady and her husband, sitting, face to face. The lady is requesting the husband: "Chant, chant, chant." And the husband is answering: "Can't, can't, can't." So this is going on. We are requesting everyone: "Please chant, chant, chant." And they are replying: "Can't, can't." This is their misfortune. This is their misfortune.

So still it is our duty to make all these misfortunate, unfortunate creatures fortunate. That is our mission. We therefore go in the street and chant. Although they say: "Can't," we go on chanting. That is our business. And, somehow or other, we push on some literature in his hand. He is becoming fortunate. He would have squandered his hard-earned money in so many nasty, sinful ways, and if he purchases one book, never mind what is the price, his money is properly utilized. The beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there. Because he is giving some money, hard-earned money, for this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, he is getting some spiritual profit. He's not losing. He's getting some spiritual profit. Therefore our business is, somehow or other, bring everyone in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. He will be profited.

So this business is going on not only in the human society. Kṛṣṇa's plan is so great that, that Kṛṣṇa appeared as human being or as Lord Kṛṣṇa, not everyone knew that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He was dealing just like ordinary human being. Not ordinary. When there was need, He proved Himself the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But generally He was known as ordinary human being.

Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī is describing Kṛṣṇa in a description when He was playing with the cowherd boys. Kṛṣṇa. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī is pointing out who is this cowherd boy? He said: itthaṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā, satām. The impersonalists, they are meditating upon the impersonal Brahman and feeling some transcendental bliss. And Śukadeva Gosvāmī says the source of that transcendental bliss is here, Kṛṣṇa. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Kṛṣṇa is the source of everything. Therefore the transcendental bliss which the impersonalists try to experience by meditating upon impersonal Brahman, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says: itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā [SB 10.12.11]. Brahma-sukham, the transcendental bliss of realization of Brahman. Dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena. Here is the person who is the source of brahma-sukha and dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena. Dāsyaṁ gatānām means devotees. A devotee is always prepared to render service to the Lord. Dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena. Supreme Personality of Godhead. And... And māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa. And those who are under the spell of illusory energy, for them He is ordinary boy.

So He is, according to the conception, ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. If Kṛṣṇa is taken as ordinary boy, human being, Kṛṣṇa will deal with him as ordinary human being. If Kṛṣṇa is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the devotee will enjoy the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And if the impersonalists are very much fond of Brahmajyoti, He's the source. So therefore He's everything. Brahmeti, paramātmeti, bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11].

So with such exalted Personality of Godhead, these boys are playing. How, why, how they have been so much fortunate, to play with the Supreme Personality of Godhead?

itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā

dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena

māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa

sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ

[SB 10.12.11]



These boys, cowherd boys, now who are playing with Kṛṣṇa, they're also not ordinary. They have got now the highest perfection, that they have been able to play with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How they have achieved this position? Kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ. Many, many lives pious activities. Because these boys for many, many lives underwent austerities, penances to achieve the highest perfection of life. Now they have got the opportunity-playing with Kṛṣṇa personally on equal level. They do not know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is vṛndāvana-līlā. The cowherd boys, they simply love Kṛṣṇa. Their love is unending. Everyone in Vṛndāvana.



Just like Yaśodā-mātā or Nanda Mahārāja. They are in paternal affection with Kṛṣṇa. So the father and mother love Kṛṣṇa, the friends love Kṛṣṇa, the girl friends, they love Kṛṣṇa, the trees love Kṛṣṇa, the water love Kṛṣṇa, the flower, the cows, the calves, everyone loves Kṛṣṇa. That is Vṛndāvana. So if we simply learn how to love Kṛṣṇa, then we can create immediately this world as Vṛndāvana. This is the only central point. How to love Kṛṣṇa. Premā pum-artho mahān.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that the dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. People are after these four things. Dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu disregarded this. "This is not achievement of life." Of course, a human being... Human life does not begin unless there is conception of religion, dharma. But at the present moment, in the Kali-yuga, dharma is practically nil. So according to Vedic calculation, the present human civilization, they are not even human being. Because there is no dharma. There is no religion. No morality. No pious activities. Do not care. Everyone can do anything without caring. Formerly there was morality, immorality, irreligious, religious. But with the progress of Kali-yuga, everything is being vanquished. It is stated in the Kali-yuga about eighty per cent people, they are sinful, all sinful. And we can practically see. The sinful list we have given, the four principles, illicit sex life, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. These are the four pillars of sinful life.

Therefore we request our students first of all break these four pillars. So the roof of sinful life will collapse. Then chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you remain fixed up in transcendental position. Simple method. Because one cannot realize God if his life is sinful. That is not possible. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says: yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. Anta-gatam means finished. One who has finished sinful life. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Who can finish sinful life? Who are engaged in pious activities. Because one must have activities, engagement. So if one is engaged in pious activities, naturally his sinful activities will vanish. One side, voluntarily he should try to break the pillars of sinful life. Another side, he must engage himself in pious life. Simply theoretically one cannot, because everyone must have some engagement. If he has no pious engagement, then simply theoretically he will not be able.

For example, practical, your government is spending millions of dollars for stopping this intoxication. Everyone knows. But the government has failed. How simply by law or by lecturing you can make them without LSD or intoxication? That is not possible. You must give them good engagement. Then it will be automatically... And practically you see that our students who come here we instruct: "No intoxication." Immediately given up. And the government has failed. This is practical. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. If you don't give somebody good engagement, you cannot stop his bad engagements. That is not possible. Therefore we are giving two sides good engagements, at the same time prohibition. We simply don't say that: "No illicit sex, no intoxication, no, no..." Simply negative is no meaning. There must be something positive. Because everyone wants engagement. That is because we are living entities. We are not dead stone.

The other philosophers, they are trying to become dead stones by meditation. "Let me think of void, impersonalism." The, artificially how you can make it void? Your heart, your mind is full of activities. So these are artificial things. This will not help the human society. The so-called yoga, so-called meditation, they are all rascaldom. Because there is no engagement. Here there is engagement. Here everyone is engaged to rise early in the morning for offering ārātrika to the Deities. They are preparing nice food. They are decorating, making garlands, so many engagements. They are going for saṅkīrtana party, they are canvassing for selling books. Twenty-four hours engagement. Therefore they're able to give up this sinful life. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate.

Just like... The, everything is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Just like in hospital. In hospital there are many patients, they are not eating anything on the Ekādaśī day. Does it mean that is observing Ekādaśī? He is simply hankering after, "When I shall eat, when I shall eat, when I shall eat?." But these students, they voluntarily don't eat anything. We, we don't say that you don't eat anything. Some fruits, some flowers. That's all. So paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. Just like a child. He has got in his hand something he's eating. and if you give him better thing, he will throw away the inferior thing and will take that better thing. So here is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this better engagement, better life, better philosophy, better consciousness, everything better. Therefore they can give up the sinful activities of life and that will promote to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So these activities are going on not only in the human society. The animal society also. Animal society, aquatic, because everyone is Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel, sons. So they are rotting in this material world. So Kṛṣṇa has a plan, a big plan to deliver them. Personally He comes. Sometimes He sends His very confidential devotee. Sometimes He comes Himself. Sometimes He leaves instructions like Bhagavad-gītā. The whole propaganda is going on. Therefore it is said here: tiryaṅ nṛ, tiryaṅ nṛ ṛṣiṣu. Everywhere Kṛṣṇa's incarnation is there. Yādaḥsu. Aquatics also.

Just like Kṛṣṇa appeared as the Fish Incarnation. Tad atyanta-viḍambanam [SB 1.8.30]. So Kṛṣṇa's disappearance and appearance, His taking birth, these are all bewildering. It is not that... We are forced to take birth. We are, we are , we living entities, conditioned souls, we are transmigrating from one body to another, being forced by the laws of nature. But Kṛṣṇa does not appear by being forced by the laws of nature. That is the difference. Therefore those who are foolish rascals, they think that: "I have taken my birth in this world and Kṛṣṇa has also taken. Therefore I am also God." They, they do not know that you have to take birth by the force of laws of nature. You have been given the chance of very nice body, beautiful body, as American boys and girls, educated, with opulence. If you misuse it, then you are going to get another body according to your mentality.

Just like at the present moment. in spite of so much arrangement by the government, nice school, nice university, colleges, but they are producing hippies. They're so much frustrated. So they are now worshiping hog. Is it not? So what is the next? Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. If you associate with the hog's quality, then you are going to become a hog. Nature will give you full opportunity. "All right sir, you become a hog." Nature's arrangement is like... Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ. Prakṛti, nature has got three modes of nature, and as soon as you associate with one type of modes, you get the next body according to that.

So therefore Kṛṣṇa's, this plan of appearance and disappearance, they are to be very greatly understood. Not that whimsically Kṛṣṇa has come. He has got a great plan. Otherwise why He should come here? He is very much eager to take you back to home, back to Godhead. That is Kṛṣṇa's business. Therefore He says:

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



He is giving assurance. "My dear..." Everyone of us, we are children of Kṛṣṇa, God. So He is more unhappy. Because we are unhappy on account of this material body, we are undergoing repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. That is not very comfortable situation. But we are so fool, rascal, that we do not take care of this. We are busy for a temporary comfort of this life. But we are neglecting the real discomforts of life, birth, death, old age and disease. This is our ignorance. This is our foolishness.



Thank you very much. (end)



741010SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.30

-

Māyāpura, October 10, 1974



Nitāi: "Of course, it is bewildering, O soul of the universe, that You work, though You are inactive, that You take birth, though You are the vital force and the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst the animals, men, sages and aquatics. Verily, this is bewildering."



Prabhupāda:



janma karma ca viśvātmann

ajasyākartur ātmanaḥ

tiryaṅ-nṝṣiṣu yādaḥsu

tat atyanta-viḍambanam

[SB 1.8.30]



This viḍambanam word, the English translation is almost similar-"bewildering." Viḍambanam, "bewildering."



So this is to be understood, what is Kṛṣṇa, because He descends out of His causeless mercy as human being for reestablishing the principles of religious system.

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



(aside:) That's all right. So this is to be understood. Superficially understanding Kṛṣṇa... Of course, even not understanding. Simply by uttering the word "Kṛṣṇa" in love and affection, one becomes delivered. It is said: eka kṛṣṇa nāme yata pāpa hare, pāpī haya tata pāpa karibare nare(?). Kṛṣṇa-nāma is so powerful... It is said, if you chant thousand times Lord Viṣṇu's name, then the result is equal to once chanting Lord Rāma's name... I forget that, to recite that verse. But the purpose is this that... Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma is recommended to be chanted by common man. But śāstra says that after chanting one thousand of Lord Viṣṇu's name-there are hundreds and thousands of names-it is equal to if you chant once Lord Rāma's name. Similarly, if you chant three times Lord Rāma's name, then it is equal to once chanting Kṛṣṇa's name. So we understand or not understand, if we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, the result is there. Without any offense, if we chant, then the result is... Once chanting of Kṛṣṇa's name is so powerful that immediately the chanting makes you free from all kinds of reaction of sinful activities. Eka kṛṣṇa-nāme yata pāpa hare, pāpī haya tata pāpa kari bare nare(?). The pāpīs, they are very much expert in committing sinful activities, but Kṛṣṇa, this holy name, once chanted, is so powerful that this expert sinful man cannot commit so many sinful activities. This is there. So some way or other, if we offenselessly chant Hare Kṛṣṇa name, it is so powerful.



So here Kuntī says, janma karma ca viśvātmann ajasya. Aja means who never takes birth. Ajasya. Aja, the living entities, they are also aja, but sometimes the living entity, being attracted by the material energy, they come to this material world. Then their quality of aja, or not to take birth, becomes vanquished, because in the material world one has to take birth. But actually spirit soul, or the Supreme Spirit, Kṛṣṇa, they are aja. Ajo nityaḥ śāśvato 'yam. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said clearly that living entity is aja, nitya, śāśvata, ayam. "Then how he is dying?" one may question. That is also replied: na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Don't think... That dying means he's changing body, not dying. Therefore... Because Kṛṣṇa says the living entity is aja, everyone can question that "If he's aja, he does not take birth, then why he's taking birth? Why he's dying?" The answer is immediately there: na hanyate: "Don't think that he's dying." Na hanyate. "No, I see his body's being burned." No, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. That body is being burned. That...

Suppose if your cloth is burned... In my childhood, when I was three, four years old, I was saved. My all cloth burned, and there is a scar. You have seen. I would have died that day, but fortunately I was saved. The cloth was burning. That, what is that called, matches color? So I was trying to burn, and it caught my cloth. So the cloth burned, but I did not burn. Similarly, this body also burns, but the soul... Nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi na dahati pāvakaḥ. The soul is never cut into pieces by any weapon, neither it is burned by the fire, soul. That is eternity. Anything material, it will burn, it will be cut into pieces, it can be dried up, it can be moistened. Because we cannot see the soul, so Kṛṣṇa has explained in a negative definition what is the characteristic of the soul. Nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ, na śoṣayati mārutaḥ [Bg. 2.23]. Like that.

So aja... We are also aja because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. And nitya. Nityaḥ śāśva... Ajo nityaḥ. Nitya... The Māyāvāda philosophy is that we are aja, and Supreme Brahman is aja. So when we are uncovered by this material body, we mix with the aja. That is their theory, monist. We merge into the existence of aja. But that is not fact. You merge. That is like merging a green bird into a green tree. When a green bird enters a green tree it appears that the green bird is now merged and he, it has no more existence. No. That is not... One can understand. The bird enters into the green tree does not mean the bird has lost his existence. His individuality is still there. Similarly, when we merge, even in Brahman effulgence, we do not lose our individuality. Although it appears that we have lost our identity, individuality, but actually that is not the fact. And because it is not fact, therefore our another quality is ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt: (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12) we want ānanda.

As Kṛṣṇa is ānandamaya... We see Kṛṣṇa is always engaged in pastimes, either with the cowherd boys or with the gopīs or with His father, mother, or in the fight of battlefield, Kurukṣetra, or in killing some demon. But His pastimes are always there. He's never inactive. He's never inactive. There it is said, viśvātmann ajasya akartuḥ. He has nothing to do, but still He is acting. Akartuḥ. Akartuḥ means He has nothing to do. Here, so far we are concerned, we have to do something in the material world. We are destined. Śarīra-yātrāpi ca te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "If you do not work, you cannot maintain even your body. You have to work." You see therefore all living entities... At night, millions and trillions of living entities, they come, fly and work. The work has no meaning. The work is death. Still, they are working. So what to speak of others? The birds, the sparrows, they are working, from here to there, here... And we are also working. So that is the nature of material existence.

But Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do. Akartuḥ. He has nothing to do. Na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti na me karma-phale spṛhā [Bg. 4.14]. He has not... But He comes as a human being just to teach us how to work, how to work. That He explains in the Bhagavad-gītā, how to work and be happy. But not to work, Kṛṣṇa has never... And neither this place is like that, that you will not work, and everything will come automatically. Things are coming automatically, but you have to pick up the things by working. That is the nature. Just like you have got gold mine under your feet. So you have to take it by working, by digging. You cannot say, "Now I have got the gold mine. Now sit down tightly." No. That is not material nature. But Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. That is the Vedic instruction. That is akartuḥ. He has nothing to do. Why He has nothing to do? Now, because He has got many energies. Just like nowadays, by electronics, one man is sitting... We have seen the pilot. He's sitting in his place. He's simply pushing on the button, and the whole, big gigantic 747 is flying in the sky. We see the pilot is sitting there. He's doing nothing, but he's doing everything. But the electronic arrangement is so perfect. But sitting in one place he is working the big gigantic machine. As it is possible for a small material man, how much it is possible for Kṛṣṇa. Although He does not do anything, still, He's viśvātman: He is controlling the whole universe, viśvātman. He's the vital force, viśvāt... This is Kṛṣṇa.

So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa. Kuntī is helping us. Every devotee, Vaiṣṇava, they voluntarily takes this business just to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, to explain Kṛṣṇa, just like Kuntī is explaining, because if we understand Kṛṣṇa thoroughly, then we are liberated. Therefore Kṛṣṇa..., Kuntī's trying that "Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa is helping Arjuna in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, it is His duty." No, it is not His duty. He's doing it voluntarily, but He has nothing to do with it. That is Kṛṣṇa. Na me karma-phale spṛhā. He has nothing to do. We are forced to do. According to our karma-phala, we are forced to do. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham. Here we have to, we are forced to accept happiness or distress according to destiny. You cannot deny, that "I'll not take this distressed condition of life. I'll simply take the happiness portion." That you cannot do. You must. Kṛṣṇa is not like that. That is understanding of Kṛṣṇa. (aside:) Why you are standing? You can sit down. Kṛṣṇa is not like that. Kṛṣṇa is akartuḥ. Ātmanaḥ..., although He is the vital force of everything.

So if we simply understand Kṛṣṇa, as explained in the śāstras, sādhu-śāstra, or saintly persons, devotees, if we try to understand, then we become liberated. Janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. As it is said, janma karma ca viśvātmann ajasya akartur ātmanaḥ, viḍambanam. Viḍambanam. They are all bewildering, bewildering. Therefore, if one understands properly, then the result is that he becomes liberated. That means he gets full knowledge. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. Then he understands that Kṛṣṇa is everything. He's the origin of everything. Viśvātman. This is to be understood. He's the vital force of the whole universe. The whole universe is moving not automatically, but under the guidance and superintendency of Kṛṣṇa. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Kṛṣṇa says, "Under My superintendence" So Kṛṣṇa is active, but He has nothing to do. This is acintya, inconceivable. He is very active because He is supervising the whole activities of the universe, but still, He has nothing to do. That is Kṛṣṇa. We have to understand that. Paśyaty acakṣuḥ. "He is seeing, but acakṣuḥ. Acakṣuḥ means... You may say, "Not seeing." Acakṣuḥ. He does not place His eyesight, but still, He's seeing. How it is? Now, He can see from any part of His body. Just like I close my eyes-I cannot see you. My seeing activities stop. But because, although I am, I have closed my eyes, but my hands are there. So Kṛṣṇa can see by hands, by nails. That is Kṛṣṇa. Aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti paśyanti... This very word is used, paśyanti. The limbs of the body of Kṛṣṇa, any part, He can see. Although He may close His eyes, but because other parts of the body are open, therefore He can see. Aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti.

In this way, Kṛṣṇa is explained in so many śāstras, and He explains Himself. If we simply try to understand the constitution of Kṛṣṇa, then we become liberated. And if we try to understand, Kṛṣṇa will help. Kṛṣṇa says, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. The more we hear about Kṛṣṇa, we become purified. We cannot understand Kṛṣṇa because we are not purified. But the, simply if you hear the Kṛṣṇa name-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare-if you chant and hear, you become purified. So why should we not this, take this simple method and as it is recommended in the śāstra, harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21], simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, twenty-four hours? Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. You become perfect. Why we are losing this opportunity? That is our misfortune. That is explained by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi: "My Lord, You have shown Your mercy so liberally that name, chanting of Your name, is sufficient." Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktiḥ. This chanting of the name, abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ... [Cc. Madhya 17.133], there is all potency of Him. Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā. There is all potencies. Nāmnām akāri... And there are many names, not only one name. If you don't like to chant Kṛṣṇa's name, then there are other names also, any name. Must be name of harer nāma, nāma, the name of Hari, not others, harer nāma. Then you get all the potencies. Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā. And niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. And there is no, I mean to, consideration whether you shall chant in the morning or in the evening or while you are, mean, purified or not purified. Any circumstances, you can chant. Niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. There is no such consideration.

So Kṛṣṇa is available so cheaply for the people, especially kalau, in this age of Kali. Still, we are reluctant to chant the holy name. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu regrets, etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi: "Although You are so liberal and kind upon this fallen soul, still, unfortunate as I am, I am not inclined to chant this holy name." This is our position, obstinacy, dog's obstinacy. But if we do it, then we become purified. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu's recommendation is to read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam either yourself, being purified, or without being purified, you can read, chant. This is our Vaiṣṇava regulation, duty. As much as possible, we should read Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And any such literature-Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Brahma-saṁhitā. Any one of them or all of them, it doesn't matter. And chant twenty-four hours Hare Kṛṣṇa. This is our business.

So we are giving this chance to everyone. We have constructed this big building, or constructing more and more-why? To give this chance to everyone. Please come here. Chant, join Hare Kṛṣṇa kīrtana, take prasādam and do your best, whatever talent you have got, easily, not very overburdened. If you know something to do, do it for Kṛṣṇa. Everyone knows. Everyone has got some talent. So that talent should be utilized for Kṛṣṇa. And if you think that "No, I shall chant simply," all right, you chant. But don't sleep in the name of chanting. That... Don't cheat. That cheating is not good. If you think that you can chant like Haridāsa Ṭhākura, then you simply chant. We shall supply you food. There is no anxiety. But don't try to cheat. You must be engaged. Yat karoṣi yaj juhoṣi yad aśnāsi, kuruṣva tad mad-arpaṇam [Bg. 9.27]. Of course, if we can chant twenty-four hours, that is very good. But that is not possible. We are not so highly elevated. We must do something for Kṛṣṇa.

So this is... This institution, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is giving chance to everyone. And we are opening centers all over the world for this purpose, that you come, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, hear about Kṛṣṇa, Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, and whatever you can do, just do it for Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



730423SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.31

-

Los Angeles, April 23, 1973



Devotee:



gopy ādade tvayi kṛtāgasi dāma tāvad

yā te daśāśru-kalilāñjana-sambhramākṣam

vaktraṁ ninīya bhaya-bhāvanayā sthitasya

sā māṁ vimohayati bhīr api yad bibheti

[SB 1.8.31]



"My, dear Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodā took up a rope to bind You when You committed an offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded with tears, which washed the mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear personified is afraid of You. This sight is bewildering to me."



Prabhupāda: This is also another opulence of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is full with six kinds of opulences. So this opulence is beauty, beauty opulence. Kṛṣṇa has got six opulences: all riches, all strength, all influence, all knowledge, all beauty, all renunciation. So this is the opulence of Kṛṣṇa's beauty. Kṛṣṇa wants everyone...



Just like we are, we are offering obeisances to Kṛṣṇa with awe and veneration. But nobody comes here to Kṛṣṇa with a rope: "Kṛṣṇa, You are offender. I shall bind You." Nobody comes. That is the another prerogative of the most perfect devotee. Yes. Kṛṣṇa wants that. Because He's full of opulence... This is also another opulence. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. The greater than the greatest and the smaller than the smallest. That is opulence.

So Kuntīdevī is thinking of Kṛṣṇa's opulence, but she did not dare to take the part of Yaśodā. That is not possible. Although Kuntīdevī happened to be aunt of Kṛṣṇa, but she had no such privilege... This privilege is especially given to Yaśodāmāyi. Because she's so advanced devotee that she has got the right to chastise the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is special prerogative. So Kuntīdevī was simply thinking of the privilege of Yaśodāmāyi, that how much fortunate and how much privileged she was that she could threaten the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is feared even by the fear personified. Bhīr api yad bibheti [SB 1.8.31]. Who is not afraid of Kṛṣṇa? Everyone. But Kṛṣṇa is afraid of Yaśodāmāyi. This is the superexcellence of Kṛṣṇa.

Just like Kṛṣṇa's another name is Madana-mohana. Madana means Cupid. Cupid enchants everyone. Cupid. And Kṛṣṇa enchants Cupid. Therefore His name is Madana-mohana. He's so beautiful that even Cupid is enchanted by Him. But again on the other side, Kṛṣṇa, although He's so beautiful that He enchants the Cupid, still He is enchanted by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Therefore Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's name is Madana-mohana-mohinī. Kṛṣṇa is the enchanter of the Cupid, and Rādhārāṇī is the enchanter of that enchanter. So these are very high-grade spiritual understanding in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is not fiction or imagination, concoction. They are facts. They are facts. And every devotee can have such privileges if he is actually advanced. If you...

Don't think that the privilege which was given to Mother Yaśodā... If not exactly like that, everyone can have that privilege. If you love Kṛṣṇa as your child, then you'll have such privilege. Because the mother has got... Because mother loves the most. Nobody... In this material world, there is no comparison of mother's love. Without any exchange. Even in this material world. Mother loves the child without any expectation of return, generally. Although in this material world it is so polluted, still sometimes mother thinks: "The child will be grown up. He will be big man. He will earn money, and I shall get it." There is still some feelings of exchange. But while loving Kṛṣṇa, there is no such feeling of exchange. That is called unalloyed love. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], free from all material gain.

We should not love Kṛṣṇa for some material gain. It is not that: "Kṛṣṇa, give us our daily bread. Then I love You. Kṛṣṇa, give me this. Then I love You." There is no such mercantile exchange. That is wanted. Kṛṣṇa wants that kind of love. So here it is said that position, yā te daśā, daśā... When, as soon as Kṛṣṇa saw Mother Yaśodā is coming with a rope to bind Him, so He immediately became very much afraid so that tears came out. "Oh, Mother is going to bind Me." Yā te daśāśru-kalila añjana. And the ointment is being washed off. And sambhrama. And with great respect looking to the mother, with feeling appeal: "Yes, Mother, I have offended you. Kindly excuse Me." This was the scene of Kṛṣṇa. So that scene is appreciated by Kuntī. And immediately His head became downward.

So this is another Kṛṣṇa's perfection, that although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead... In Bhagavad-gītā He says: mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. "My dear Arjuna, there is no superior being above Me. I am the supermost." Mattaḥ parataraṁ na anyat. There is nobody else." That Supreme Personality of Godhead, above whom there is none, that Supreme Personality of Godhead is bowing down before Mother Yaśodā. Ninīya, vaktraṁ ninīya. He is accepting: "My dear Mother, yes, I am offender." Ninīya vaktraṁ bhaya-bhāvanayā, with a feeling of fearfulness. Sthitasya. Sometimes when Yaśodāmātā, Mother Yaśodā, used to see that the child has become too much afraid, she also became disturbed. Because if the child is disturbed... It is a psychology. There is some mental reaction. So Mother Yaśodā did not want that actually Kṛṣṇa will suffer by my punishment. That was not Kṛṣṇa, Mother Yaśodā's purpose. But as a mother feelingly, when she feels too much disturbance, the child is...

This system is still current in India, when the child too much disturbing, he is bound up in a place. That is very common system. So Yaśodā Mother adopted it. Sā māṁ vimohayati. So that is the scene appreciated by pure devotees, that how much greatness is there in the Supreme Person that He is playing exactly a perfect child. When He's playing like a child, He plays perfectly. When He plays a husband (with) 16,000 wives, He was playing perfectly as husband. When He was playing as lover of the gopīs, He was playing perfectly. When He was friend of the cowherd boys, He was playing perfectly.

The cowherd boys all depend on Kṛṣṇa. They wanted to taste the palm tree fruit, but there was a demon, Gardabhāsura, they would not allow anyone to enter that palm trees. But the boy friends of Kṛṣṇa, cowherds, they requested: "Kṛṣṇa, we wanted to taste that fruit. If you can arrange..." "Yes." Immediately Kṛṣṇa arranged. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma went to the forest, and the demons, they were living there in the shape of asses, and immediately they came to kick by their hind legs Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. And Balarāma captured one of them and immediately threw on the top of the tree and the demons died.

So the friends also were very much obliged to Kṛṣṇa. There was fire all around. They do not know anything. "Kṛṣṇa." "Yes." Kṛṣṇa is ready. Kṛṣṇa immediately swallowed up the whole fire. There were so many demons attacked. Every day, all the boys, they would come back to their home and explain to their mother: "Mother, Kṛṣṇa is so wonderful. You see. This happened today." And the mother would say: "Yes, our Kṛṣṇa is wonderful." So much. That's all. They do not know Kṛṣṇa is God, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person. Kṛṣṇa is wonderful. That's all. And their love increases. The more they perceive Kṛṣṇa's wonderful activities, they become more lover. "Perhaps he may be a demigod. Yes." That is their suggestion. When Nanda Mahārāja will talk amongst his friends and the friends will talk about Kṛṣṇa... "Oh, Nanda Mahārāja, your child Kṛṣṇa is wonderful. "Yes, I see that. Maybe some demigod." That's all. "Maybe." That is also not certain. So the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they do not care who is God out or who is not God. That is not their business. But they want Kṛṣṇa and love Kṛṣṇa. That's all.

So those who are thinking of first of all analyzing Kṛṣṇa, whether He's God, they are not first-class devotee. Those who have got spontaneous love for Kṛṣṇa, they are first-class devotees. How you will analyze Kṛṣṇa? He's unlimited. It is impossible. So this business... We should not try to analyze, to know Kṛṣṇa. It is impossible. We have got limited perception, limited potency of our senses. How we can study Kṛṣṇa? It is not possible at all. Whatever Kṛṣṇa reveals Himself, that much sufficient. Don't try. That is not...

Neti neti. Just like the Māyāvādīs, they are trying to find out God, where is God, who is God. Neti, not this. They're simply "Not this." Their philosophy is based on "Not this." And what it is, they do not know. The so-called scientists, also, they are trying to find out the ultimate cause, but their process is "not this." So much. As, as much they're advancing, they're finding "Not this", and what it is, they will never find. They will never find. They can say "Not this," but what it is, that is not possible. That is not possible.

panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo

vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām

so 'pyasti yat prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.34]



So what to speak of Kṛṣṇa, even this material object. They're trying to go to the Moon planet. Actually they do not know what it is. Actually. Then why they're coming back? If they knew it perfectly, what it is, then they would have resided there by this time. They are trying for the last twenty years. Simply they are seeing: "Not this. There is no living entities. There is no possibility of our living there." So many "Nos." And what is yes? No, they do not know. And this is only one planet or one star. The moon planet is taken as star.



The scientists, they say the stars are all suns, but according to our information, in the Bhagavad-gītā: nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī. Śaśī means the moon is just like so many stars. So what is the position of the moon? Moon is bright being reflection of the sun. So according to our calculation the sun is one. But the modern scientists say that there are so many suns, the stars. We don't agree. This is only one universe. There are many suns, innumerable, but in each and every sun, every universe, there is one sun, not many. So this universe, what we are experiencing, experiencing by seeing imperfectly... We do not know. We cannot count how many stars are there, how many planets are there. It is impossible. So the material things which is before us, still we are unable to count, to understand, and what to speak of the Supreme Lord who created this universe? That is not possible.

Therefore in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said: panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyaḥ [Bs. 5.34]. Panthās... Koṭi-śata-vatsara. The space is unlimited. Now you take your plane or sputnik or capsule... So many things they have invented. So you go on. Now go on for how many hours or days or years? No. Panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara. For millions of years, koṭi-śata-vatsara, go on with your speed. Panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyaḥ. And how I shall go? Now on the plane which is running on the velocity of the air. Not this velocity, not this speed, 500 miles or 1000 miles per hour. No. What is the speed of air?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: 126,000 miles per second.



Prabhupāda: 96 miles per second. These are mentioned in the Vedic literature that if you go by this speed, air, 96 miles per second... So just imagine what is the speed of air. So panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo vāyor athāpi [Bs. 5.34]. On the plane which is running on the speed of air. That speed, and for millions of years. Then again it is suggested not only on the speed of air but also on the speed of mind.



The mind you can, everyone, we know, what is the speed of mind. Even one ten-thousandth part of a second, you can go millions of miles. The speed of mind. It is so speedy. You are sitting here, and suppose you have seen something which is millions of miles, miles away, you can immediately, your mind can go immediately. So these two examples are given. Just see how much scientific they were. These rascals says that there was no advanced mind or advanced scientists. Then wherefrom these words are coming? The speed of air, the speed of mind. Unless they had some experiment, some knowledge. Why, how these books are written?

So panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo vāyor athāpi manasaḥ [Bs. 5.34]. And how the speed, speedy planes are manufactured? Muni-puṅgavānām. By the greatest scientists and greatest thoughtful men. By, manufactured by them. So is that perfection? No. So 'pyasti yat prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve. Still you shall remain in inconceivable understanding what is this creation. Still, if you are so advanced that you can run on on this speed and if you are greatest scientist and thoughtful philosopher, still you'll remain in the same condition, unknown. Still.

So how we can study Kṛṣṇa? And Kṛṣṇa has created all these things. So if you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa's created things, how you can understand Kṛṣṇa? This is not possible at all. It is not possible. Therefore this Vṛndāvana status of mind for the devotees is the perfection. They have no business to understand Kṛṣṇa. They want to love Kṛṣṇa, without condition. "Because Kṛṣṇa is God, therefore I love Him." Their mentality is not like that. Kṛṣṇa is not just playing in Vṛndāvana as God. He is playing there as ordinary cowherds boy. But at times, He's proving that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But they do not care to know it. So outside Vṛndāvana...

Just like Kuntīdevī. Kuntīdevī is not inhabitant of Vṛndāvana. She is inhabitant of Hastināpura, outside Vṛndāvana. The outside devotees, the devotees who are outside Vṛndāvana, they are studying the inhabitants of the Vṛndāvana, how great they are. But the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they don't care to know how great is Kṛṣṇa. That is the difference. So our business is simply to love Kṛṣṇa. The more you love Kṛṣṇa, the more you become perfect. It is not that it is necessary to understand Kṛṣṇa, how He has created. The things are mentioned there. Kṛṣṇa is explaining Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā so much. Don't bother very much to know Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. Simply increase your unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa. That is perfection of life.

Thank you very much. (end)



741011SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.31

-

Māyāpura, October 11, 1974



Nitāi: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodā took up a rope to bind You when You committed an offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded with tears, which washed the mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear personified is afraid of You. This sight is bewildering to me."



Prabhupāda:



gopy ādade tvayi kṛtāgasi dāma tāvad

yā te daśāśru-kalilāñjana-sambhramākṣam

vaktraṁ ninīya bhaya-bhāvanayā sthitasya

sā māṁ vimohayati bhīr api yad bibheti

[SB 1.8.31]



So this is the description of Kṛṣṇa's becoming Dāmodara. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Dāmodara. The Dāmodara Temple, Rādhā-Dāmodara Temple, is there in Vṛndāvana, and I was staying there. Still I have my two rooms. So this Dāmodara description... The Dāmodara month is coming, and it will begin on the 18th of this October. So from that day, we'll observe Dāmodara-vrata for one month. From 18th to 17th November. The duty will be that in the evening you'll offer candle, a small candle, all of you, just before the Deity, not within the room, outside the room, and chant the Dāmodarāṣṭaka, namāmīśvaram. That is already printed in our song book. So this will be Dāmodara-vrata. That Dāmodara is explained here.



Śrīmatī Kuntī is also motherly. So how Kṛṣṇa was afraid of His mother, Yaśodā, that is described here. Gopyā: "By Your mother, Yaśodā." The Vallabhācārya made a book of Kṛṣṇa's various names. And he came to Caitanya Mahāprabhu to request Him to hear that how he has described Kṛṣṇa's name. At that time, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "I know Kṛṣṇa's two names: Śyāmasundara and Yaśodānandana." Śyāmasundara, "beautiful Śyāma, Kṛṣṇa." Yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpam. He's not śyāma-śyāma means blackish-but at the same time, the most beautiful. Here in this material world, if somebody is blackish, he cannot be called beautiful. But Kṛṣṇa, although He is blackish, He is sundaram, very, very beautiful. How much sundaram? Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobham [Bs. 5.30]. Kandarpa-koṭi. If you keep one side millions of Cupids, still, Kṛṣṇa will appear more beautiful. Just like we sing, nitāi-pada-kamala, koṭi-candra-suśītala. Koṭi, millions of moons together, they cannot be so peaceful and cool as the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda. These examples are given in the śāstra. They are not exaggeration but actual fact. And we have to take it in good faith. Then we'll make advance in spiritual life. Otherwise, if we think these things are exaggeration in the śāstras or by the devotees, that is aparādha, offense.

So here it is said that kṛtāgasi. Kṛtāgasi... So Kṛṣṇa was offender before His mother. The mother, Yaśodā, was taking care of the milk, and Kṛṣṇa wanted to suck his (her) breast. So mother was very busy. So when the milk was overflowing, she immediately left Kṛṣṇa and went to take care of the milk. Kṛṣṇa became very much angry. So He went to the butter stock and broke the butter pot, spoiled it, and when mother Yaśodā saw that the child is breaking the butter pot, he (she) immediately wanted to catch Him, and Kṛṣṇa fled away. And then, after all, He was a small child, and Mother Yaśodā caught Him and wanted to bind Him with a rope. This is the fact. Kṛtāgasi. Then gopy ādade kṛtāgasi tvam: "Because You were offender, therefore he (she) wanted to bind You." Dāma. Dāma means rope. Tāvat. "And what was Your condition at that time? The condition was yā te daśā." Daśā means condition. So He was crying. Lord Kṛṣṇa, out of fear of His mother-"Now Mother will bind Me"-so He was crying. And while crying, the tears washed the, what is called? Kajala? Mascara? So they were dropping, and He was fearful, crying, and He was, His head was down, flapping. This condition. Ninīya. Vaktraṁ ninīya, face. He felt culprit, that "I have done wrong." Bhaya-bhāvanayā. He was so much afraid that "Mother will bind Me. My freedom will be lost." Sthitasya: "In this way, when You were situated..."

So Kuntīdevī is remembering that scene, and she became astonished. Why? Now, bhīr api yad bibheti [SB 1.8.31]. The... There is one thing, bhaya. Everyone is afraid of something. That is called bhaya. So there is the personified bhaya, bhīḥ. So he's also afraid of Kṛṣṇa. Because Kṛṣṇa is the supreme being, controller, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1], so He can control... Just like the superintendent of police. So everyone is afraid of the superintendent of police. Especially those criminals, they are very much afraid. But why the governor should be afraid of the police superintendent? As that is not possible, that is unnatural, similarly, if there is any director of the fear department in the kingdom of Kṛṣṇa, so he's afraid of Kṛṣṇa because everyone is servant. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Whoever may be... Just like Goddess Kālī. She is personified fear. Just see, just imagine the bodily feature of Goddess Kālī. She is killing all the asuras. So many asuras has been killed that all their heads have been made into a garland, and she is putting on the shoulder. And one asura killed, and she has taken the head in the left hand. And the other hand is engaged with the, what is called, chopper? Khaṅga. What is the English of khaṅga?

Devotee (1): Chopper.



Prabhupāda: Chopper?



Devotee (2): Sword?



Prabhupāda: Yes. And the, she's standing, bhīḥ, bhīr api. Bhīḥ means personified, personified fearfulness. So those who are criminals, they worship Kālī, Goddess Kālī: "Mother, please excuse me. I, I am criminal. I'll give you one goat."



So these things are going on in the name of worshiping God. But that is not God worship. That is worshiping the fearful personified by the criminals. Just Durgā... Kālī is expansion of Durgā. Just like Viṣṇu is expansion of Kṛṣṇa, similarly, Kṛṣṇa's energy... Energy has also many expansions. Daśā mahā-vidyā. There are many expansions of Durgā because she has to look after... Just like police department. Police department is there, but there are many officers in that police department. Similarly, Durgā is the superintendent of police of this universe. Durgā. Durgā means the fort, durgā. Ga means going, and dur means difficulty.

So where you cannot go unless you accept so many difficulties, that is called durgā, or fort. So this universe, material world, is just like a durgā. You cannot escape. Conditioned souls, you cannot escape. It is very difficult. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. There are rules and regulations. Just like immigration department, security department-same thing. These are simply reflection of the original function of the supreme government. So this is... Just like prison house. You cannot escape so easily. If you try to escape, then you'll be again punished. So the bhīḥ, the superintendent of police... The original superintendent is Durgā. Durgā means the protector of this durgā, where you cannot escape. So she is also servant of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is said, bhīr api yad bibheti [SB 1.8.31]. This Durgā is the fearful personified, but still she cannot disobey Kṛṣṇa's order. That is her position, dāsī. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. The bhīḥ, the fearful feature of Kṛṣṇa's potency, can only excuse you when you are surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, you have to suffer these material pangs. We can understand how we are materially inconvenienced. We are... We have got such a nice house, and we are living on the third floor, so nicely decorated with marble. But the Durgā's agent, the flies, they can go there and disturb you, so much so that you would like to go away from this house. This is our position. So the bhīḥ, the fearful personified agent, can punish you anywhere. You may think that "I am very comfortably situated," but that fearful agent can go anywhere.

So that fearful agent, Durgā, is also fearful of Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa's position. Because she is servant. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. She is so powerful, Durgā, that she can create one universe. Just like Kṛṣṇa can create, Kṛṣṇa also creates through her agent. As it is stated, na tasya kāryam karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. He does not do anything directly, but as soon as He desires, "Let there..." Sa aikṣata sa asṛjata. These are the statements of the Vedas. In the Bible also it is said, "God desired: Let there be creation." Is it not like that? "And there was creation." Yes. The modern men, they cannot understand. "Eh! What is this? If somebody says 'Let there be creation,' and immediately that is ready? And He hasn't got to do it? These things are simply exaggeration." But no, that is the fact. God does not do anything by Himself. He's so powerful. Simply by His will... There are so many agents, and they are so powerful that immediately they can do it. The foolish people, they cannot see the hands of God is working everywhere.

So sṛṣṭi-sthiti... Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. So prakṛti, this material nature is working, and if one is criminal... Criminal means we are. Just see the flies, the insects, how much they are suffering. Whole night, they struggle to enjoy the lamp. And in the morning all dead. All dead. This is their life. So we are thinking that we are better situated. No, we are not better situated. Our, the principle is the same, that you come here, you accept a certain type of body, and whole night, or whole life... Night means ignorance, darkness. So in ignorance you go on struggling whole life, and then you become dead, finished. The same thing. There is no difference between the life of the insect... Therefore Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that, that the, these big, big demigods... Yat kāruṇya-katākṣa-vaibhavavatām. There is a verse. I just now forget it. Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that kaivalya, the impersonalists' theory of becoming one, monist, with the Absolute... That is called kaivalya. So he says: kaivalyaṁ narakāyate: "For a devotee who has got little favor of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, for him, this kaival ya-sukha, happiness of becoming one with the Supreme, is as good as the hell." Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. And tri-daśa-pūra ākāśa-puṣpāyate. Tri-daśa-pūra means where thirty-three millions of demigods live, heavenly planets. It is something like phantasmagoria, ākāśa-puṣpa, which has... Just like in Bengal they say, jokingly, ghoṛā ḍim. Ghoṛā ḍim means a ghoṛā, a horse, never gives eggs. It is fantastics. It is not possible. Similarly, these heavenly planets, for a Vaiṣṇava, is ghoṛā ḍim. They don't care for it. It is no fact.

So kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūra ākāśa-puṣpāyate. Karmīs, they want to go to the heavenly planet. This is the sarcastic remark upon the karmīs. And kaivalyaṁ narakāyate, a sarcastic remark upon the jñānīs. They want to become, want to become one. Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūra ākāśa-puṣpāyate, durdānta indriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate. Durdānta indriya. Our senses are very powerful, durdānta. We cannot control. Just like snake. A snakes..., if you get some snakes here, it is very difficult to control. If you go to control, immediately it will bite and your life is finished. But mantrauṣadhi, those who know mantra and oṣadhi, they can control. But common man, they cannot control. But this Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that there is no control. There is no question of control. The snake is horrible, very fearful, so long it has got the poison teeth, viṣa-dānta. So sometimes the physicians, according to Āyur Vedic system, they take out the poison from the teeth. They do not kill, but catch and take out the poison. So if the poison teeth is taken away, the snake is no more fearful. So Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate. Daṁṣṭrāyate. Just like the dentists take away the teeth, similarly, if one snake's poison teeth is taken away, so no, it is no more fearful. In Bengal it is said that viṣa nai kula pana cakra.(?) So one who knows that this snake's poison teeth is taken away, he's not afraid. But this snake is fearful to the boys, to the children, not to the elderly men.

So anyone who has become devotee, for them, these senses, which are compared with the snakes, are not fearful. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He was young man, he has got all the senses, and the young girl, beautiful girl, came before him. But he was not fearful because the poison teeth is taken away of his senses. The senses, being engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, it is no more controller of the sense proprietor. This is the system. Therefore Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī said that durdānta: "The senses are like the snakes; it is very difficult to control. But it can be controlled because the poison teeth is taken away." This is the position of devotee. Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūrākāśa-puṣpāyate durdānta indriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate.

And what is the other? Now, vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate. I was going to come to this point. Vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate. Vidhi means Brahmā, and mahendra means the king of heaven, Indradeva. Such, such, big, big men, what to speak of these Churchill or Subhash Bose or... These big, big, they're kīṭāyate. Kīṭāyate means a devotee thinks this Brahmā and Indra exactly like these insect. That is the conception. So that is actually the fact. Everyone... It is the relative world. Relatively, it looks very gorgeous, but the actually... Just like proportionate. You put five upon ten, and five millions upon ten millions. The ratio is the same, half. Similarly, these big, big men, these big, big politicians, they are struggling exactly like the insect. The whole life, they struggle. And in the morning, at a certain time, they're heap, heaps of dead body. That's all. We have seen it in Calcutta. When there was Hindu-Muslim riot, they fought, and in Bhag Bazaar there were heaps of dead bodies. And when it is dead body, nobody could understand who is Hindu and who is Muslim. Simply it was to be cleared from the road. So our position is like that.

So we may be afraid of this fearful agent, but Kṛṣṇa is not fearful, afraid of fearful agent. We do... Because we should not. Therefore Kuntī is astonished, vimohayati, that "This is my astonishment, that how Kṛṣṇa is afraid of His mother? The... Everyone is afraid of Kṛṣṇa." That Kṛṣṇa, Kuntī admits that... Therefore it is called līlā. Everything, whatever Kṛṣṇa does, it is līlā. Līlā means He's enjoying that fearful attitude of Himself. Everyone prays Him as the Supreme Lord. He is adored, He's worshiped. Nobody can be fearful to Him. Nobody goes to Kṛṣṇa: "I have come to chastise You, Kṛṣṇa." That is not possible. Nobody goes to the temple with the attitude, with a stick-"Sir, I have come to chastise You." Everyone is praying. So when Kṛṣṇa thinks that "I want to be chastised," at that time He become subordinate to His devotee to be chastised. This is Kṛṣṇa's līlā. Kṛṣṇa agrees that "Nobody comes to chastise Me, all My devotees. If some devotee comes to chastise Me, I would like it." So Kṛṣṇa accepts such great devotee as His mother and father, and they are able to chastise Kṛṣṇa.

So these people, these Māyāvādī people, they are trying to become one with the God. But a devotee doesn't like to be one with God but better than God or higher than God. That is devotee's position. Devotee's so powerful that Kṛṣṇa, a devotee can claim to become higher than God. They can produce God. Just like Yaśodā-mātā, Devakī. He (she) produced God. And God agrees. These Devakī and Vasudeva, they underwent severe penances, austerities. Without any conjugal union, they undergone tapasya. And Kṛṣṇa came to them, that "What do you want?" "Now I, we want a son like You." So Kṛṣṇa said, "Who can be equal to Me? That is not possible. I shall become your son." This is the reason that Kṛṣṇa took birth as the son of Devakī, because they become... Kṛṣṇa... Vasudeva and Devakī or mother Yaśodā or Nanda, they became the father and mother of Kṛṣṇa, and now they are chastising Kṛṣṇa. It is not so easy thing. They had to undergo thousands of years in penances to take this position of chastising Kṛṣṇa. It is not... (end)



730424SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.32

-

Los Angeles, April 24, 1973



Devotee:



kecid āhur ajaṁ jātaṁ

puṇya-ślokasya kīrtaye

yadoḥ priyasyānvavāye

malayasyeva candanam

[SB 1.8.32]



"Some say that the Unborn is born for the glorification of pious kings, and others say that He is born to please King Yadu, one of Your dearest devotees. You appear in his family as sandalwood appears in the Malaya hills."



Prabhupāda: So there are two Malayas. One Malaya hill and one, this Malaya... Malaysia, now it is known as. Formerly, in this part of the world, Malaysia, they were growing sandalwood in great, large scale. Because 5,000 years ago, there was good demand for sandalwood. Every person should use the sandal pulp. Because in India, it is tropical country. So this is a good cosmetic. Still, those who can afford during very warm day of summer season, if you apply pulp of sandalwood on your body, you feel no warm. It is cool. Yes.



So it was the system... Still that is going on, but a very small scale. That everyone, after taking bath, he should smear over the body with sandalwood pulp. It will keep the body whole day nice, cool and calm. So that was the cosmetic. Now, in the Kali-yuga, that is called prasādhanam. Just like, every country, the system is, after taking bath, you dress your hair, add something scented. So in India it was the system that after taking bath, having tilaka, going to the Deity room, offering obeisances, then the prasādam, candana-prasādam was taken from the Deity room and it was used. This is called prasādhanam. In Kali-yuga, in the, it is said that: snānam eva hi prasādhanam. If one can take bath nicely, that is prasādhanam. So much. No more this cosmetic or sandalwood oil or rose scent or rose water. These are finished. That snānam eva prasādhanam [SB 12.2.5]. Simply by, taking bath...

While I was in India, in the beginning, so taking bath is very ordinary thing because even the poorest man will take early morning bath. But actually when I came to your country I saw that taking bath is also difficult thing. Taking bath, that is also not in practice. Perhaps once in a week. We are accustomed to see in India thrice in a day. And I have seen in New York that friends are coming to another friend's house because one has no facility for taking shower bath. So coming to a friend's house. Is it not? I have seen it. So the symptoms of Kali-yuga described that it will be very difficult also to take even bath. Snānam eva hi prasādhanam.

And dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. Dākṣyam. Dākṣyam meaning, means one who is famous for his pious activities. He's called dākṣyam. Dākṣyam, this word comes from dakṣa. Dakṣa means expert. So dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. In Kali-yuga, if a person can maintain a family... Family means wife and a few children, or one or two children. That is called family. But family does not mean in India like that. Family means a joined family. Joined family, the father, the sons, the nephews, the sister, husbands. They join together. That is called family. But in the Kali-yuga, it will be difficult even to maintain family. If one can maintain his family...

In New York, when I was there, one old lady was coming. So he has, she had a grown-up son. So I asked her: "Why don't you get your son married?" "Yes, he can marry if he can maintain the family." I did not know that, that the maintaining of family is a difficult job here. I did not know that. So these are described in the Bhāgavatam. If one can maintain a family, oh, he is very glorious man. "Oh, he's maintaining five (?)." If the girl has got a husband, she is considered to be very fortunate. So actually these things are there.

So it is not our business to criticize, but the symptoms of Kali-yuga is very, very severe, and it will grow more and more. We have simply passed 5,000 years only of the Kali-yuga, but the duration of Kali-yuga is 400,000, 432,000 of years, out of only we have passed 5,000 years. And after passing 5,000 years, we find so many difficulties, and the more we grow in this Kali-yuga, the days will be more and more difficult. So best thing is that you finish your Kṛṣṇa consciousness business and go back to home, back to Godhead. That will save you. Otherwise, if we come back again, the difficulties, the difficult days are ahead. We have to suffer more and more.

So Kṛṣṇa is described here as Aja. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Ajo 'pi. "I am unborn." Yes. Kṛṣṇa is unborn. We are also unborn. But difference is that we have been entangled with this material body. Therefore we cannot keep our position as unborn. We have to take birth, transmigrate from one body to another, and there is no guarantee what kind of body you are going to get next. But you have to accept.

Just like we are accepting in this life one body after another. The child is giving up his childhood body, accepting the boyhood body, The boy is giving up his boyhood body, accepting youthhood body. Similarly, this body of old age, when giving up, natural conclusion is that I will have to accept another body. Again childhood body. Just like there are seasonal changes. After summer, there is spring, or after spring there is summer, after summer, there is fall, there is, after fall, there is winter. Or after day, there is night, after night, there is day. As these, these are cycles one after another, similarly, we are changing body one after another. And natural conclusion is that after changing this body I'll get another body. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19].

This is very logical and supported by the śāstra and spoken by the greatest authority, by Kṛṣṇa. And why should you not accept it? If you don't accept, that is foolishness. If you don't think that there is no life after death, that is foolishness. There is life after death. So because we are accepting one body after another since time immemorial, we cannot think of that there is life eternal. It is difficult for us.

Just like a diseased man. He's lying down on the bed and eating there, passing stool there, passing urine there, and he cannot move and very bitter medicine. So many inconvenience. He's lying down. So he's thinking of committing suicide. "Oh, this life is very intolerable. Let me commit suicide." So in desperate condition sometimes the philosophy of voidism, impersonalism is followed. To make the things zero. Because this life is so much troublesome, sometimes even one commits suicide to get out of this, I mean to say, troublesome life of material existence. So the philosophy of voidism, impersonalism is like that. Mean they cannot, shudder, to think of another life, again eating, again sleeping, again working. Because he thinks eating, sleeping, means on the bed. That's all. And suffering. He cannot think otherwise. So the negative way, to make it zero. That is void philosophy.

But actually that is not the case. The case is that you are in trouble on material condition. you get out of this material condition. Then there is real life, eternal life. Because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is Aja. Aja means who has no birth and death. So we are also aja. How we can be otherwise? If Kṛṣṇa, I am Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel. The same example we can see. If my, if my father is happy, so I am the son of my father. Why I shall not be, I shall be unhappy? This is natural conclusion. Because I will enjoy my father's property as my father is enjoying.

Similarly God is all-powerful. Kṛṣṇa is all-powerful, all beautiful, all-knowledge, everything complete. So I may not be complete, but because I am part and parcel, so I have, I have got all the qualities of God in part and parcel. It is not that... So God does not die. He's aja. So I also will not die. This is my position. And that is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā that: na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit. When He's describing about the soul, Kṛṣṇa says that the soul is never born, na jāyate, na mriyate. And if one is not born, how he can die? There is no question of death. Death is for a thing which has got a birth. If one has no birth, there is no question of death. Na jāyate na mriyate vā. So we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa is Aja, we are also aja. That we do not know. This is ignorance. This is ignorance.

They are making scientific researches, but they do not know that every living entity is spirit soul. He has no birth. He has no death. He's eternal. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yam, everlasting, purāṇaḥ, although oldest, na hanyate. The conclusion: na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. So after the annihilation of this body the soul does not die. He accepts another body. This is our disease. This is called bhava-roga. Bhava-roga means material disease. So Kṛṣṇa, being the Supreme Living Entity, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13) Kṛṣṇa is exactly like us. Or we are imitation of Kṛṣṇa. The difference is Kṛṣṇa is vibhu, unlimited, and we are aṇu, we are limited. That is the difference. Otherwise, qualitatively, we are as good as Kṛṣṇa. Therefore whatever propensities Kṛṣṇa has, we have got all these propensities. Kṛṣṇa has the propensity to love the other sex. Therefore we have got this propensity, to love the other sex. The beginning of love is there in Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, eternal love between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So we are also seeking eternal love, but because we are conditioned by the material laws, it is interrupted. It is interrupted.

So if we be, come out of this interruption, then we get similar love affairs as Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī. So our business should be how to go back to home, back to Kṛṣṇa. Because going to Kṛṣṇa means, Kṛṣṇa is eternal, we get eternal body. Just like to become a secretary or even a servant of President Nixon, he's also big man. He's also big man. Because unless one has got some special quality, he cannot become personal servant of President Nixon or his secretary. It is not possible. Not ordinary man can become President Nixon's servant or secretary. Similarly to go back to home, back to Godhead means you get the same type of body, as Kṛṣṇa has got. You become aja. Ajo nityaḥ śāśvato 'yam. This is a disease, that we are changing our body. So Kṛṣṇa is Aja.

So Kuntī says: kaścid, kecid āhur ajaṁ jātam [SB 1.8.32]. Ajam, the eternal, the unborn, is now has taken His birth. Then of course we can say that Kṛṣṇa is taking birth. Yes Kṛṣṇa takes birth but His birth is not like ours. That we should know. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa is taking birth as the son of Devakī or Mother Yaśodā, but He's not taking birth exactly like us. That is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. When Kṛṣṇa appeared, He did not come out or did not come out from the womb of Devakī. He first of all appeared. You have seen the picture. And then He became a small child on the lap.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa's birth is transcendental. Our birth is by force, by the laws of nature. He's not under the laws of nature. The laws of nature works under Him. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Prakṛti, nature is working under the order of Kṛṣṇa, and we are working under the order of nature. That is the difference. See... Kṛṣṇa is the master of nature, and we are servant of nature. That is the difference. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate. Therefore Kuntīdevī says: kecid āhur. Somebody says like that. Somebody says like that, that the unborn has taken birth. How the unborn can take birth? It appears like that but it is not taking birth. It appears just like He has taken birth like us. No.

Therefore the, it is said, distinctly: kecid āhur. "Some foolish persons say like that." And Kṛṣṇa has also said in the Bhagavad-gītā: avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ. "Those who are rascals. they think that I am also just like ordinary human being." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. "Because I have appeared just like a human being, so some of the rascals, they think that I am also one of the human beings." No. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. He does not know what is the mystery behind the God's taking birth like human being. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. So similarly Kṛṣṇa is aja. He takes birth likely, not exactly He takes birth. He is everywhere.

Just like Kṛṣṇa, it is stated: īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati, īśvara [Bg. 18.61]. If the Lord is situated in everyone's heart, if that is a fact, so if Kṛṣṇa is within your heart, within yourself, so if he immediately comes in your front, so what is the difficulty for Kṛṣṇa? He's already within, and He's all-powerful. Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja, when he was engaged in meditation, the form meditation, four-handed Viṣṇu he was meditating upon. All of a sudden his meditation broke and he saw the same figure before him, immediately. Is it very difficult for Kṛṣṇa? He's already within you, and if He comes out...

Similarly if Kṛṣṇa is within the heart of everyone, Devakī also, so if He comes out before Devakī in the same four-handed form, is it very difficult for Kṛṣṇa? So people do not know. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that: "You have to understand: janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9], transcendental birth. My activities, My birth." Therefore Kuntīdevī knows that Kṛṣṇa is unborn. Kṛṣṇa does not take birth, but it appears like that to some fools. Therefore they say that Kṛṣṇa has taken birth. But why Kṛṣṇa takes birth? The next question will be. That is replied: puṇya-ślokasya kīrtaye [SB 1.8.32], puṇya-ślokasya. Those who are very pious, very advanced in spiritual understanding, to glorify them. Kṛṣṇa comes to become the son of Devakī to glorify Devakī. Kṛṣṇa becomes the son of Yaśodā to glorify His devotee, Yaśodā.

Similarly Kṛṣṇa appeared in the dynasty of Mahārāja Yadu just to glorify. He was a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and He is born in the family of Mahārāja Yadu. The whole family is celebrated still: Yādava. Kṛṣṇa's name is Yādava, because He took His birth in the Yadu family. So how is it that, that Kṛṣṇa took...? Now to glorify the family. Exactly, the example is given: Just like malayasyeva candanam [SB 1.8.32]. Candana. This is a tree. A tree can grow anywhere, but the sandalwood tree, because it is very prominent in the Malaysia country, formerly they were growing this candana tree, as I told you, because there was good demand, in India especially, of sandalwood. So they, nowadays they are growing rubber tree because there is good demand for rubber.

So... So even after business... Kuntī is giving this very nice example. This candana tree, it is a particular type of tree. It can grow anywhere. Not necessarily that it has to grow in Malaysia, or Malaya Hill. There is no such rules and regulations. It can grow anywhere. But because this sandalwood is grown in large quantity in such part of the world, the sandalwood is known as malaya-candana. Malaya-candana.

Just like in, in your western countries, the scented water: eau de cologne. Eau de cologne. Cologne is a country in France...? And there it is manufactured, therefore it is called eau de cologne. Similarly eau de cologne can be manufactured anywhere, but originally because it was manufactured in that Cologne city, it is known as eau de cologne. Similarly sandalwood also can grow anywhere but because originally it was very prominent in the Malayas...

Now 5,000 years ago, Kuntī is offering this prayer. That means before 5,000 years, the sandalwood was growing in the Malaysia. So this Malaysia is not a new name. It was known thousands and thousands of years ago. And... All these places, they were Vedic culture. So similarly she's giving the example that Kṛṣṇa has no obligation that He has to take His birth in a particular family or particular country. He has no such obligation. But to glorify a certain family or certain person because he is devotee, therefore He has taken birth.

The reason is He is appearing... Therefore it is called divyam, transcendental. He is not obliged. But we are obliged. That is the distinction between our taking birth and Kṛṣṇa. We are obliged. If by our karma, by our activities, we are fit for taking birth in a good family, then I will get my birth in good family or in the human society or demigod society. But if my activities are lower grade like animals, then I will have to take birth in the animal family. That is force. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur deha upapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. We develop a certain type of body according to our karma.

In this life... This human form of life is meant for athāto brahma jijñāsā, for understanding the Supreme. the Absolute Truth. But if we do not do so, if we simply remain like animal, then again we are going to the animal form of life. Misuse of the opportunity. Then we are... Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to save people from going down to animal life.

Thank you very much. (end)



741012SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.32

-

Māyāpura, October 12, 1974



Nitāi: "Some say that the Unborn is born for the glorification of pious kings, and others say that He is born to please King Yadu, one of Your dearest devotees. You appear in his family as sandalwood appears in the Malaya Hills."



Prabhupāda:



kecid āhur ajaṁ jātaṁ

puṇya-ślokasya kīrtaye

yadoḥ priyasyānvavāye

malayasyeva candanam

[SB 1.8.32]



So Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do. He is the Supreme. Why He shall have some thing to do? Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇam... This is the definition in the Vedas: "God has nothing to do. He is self-sufficient. Neither He has got any aspiration." Just like we are thinking of purchasing this land, that land. Why Kṛṣṇa will think like that? Because every land is belonging to Him. So He has nothing to purchase. Everything is there. So why He comes? That is the same way, as Kṛṣṇa says personally. He comes for paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. He wants to give protection to the devotees, to glorify the devotees. That is His business. Otherwise He has no business. He has nothing to do. Just like a devotee has nothing to do except serving Kṛṣṇa, except to see Kṛṣṇa is pleased, similarly, Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do, but He wants to glorify His devotee. This is reciprocation. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. If you... If you dedicate your life for glorifying the Supreme Lord, the Lord is also ready. His business is to glorify you. Otherwise, He has no business.



Therefore here it is said that priyasya, yadoḥ priyasya. King Yadu became very dear to Kṛṣṇa by rendering service. Priyasya. The... As Kṛṣṇa is very dear to the devotee, similarly, devotees are also very, very dear to Kṛṣṇa. There is another verse, sva-pāda-mūlaṁ bhajataḥ priyasya. Sva-pāda-mūlaṁ bhajataḥ priyasya: "If one is engaged at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, he becomes very, very dear." Sva-pāda-mūlaṁ bhajataḥ priyasya. Bhajataḥ, one who is simply engaged for rendering service to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa-he has no other business-he becomes priya. And as soon as you become priya, or dear to Kṛṣṇa, then your all problems solved. Just like if you become a dear child of a very big, rich man, then where is your problem? Automatically he's taken care of. Because he has become dear child of a very big man, so what is his problem? No problem. Similarly, we have to become very dear to Kṛṣṇa. Then all our problems solved.

These rascals, karmīs, they do not know. They want to become happy by their own endeavor. That is called karmī. They are working very hard-the same thing-to be very happy, and the devotee is also trying to become happy. Everyone is trying. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. Everyone is trying to be, become happy, because to become happy is our natural tendency. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Everyone is trying to become happy. But the karmīs, the jñānīs, the yogis, they do not know how to become perfectly happy. They're making their own endeavor. Karmīs are trying to work harder, hard, day and night, to get money. "Some way or other, never mind black and white. Bring money. I must have nice car, nice house, nice bank balance." This is karmī. And jñānī, when he is fed up with working, when he understands that "This working hard and bank balance could not make me anyway happy, so therefore this is false, all these activities, what I am..." The brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. So they become disgusted and take to Brahman. Brahma satyam.

But brahma satyam is fact, but because they are trying to understand Brahman by their speculative method, they cannot understand Brahman. Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi, jānāti tattvam [SB 10.14.29]. You can understand the Supreme Brahman... Simply understanding Brahman will not give you satisfaction. Simply understanding ahaṁ brahmāsmi, this will not... Suppose if you have got money, and you are aware that you are very rich man. So simply thinking that you are very rich man and you see your money in the treasury, you'll be happy? No. When the money is utilized in so many ways for your gratification, then you are happy. Similarly, simple understanding, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, this realization, will not make you happy. You have to utilize his Brahman's position. That means bhakti. This is called śānta-rasa, simply to understand ahaṁ brahmāsmi. This is called śānta-rasa. You must develop further. That is called dāsya-rasa, to become the servant of the Supreme Brahman. Then further advance. Simply to understand that "I am Brahman" will not give you...

Just the same example... It is very easy, that, if you simply understand you have got much money... Just like we are trying to purchase land, but purchase land means I must have money. So money is there. So why I am not happy? Why I am trying to purchase land? To utilize the money. That is required. Every businessman has got money, enough money. But why they are active in the business circle? They are going to the market, share market, this market. Utilize the money. The same thing, simply to understand that ahaṁ brahmāsmi... Therefore they fail. All these so-called sannyāsīs, simply understanding ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "I have become now Nārāyaṇa," not giving them satisfaction, but because they have no information about rendering service to the Parabrahman, they come to again to this material field to render service, to open hospital, to open school, to feed the daridra-nārāyaṇa, and in this way they imagine because they want activities.

So Brahman realization without activity of Brahman will not allow you to stay in the Brahman position. You'll fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Patanty adhaḥ. By great austerities and penance, they can rise up to the paraṁ padam, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, brahma-pada. But āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ, from that place, patanty adhaḥ, again falls down in this material world. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ: "Because they did not learn how to honor Your lotus feet." Because they are impersonalists, they are-"God, or the Brahman, has no leg." So how they will take shelter of the leg or lotus feet? Impersonal. Therefore the very word is used, anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. Aṅghrayaḥ means this leg, or lotus feet. So because they have no information, or they, even they have got information, they are not inclined to render service, therefore they fall down. This is the position.

So our business is not to realize simply that "I... ahaṁ brahmāsmi." That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. When you understand that you are not this body but you are spirit soul, then, actually, if you realize, then, if I understand... Na jāyate na mriyate vā. The soul does not die. Then here the karmīs are working very hard because he's upset that "If I do not work hard, if I do not get money, then I shall die out of starvation." But if you are actually Brahman realized, if you understand that "I'll not die," then where is your activities? You'll not die. If somebody, some physician, gives you a tablet: "Now you take this tablet. You'll not die," then you'll stop working immediately, because "I'll not die." So brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā. "That is all right. Now I am spirit soul. I understand I will never die." That is prasannātmā. Na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. There is no need of lamentation. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. But mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām. If you do not take to devotional service, simply by realizing that you are Brahman will not help. And by devotional service, you can become dear.

Just like Arjuna is addressed by Kṛṣṇa, bhakto 'si priyo 'si: [Bg. 4.3] "You are My devotee and very dear friend." So our business is, somehow or other, to become very dear to Kṛṣṇa, as a servant, as a friend, or as father, mother, or as lover. Some way or other, you become... Make Kṛṣṇa your dear as master or as son or as father or... Father, they are taki..., doing, everyone. Even ordinary person, if he is God conscious, he takes Kṛṣṇa as supreme father. Just like the Christians, they take that "O Father, give us our daily..." Father means to ask Him, "Give me, give me, give me, give me." Nobody wants to give father, but wants to take from father. Sometimes our students, when they spend extravagantly and I point out, he says, "My father has sent money." Sometimes. "My father has sent money." Yes. "Why did you stay at Ashoka Hotel?" "My father sent money." "Why not ask your father to send money? Why you are collecting by making life member?" So means idea of father... Father means that "Whenever I want to stay in Ashoka Hotel, he'll send money," not that "I will send money to father. He may stay at Ashoka Hotel." Nobody thinks like that. "Father may send money, and I shall stay in Ashoka Hotel." This is the idea of father. Father means to exploit him, to exploit.

So the father conception of God, mother conception of God, is not bad. Just like in Bengal especially, they have got mother conception. Mother conception means the same thing, to exploit, take from mother, or father. But the Vaiṣṇava conception is not to accept God as father or mother but as son. Son means to give. Father means to take from him, and son means to take from the father. So if you become father of God, then your business will be to give, not to take. That is Vaiṣṇava conception. From the very beginning of the son's life, the mother is giving service to the son, the father is giving service. Therefore the service is there. Even Kṛṣṇa is afraid of mother Yaśodā. Why? Why mother Yaśodā was trying to bind Kṛṣṇa? Because He disrupted the process of service of mother Yaśodā to Kṛṣṇa. That is... Mother Yaśodā tried that "You have broken the butter, and You have distributed to the monkeys, You rascal. Then how You will live? I kept the butter for You so that You will eat and You'll become fatty. And You have broken that, and You have distributed the butter to the monkeys, so You must be punished." So the aim is to serve Kṛṣṇa, not that Yaśodā is thinking, "My butter is spoiled by this child. Therefore He should be punished." He (she) is anxious to see that "Kṛṣṇa may not starve for want of butter. He's child. He does not know. He has distributed the butter to the monkeys." But Kṛṣṇa knows that "These monkeys are not ordinary monkeys." Those monkeys, they have taken birth in Vṛndāvana and come to Kṛṣṇa. Do you think they're ordinary monkeys? They're devotees. They're devotees. They're playing as monkey for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. These are the intricate meanings of understanding Kṛṣṇa's līlā. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9].

So to understand kṛṣṇa-līlā... So therefore we have to understand Kṛṣṇa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa, from these books, Bhāgavata, Bhagavad-gītā, but not directly. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends, bhāgavata giyā paro bhāgavata sthāne. Just try to understand Bhāgavata or Bhagavān from the realized soul, not from the professional man. So here: kecid āhur ajaṁ jātam [SB 1.8.32]. Āhuḥ ajaṁ jātam. Contradiction. Now Kṛṣṇa says, ajo 'pi: "Although I am birthless, I do not take birth," ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san... He is the Supreme Being, He's the master of everyone, and He never takes birth. Still, He takes birth-contradiction. He never takes birth, aja; at the same time... Ajo 'pi... Here it is said, kecid āhur ajam. God, or Kṛṣṇa, is aja. He never takes birth. But again he (she) says, jātam: "He has taken birth." This contradiction should be understood. The Vedas, there are many such contradictions like that. Paśyaty acakṣuḥ: "Kṛṣṇa, or God, sees, but He has no eyes." Similarly, God, Kṛṣṇa, takes His birth although He never takes birth. These are contradictions. Paśyaty acakṣuḥ. Apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā: "He has no leg, but He goes so fast, nobody can compete Him." These are Vedic statements. You'll find in the Upaniṣads, apāṇi-pāda: "He has no leg, He has no hand," but javano grahītā, "but if you offer Him something, He takes." Kṛṣṇa says... It is not my word.

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

[Bg. 9.26]



Now, if the Supreme Lord, God, has no hand, no leg, then how He can walk? Just like Sākṣi-gopāla. Sākṣi-gopāla, He was Deity, apparently showing as made of stone, and the devotee's asking, "My Lord, Gopāla, You have to come to give witness." So Gopāla was smiling and said, "How you expect a Deity can walk that I shall go to give witness for you?" The bhakta said, "If the Deity can speak and smile, He can walk also." That is the conviction of devotee. And the other party, they agreed that "If Gopāla comes to give witness, my sister will be given to you." He... Because he's atheist, he is thinking that "How the Deity will come? He'll never come. Then I shall not have to fulfill my promise." He is... He was confident like that. That is the difference between a devotee and nondevotee. The nondevotee cannot understand. They will take it that "Once you say that God has no eyes, then how He can see? God has no leg. Then how can He walk? God has no hand. Then how can He accept your offering?" Therefore the conclusion should be that ajo 'pi, although Kṛṣṇa never takes birth, and again He takes birth. He has taken birth. Therefore His birth is not like our birth. This is to be understood. He has no birth, but He has taken birth. Therefore, an intelligent man will conclude that His birth is not like our birth.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. It is all transcendental. It is not this ordinary birth. Ordinary birth means male and female union, then there is pregnancy, then the child comes out of the womb. It is not like that. It is... We can take this example. Just like the sunrise in the morning: udilo aruṇa pūraba-bhāge. Before the sunrise, the sky becomes reddish, and then the sun comes out. So if somebody says that "The eastern side is the birthplace of sun," is it a fact? No. The sun is always there in the sky, but with your limited eyes you are seeing that now sun comes, sunrise. Sun does not rise nor set. Sun is already there. Your imperfect eyes-you see there is sunrise, there is sunset. Is it not a fact? Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is always there, but because we do not know Kṛṣṇa, therefore we understand that Kṛṣṇa is taking birth from Devakī, or Kṛṣṇa has taken birth in the family of the Yadus. Yes, He appears like that, that He has taken birth in the Yadu family. Because why? The purpose is to glorify the family because it belongs to the devotee, Mahārāja Yadu. That is His purpose. His real purpose is that the Yadu dynasty... Mahārāja Yadu was a great devotee. Here the yadoḥ priyasya. He appears to take birth in the family of Mahārāja Yadu. Just like Lord Rāmacandra. He took birth in the family of Mahārāja Raghu. Therefore Lord Rāmacandra is called Raghunātha, Dāśarathi, as Kṛṣṇa is called Vāsudeva because He accepted Vasudeva as His father.

So actually, Kṛṣṇa has no birth. Kṛṣṇa doesn't require. He can appear in any family. He... Just like Kṛṣṇa appeared, matsya-avatāra, in the family of fish. Keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra, jaya jagadīśa hare. Kṛṣṇa took birth as a pig. Keśava dhṛta-varāha-śarīra, jaya jagadīśa hare. Kṛṣṇa is free. He can appear anywhere, everywhere. That is... Just like īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. He's situated in everyone's heart. So He is with everyone's... Every living being has got Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa is already there in the heart. From the heart, if He appears in front... Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. He was meditating that Viṣṇu form of Kṛṣṇa, and all of a sudden he saw that Viṣṇu is not there. Then he opened his eyes. He saw Viṣṇu is in his front. So what is the difficulty for Kṛṣṇa? If He is within the heart and if He comes in your front, is it very difficult task for Him?

But the rascals, atheists, they cannot understand. Kṛṣṇa everywhere. That is explained here, yadoḥ priyasya anvavāye. He can appear... How it is? Malayasyeva candanam. The sandalwood is famous as produced in Malaysia, or Malaya. I think formerly they used to grow sandalwood in Malaysia. What...? What is that capital?

Devotee: Kuala Lumpur.



Prabhupāda: Kuala Lumpur. Yes. We had been in Kuala Lumpur. Now, instead of sandalwood, they are growing rubber, rubberwood. Yes. So formerly malaya-candana, Malaysia, Malayasian candana, sandalwood was very famous. Still it is famous. So this candana tree can grow anywhere, but it is famous as Malayan candana. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa can appear from anywhere. He is independent. But He appeared as this descendant of the Yadu dynasty. Why? Yadoḥ priyasya, puṇya-ślokasya kīrtaye [SB 1.8.32]. Those who are devotee, they are puṇya-śloka. Or Kṛṣṇa is also puṇya-śloka, uttama-śloka, Kṛṣṇa's another name... As Kṛṣṇa is known as Uttama-śloka, similarly, the devotees are called puṇya-śloka. How they become puṇya-śloka? Simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śloka-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Anyone who is always in contact with Kṛṣṇa, he's puṇya-śloka, and Kṛṣṇa is Uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloke bhagavati bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī.



So these are the terms used in the śāstras. As Kṛṣṇa is Uttama-śloka, similarly, a devotee is puṇya-śloka. As the devotee worships Kṛṣṇa with selected poems, uttama-śloka... They are not ordinary poems. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayan... [Bs. 5.29]. These are not ordinary verse. These are transcendental verses: Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So Kṛṣṇa is worshiped by transcendental verses, transcendental language, Vedic language. That is transcendental language. Therefore it is called uttama-śloka. So puṇya-śloka, when he's advanced, he can worship the Uttama-śloka. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam, daily, regular. So as you are daily hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, so if you go on, then naṣṭa-prāya, everything, all dirty things within your heart, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], it will be all cleansed. Then you become puṇya-śloka. Puṇya-śloka. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ nityam..., puṇya-śloka-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Simply by hearing...

So we are inviting everyone to become puṇya-śloka simply by hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavata. There is no... Come here. Take prasādam. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Dance in jubilation. Become puṇya-śloka, and Kṛṣṇa..., you become very dear to Kṛṣṇa. This is perfection of life.

Thank you very much. (end)



730425SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.33

-

Los Angeles, April 25, 1972



Devotee:



apare vasudevasya

devakyāṁ yācito 'bhyagāt

ajas tvam asya kṣemāya

vadhāya ca sura-dviṣām

[SB 1.8.33]



"Others say that since both Vasudeva and Devakī prayed for You, You have taken Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are unborn, yet You take Your birth for their welfare and to kill those who are envious of the demigods."



Prabhupāda: So there are two purposes of incarnation. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



The Lord says that whenever there is irregularities, dharmasya, of religion, irregularities... Glāniḥ. Glāniḥ means irregularities. Just like you are executing some service. There may be irregularities. Then it becomes polluted. So yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati... Dharmasya glānir bhavati means development of irreligiosity. That means if your wealth is diminished, then your poverty is increased, balanced. If you increase this side, the other side will go up and if you increase that side, the other side... But you have to keep balance. That is required.



So in the human society, they are meant for keeping balance. What is that balance? They do not know that... It is just like balance. One side spirit, another side matter. We are now, actually, we are spirit soul. Somehow or other we have been encaged within this body, material body. For that purpose, so long we have got this body, we have got necessities of the body, eating, sleeping, mating, defending. These are the necessities of the body. Soul does not require all these things. Soul has nothing to eat. That we do not know. Whatever we are eating, that is, that is for keeping of this body. So the bodily necessities are there, but if you simply look after the bodily necessities and do not care to look after the necessity of the soul, that is foolish civilization. No balance. They do not know.

Just like a rascal. He's simply washing the coat, but does not take care of the body. Or a bird is in the cage and if you take care of the cage and don't take care of the bird within the cage... The bird is crying: "Ka Ka. Give me food, give me food." But you are taking care of the cage. This is foolishness. So why we are unhappy? Why, in your country especially... You are supposed to be the richest country in the world. You have no scarcity. No scarcity of food, no scarcity of motor car, no scarcity of bank balance, no scarcity of sex. Everything is there, complete, in full abundance. And still why a section of people are frustrated and confused like the hippies? They are not satisfied. Why? That is the defect. Because there is no balance. You are taking care of the bodily necessities of life, but you have no information of the soul. And there is necessity of the soul also. Because soul is the real subject matter. Body is the covering only.

So it is said that... No I'm explaining that verse. Dharmasya glānir bhavati. This is dharmasya glāniḥ, pollution of duty. Dharma means duty. Dharma is not a kind of faith. In English dictionary it is said: "religion means a faith." No, no. It is not. Dharma means the actual constitutional duty. That is dharma. So if you have no information of the soul, if you do not know what is the need of the soul, simply you are busy on the bodily necessities of life, bodily comfort... So bodily comfort will not save you.

Suppose a man is very comfortably situated. Does it mean that he will not die? He'll die. So simply by bodily comforts you cannot exist. Survival of the fittest. Struggle for existence. So when we simply take care of the body, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ, polluted. One must know what is the necessity of the body and what is the necessity of the soul. The real necessity of life is to supply the comforts of the soul. And the soul can be comforted not by material adjustment. Because soul is a different identity, the soul must be given spiritual food. That spiritual food is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you give the soul the spiritual food...

Food, there are, when one is diseased, you have to give him diet and medicine. Two things required. If you simply give medicine, no diet, that will be not very successful. Both. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for giving food, means diet and medicine, to the soul. The medicine is the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt [SB 10.1.4]. The Parīkṣit Mahārāja said to Śukadeva Gosvāmī that: "This Bhāgavata discussion which you are prepared to give me, it is not ordinary thing." Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. This Bhāgavata discussion is relishable by persons who are nivṛtta-tṛṣṇā. Tṛṣṇā, tṛṣṇā means hankering. Everyone in this material world is hankering, hankering. So one who is freed from this hankering, he can taste the Bhāgavata, how palatable it is. It is such a thing. Nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ... Similarly bhāgavata means also, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is also bhāgavata. Bhāgavata means anything in relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is called bhāgavata. The Supreme Lord is called Bhagavān. Bhāgavata-śabda, and in relationship with Him, anything, that bhāgavata-śabda turns into bhāgavata-śabda.

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja said that the taste of Bhāgavata can be relished by a person who has finished his hankering of material desires. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. And what is, why such thing should be tasted? Bhavauṣadhi. Bhavauṣadhi, medicine for our disease of birth and death. Bhava means "become". Our... At the present moment, we are in diseased condition. They do not know what is the diseased condition, what is the healthy condition, these rascals. they do not know anything. Still they are passing on as great scientists, philosophers... They do not inquire that: "I do not want to die. Why death is enforced upon me?" There is no such inquiry. Neither is there any solution. And still they are scientists. What kind of scientists? If you can...

Science means that you advance in knowledge so that your miserable condition of life can be reduced, minimized. That is science. Otherwise, what is this science? They are simply promising; "In future." "But what you are delivering just now, sir?" "Now just now you suffer as you are suffering, go on suffering. In future we shall find out some chemicals." No. Actually ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. Ātyantika, ultimate. Ātyantika means ultimate. Duḥkha means sufferings. That should be the aim of human life. So they do not know what is ātyantika-duḥkha. Duḥkha means suffering. So ātyantika-duḥkha is pointed out in the Bhagavad-gītā. "Here is the ātyantika-duḥkha, sir." What is this? Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. Birth, death, old age and disease.

So what you have done for vanishing or making, or nullifying this duḥkha, these sufferings? So there is no such thing in the material world. Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. Ultimate relinquishment from all kinds of suffering is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. What is that?

mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



So you should read all this. You have got: Bhāgavata, everything explanation. This is ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti, ultimate relinquishment from all sufferings. What is that? Mām upetya. "One who approaches Me or one who comes to Me, back to home, back to Godhead." So they have no knowledge what is God and whether one can go back to home, back to Godhead. It is a practical thing or not. No knowledge. Simply like animals. That's all. No knowledge. They pray: "O, God, give us our daily bread." Now ask him: "What is God?" Can he explain? No. Then whom we are asking? In the air? If I ask, if I submit some petition, there must be some person. So I do not know what is that person, where to submit this petition. Simply... They say that He's in the sky. The sky, there are so many birds also, but that is not God. You see. No knowledge, no knowledge. Imperfect knowledge, all. And they're passing on scientists, philosophers, great thinkers, writers, and... All rubbish, all rubbish. The only book is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. All rubbish. In the Bhāgavata it is said:



tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

[SB 1.5.11]



And on the other side: na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo jagat-pavitraṁ pragṛṇīta karhicit tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham... [SB 1.5.10]. Tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham. Any literature which has no connection with the knowledge of God, tad, tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham, that is just like the place where the crows take enjoyment. Where the crows take enjoyment? In the filthy place. And the swans, the white swans, they take pleasure in a nice, clear water where there is garden. where is birds.



So there are, even in the animals, there are divisions. Swan class and crow class. Natural division. The crow will not go to the swan. The swan will not go to the crow. Similarly in the human society, there are crow class men and swan class men. The swan class men will come here because here everything is clear, nice, good philosophy, good food, good education, good dress, good mind, everything good. And crow class men will go to such and such club, such and such party, naked dance, so many things. You see.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for the swan class of men. Not for the crow class of men. No. But we can convert the crows into swans. That is our philosophy. One who was crow is now swimming like swan. That we can do. That is the benefit of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So when the swans become crows, that is material world. That is Kṛṣṇa says: yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. The living entity is encaged in this material body and he's trying to gratify the senses, one body after another, one body after another, one body, after another. This is the position. And dharma means to gradually turn the crows into swans. That is dharma.

Just like one man may be, may remain, may be very illiterate, uncultured, but he can be converted into educated, cultured man. By education, by training. So that possibility is there in the human form of life. I cannot train a dog to become a devotee. That is difficult. It can be done also. But I may not be so powerful. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu did. When He was passing through the jungle, Jharikhaṇḍa, the tigers, the snakes, the deers, all the animals, they became devotee. They became devotee. So what was possible for me, uh, Caitanya Mahāprabhu... Because He's God Himself. He can do anything. We cannot do that. But we can work in the human society. It doesn't matter, however fallen a man is. If he follows our instruction then he can be turned.

That is called dharma. Dharma means to bring one to his original position. That is dharma. So there may be degrees. But the original position is that we are part and parcel of God, and, when we understand that we are part and parcel of God, that is our real position of life. That is called brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage, understanding his Brahman realization, identification. So Kṛṣṇa comes... This explanation...

Just like Kuntī says that: apare vasudevasya devakyāṁ yācito 'bhyagāt [SB 1.8.33]. Vasudeva and Devakī prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead that: "We want a son like You. That is our desires." Although they were married, they were, they did not beget any child. They engaged themselves in tapasya, severe tapasya. So Kṛṣṇa came before them: "What do you want?" "Now we want a child like You." Therefore here it is said: vasudevasya devakyāṁ yācitaḥ. Yācitaḥ. "Sir, we want a son like You." Now what, where there is possibility of another God? Kṛṣṇa is God. God cannot be two. God is one. So how there can be another God to become the son of Vasudeva and Devakī? Therefore God agreed that: "It is not possible to find out another God. Then I shall become your son."

So people say that because Vasudeva and Devakī wanted Kṛṣṇa as their son, He appeared. Kecit. Somebody says. Vasudevasya devakyāṁ yācitaḥ. Being requested, being prayed for, abhyagāt, He appeared. Ajas tvam asya kṣemāya vadhāya ca sura-dviṣām. Others says the same thing, as I was explaining. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. Actually Kṛṣṇa comes to pacify His devotee. Just like He appeared to pacify, to satisfy His devotee, Vasudeva and Devakī. But when He comes, He does the other business. What is that? Vadhāya ca sura-dviṣām. Vadhāya means killing. Sura-dviṣām.

There is a class of men, they are called asuras. They are sura-dviṣām. They are always envious of the devotees. They are called demons. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja and his father Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu is the father of Prahlāda Mahārāja, but because Prahlāda Mahārāja was a devotee, he became envious. That is the nature of the demons. So much so envious, that he was prepared to kill his own son. The only fault is that little boy, he was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is his fault. The father could not. Therefore they are called sura-dviṣām, always envious of the devotees. Demon means always envious of the devotees. This material world is so nuisance place that...

Just you have got a very nice example. Just like Jesus Christ, Lord Christ. So what was his fault? But the sura-dviṣām, the envious persons killed him. And if we find, if we analyze, what is the fault of Jesus Christ, there is no fault. The only fault he was preaching about God. And still he'd find so many enemies. He was cruelly crucified. So you'll always find this, sura-dviṣām. So Kṛṣṇa comes to kill these sura-dviṣām. Therefore vadhāya ca sura-dviṣām. These envious persons are killed.

But this killing business can be done without the presence of Kṛṣṇa. Because there are so many natural forces, war, pestilence, famine. Anything. Just set on working. Millions of people can be killed. So Kṛṣṇa does not require to come here to kill these rascals. They can be killed simply by Kṛṣṇa's direction, nature's law. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā [Bs. 5.44]. The nature has got so much power that it can create, it can maintain, it can annihilate, dissolute, everything. Nature is so powerful.

Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya. Sṛṣṭi means creation and sthiti means maintenance and pralaya means destruction. These three things nature can do. Just like this creation, material creation is natural, nature, cosmic manifestation. It is being maintained. By nature's mercy, we are getting sunlight, we are getting air, we are getting rains and thereby we are growing our food, eating nicely, growing nicely. This maintenance also being done by nature, But at any time everything can be finished simply by one strong wind. Nature is so powerful. So for killing these demons, nature is already there. Of course, nature is working under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. So if Kṛṣṇa says that these demons may be killed, then nature's one blast, one strong wind will, can kill millions of them.

So for that purpose Kṛṣṇa does not require to come. But Kṛṣṇa comes as it is stated here, that: yācita. Kṛṣṇa comes when He is requested by devotee like Vasudeva and Devakī. That is His coming. That is the cause of His coming. And simultaneously when He comes He also shows that, that "Anyone who is envious of My devotees, I kill them. I kill them." Of course, His killing and maintaining, the same thing. He's absolute. Those who are killed by Kṛṣṇa, they immediately get salvation, which requires millions of years to get. So people say like that, that Kṛṣṇa came for this purpose or that purpose, but actually Kṛṣṇa comes for the benefit of the devotees, kṣemāya. What is the meaning of kṣemāya? For maintenance?

Devotee: "For the good."



Prabhupāda: For the good. For the good of the devotees. He's always after seeing good of the devotees. Therefore from this instruction of Kuntī, our business should be always how to become devotee. Then all good qualities will come upon us. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. If you simply develop your devotion, dormant devotion, natural devotion... We have got natural devotion.



Just like father and son, there is natural affection. And the son has got natural devotion to the father, for father, for mother. Similarly, we have got our natural devotion. When we are actually in danger, even the scientists, they also pray to God. But when they are not in danger, they defy God. So therefore danger is required in order to teach these rascals that there is God. So that is natural. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. That is our natural... Artificially we are trying to banish God. "God is dead, there is no God, I am God, this God, that God." This rascaldom we shall give up. Then we shall be given all protection by Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



741013SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.33

-

Māyāpura, October 13, 1974



Nitāi: "Others say that since both Vasudeva and Devakī prayed for You, You have taken Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are unborn, yet You take Your birth for their welfare and to kill those who are envious of the demigods."



Prabhupāda:



apare vasudevasya

devakyāṁ yācito 'bhyagāt

ajas tvam asya kṣemāya

vadhāya ca sura-dviṣām

[SB 1.8.33]



There are... Actually Kṛṣṇa is unborn, aja, but Aja is taking birth. That is already explained. This is the bewilderment, viḍambanam. It is already explained. So this viḍambanam, speculation or bewilderment, how many types of speculation are there, that is being described by Kuntīdevī. Somebody says that Kṛṣṇa is Yādava. Yādava. Yādavāya mādhavāya keśavāya namaḥ. Yādava means born in the Yadu dynasty. And somebody says Kṛṣṇa is Vāsudeva, son of Vasudeva, Devakī. And Kṛṣṇa... And some of them, they say, nanda-kumārāya, now, son of Nanda Mahārāja. So Kṛṣṇa has many speculations, but actually He is aja. Ajas tvam asya kṣemāya.



Kṛṣṇa... This is to be understood, that everyone thinking that He is born in the Yadu family, He is born of Vasudeva, or He is the son of mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. This is Kṛṣṇa's pastime. When the impersonalist says, or there are many philosophers, that "God has no name," actually that is a fact. God has no name. But He has name according to His activities. Just like when He acts as the chariot driver of Arjuna, His name is Pārtha-sārathi. When He plays as the child of mother Yaśodā, He is called Yaśodā-nandana. When people say that He is born of Nanda Mahārāja, He is called Nanda-nandana. When people say that He came to protect Vasudeva and Devakī, He is called Vāsudeva, or Devakī-nandana. Or when He is in the Yadu dynasty, He's said as Yādava. In this way, Kṛṣṇa has unlimited pastimes and unlimited names. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta. Ananta means unlimited. He has got unlimited because so many devotees, not one devotees, and He has to satisfy everyone, as Nanda-kumāra, as Yaśodā-nandana, as Vāsudeva, as Yādava, as Pārtha-sārathi. So in this way, when one becomes bewildered that how many names He has got, so one should understand He has unlimited names or no name, but because He has to act unlimitedly, therefore He has got unlimited names.

So whole thing is summarized in one word: "Kṛṣṇa," means all-attractive. He draws the attraction of Vasudeva. He draws the attraction of Yadu-kula. He draws the attraction of Arjuna. He draws attraction of everyone, all devotees. Mama vartmānuvartante pārtha sarvaśaḥ. The whole world, civilized world, they have got some religion-Christian religion, Muhammadan religion, Hindu religion, Buddhist religion, and many other subordinate religions. Under the groups of Christian, there are so many churches-Protestant, Catholic. In the Muhammadans, they have got Shiya, Suni, Sek,(?) so many. In Hindus also, Vaiṣṇavas and Śāktas and Sauras, Gāṇapatyas, so many. But Kṛṣṇa says that "All of them, seeking after Me." Mama vartmānuvartante pārtha sarvaśaḥ: "Everyone, they may go on under different religious systems, but the aim is how to approach Me." Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15].

If you take... Veda means knowledge, scripture. Veda does not mean any particular scripture. Any scripture which gives knowledge of God, you can call it as Veda. Vedaiś ca sarvaiḥ. If any book or any scripture or any book of knowledge does not give the information of God, that is not scripture because it cannot be called scripture, or Veda, because it does not search after the Supreme Being. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. This is the ultimate goal of knowledge.

So you can call the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa or something else. Just like Muhammadans, they say "Allah." Allah means "the Supreme Being." Allah akbar. And the Christian says "God is great." And we say paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma [Bg. 10.12], or Kṛṣṇa, all-attractive. But the aim is to understand Kṛṣṇa, that Kṛṣṇa personally appears so that your misgivings, misunderstandings may be mitigated immediately-"Here I am." The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is for this purpose, that "You religionists, you philosophers, you scientists, you speculators, you are all... theosophists, so many, you are searching after God, and here is God, Kṛṣṇa." But they are so unfortunate, they'll not accept it. "No, why shall I accept Kṛṣṇa as God?" Then why you shall not? That is our question. If you do not accept Kṛṣṇa as God, then you must know what is God. That, if I ask him, "Do you know what is God?" "That I do not know."

The same... Just like the scientist. He would propose that life is made by combination of chemicals, but when another scientist says, "Suppose I give you the chemicals. Can you produce life?" he will, the rascal will say, "That I cannot say." Similarly, they are rascals. We are presenting herewith, "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Take His address. Take His name. Take His father's name, mother's name, all identification, His activities, His glories, everything." Kṛṣṇa proves that He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead:

aiśvaryasya samagrasya

vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva

ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itiṅganā

(Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47)



Bhagavān. Bhagavān means the proprietor of all wealth, aiśvarya, samagrasya. Not any limited amount, but samagra, everything. Kṛṣṇa says that. Bhoktāraṁ yajña..., sarva-loka-maheśvaram: [Bg. 5.29] "I am the proprietor of all the planets." Kṛṣṇa says that. So you check Him, that "How He is the proprietor of all the planets?" Therefore He showed Viśvarūpa, the universal form, how everything is within Him.



Everything is there. Arjuna wanted, requested Kṛṣṇa, that "How I can understand that You are the proprietor, You are the everything in the universe?" So He showed His universal form. Kṛṣṇa showed in every way to fulfill the proper definition of God, aiśvaryasya samagrasya, proprietor of everything, and vīryasya, the powerful. Nobody could kill Kṛṣṇa, but He killed so many demons, big, big demons. Therefore He's powerful. And His reputation? Still continuing, Kṛṣṇa. We are selling Kṛṣṇa book like anything. Why people are interested with Kṛṣṇa? Because He is reputed. People are seeing. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is going on all over the world. This is yaśaḥ.

So when Kṛṣṇa was present, who could compete Him with His opulence? He had 16,108 wives, not loitering in the street, but each and every wife had big, big marble palaces, all marble palaces. Furniture with ivory, ivory and silk, and frames, all golden, garden with pārijāta, so many things. The... And not one palace, two palace. Sixteen thousand palaces. And Nārada was surprised: "What Kṛṣṇa is doing with sixteen thousand wives?" In each and every palace he entered, and he saw Kṛṣṇa is engaged in different way. Somebody is taking care of the children; somebody... Somewhere He is arranging for the marriage of His son and daughter. Somewhere He is engaged in other sixteen thousand..., in the sixteen thousand palaces, in sixteen thousand engagements, and queens. So this is called opulence, aiśvarya. Who can show this? And Kṛṣṇa showed it personally.

So in every way Kṛṣṇa proved the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, these rascals, they are searching after God. What is this nonsense? Here is God. You see that He is God in every respect according to the definition, and still, you say that "Where is God?" How much rascal they are, just imagine. Here is God, and still, they are enquiring, "What is God? Can you show me God?" What is this? Is it not rascaldom? What is this? If everything, proof is there, why they are searching after God? What is the answer? Where is the question of searching after God? Just answer this question. God is present here, and still, you are wasting your time. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, mūḍha. Mūḍha. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Simply rascal. They cannot be given any other title except this one title, mūḍhāḥ. Why they remain mūḍhāḥ? Why are they are not intelligent? They are being educated in the universities, getting so many degrees. Still, they remain mūḍhāḥ. Why? Duṣkṛtinaḥ, sinful, engaged in sinful activities, these sinful activities. Yatra pāpaś catur-vidhā. Every one of them, all these rascals, are... They're engaged in four kinds of sinful activities. They'll search after illicit sex, they will eat meat, and they will drink and they will play gambling. Just one after a... You just study. They cannot understand God because they are mūḍhāḥ.

Why they are mūḍhāḥ? Because they are sinful. Why they are sinful? Because narādhamāḥ, lowest of the mankind. Human form of life was given to him to become purified, but they are engaged in sinful activities so that next life they'll be cats and dogs and hogs and trees. Why trees? Trees stands naked. And now this nudie movement is there, how to remain naked. That means next life they are preparing for becoming tree: "Thousand years, stand up here, naked. Nobody will object." Yes, this is the law of nature. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. These rascals... Because the rascals, they do not know. And even the information is there, still, they'll not accept. This is their position.

So don't remain mūḍhāḥ. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to educate people not to remain mūḍhāḥ. Be intelligent. It is a very nice cultural movement that it is trying to awaken people to their God consciousness. "Here is God." This is the sum and substance of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And the process is also bona fide because Kṛṣṇa Himself is teaching the process. Kṛṣṇa, first of all, generally He told, sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66], because this is the process. But because they are mūḍhas, rascals and sinful, they could not understand. They could not understand. Therefore Kṛṣṇa came personally to teach people how to surrender. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Āpani ācari prabhu jīvere śikhāya.

namo mahā-vadānyāya

kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-

nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ

[Cc. Madhya 19.53]



Rūpa Gosvāmī could understand that "Here is Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." Kṛṣṇāya. Now He is acting as Kṛṣṇa-caitanya. Kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne: "He has assumed the name of Kṛṣṇa-caitanya, but He is Kṛṣṇa Himself." And what He is doing? Because previously, as Kṛṣṇa, He simply ordered that "You surrender. Then you'll be purified and you'll be promoted." Now here, as Kṛṣṇa-caitanya, He is giving kṛṣṇa-prema. Kṛṣṇa-prema. Unless I understand you very thoroughly, how there can be love for you? Love is not so easy that simply by meeting, or one day's transaction, one becomes lover of other. No. It takes time. So in the Kṛṣṇa form, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, He simply wanted that "You surrender; then you'll understand Me." But in the Caitanya Mahāprabhu, not only understanding Him, but one gets love of Kṛṣṇa, the highest stage. Therefore He is addressed as namo mahā-vadānyāya, the topmost charitable personality. He is giving kṛṣṇa-prema.



So the process is there. And actually it is so happening all over the world. How the Christian priests are surprised that "These boys, these Christian boys or these Jewish boys, they never came to the church. They did not inquire even what is God. Now they have left everything and they are mad after God. How it is po... How it is?" Because we have adopted the process enunciated by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; therefore it has become easier. Otherwise, to understand Kṛṣṇa only, it will take millions of years, simply to understand Kṛṣṇa. And what to speak of becoming lover of Kṛṣṇa? If I do not understand you, I cannot become your lover. You... We cannot love an unknown person. Is it possible? You must know him. You must behave with him. You must study him. He will study you. Then there is question of love. But Kṛṣṇa-caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us such a nice process: ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, immediately...

Because we do not love Kṛṣṇa... We have got intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa as part and parcel. It cannot be separated. It cannot be separated. But any way, some way or other, we have lost or forgotten that intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. That is nitya-siddha, eternally fact, that Kṛṣṇa loves us and we love. Kṛṣṇa loves. Therefore He comes personally. He comes as devotee to deliver us back to home, back to Godhead. Unless He loves, how it is possible? Kṛṣṇa is coming in so many ways. He is sending His devotee. He is leaving Bhagavad-gītā for study to understand Kṛṣṇa. That is... Kṛṣṇa loves. Simply teaches that... Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta says that nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. This kṛṣṇa-bhakti, love of Kṛṣṇa, it is not something that artificially trained up. Artificial things...

Now these American and the European boys, they are after me. They are after this for the last six, seven years. Had it been an artificial thing, they could not stay. That is not possible. It is not artificial. It is already there, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti nitya-siddha. It is already there. By the process of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, I am simply trying to awaken that kṛṣṇa-bhakti. That's all. That is the duty of guru. Cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena. He opens the eyes, that "Why you have forgotten Kṛṣṇa? Here is Kṛṣṇa. You love Him. You'll be happy." This is guru's business. Not that he is giving artificially something which is known as kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti's already there. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya, śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte. Simply by this process, hear about Kṛṣṇa. That we have introduced. In our so many centers this process is going on: hear about Kṛṣṇa, chant about Kṛṣṇa. Simply "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Then Kṛṣṇa will help you.

So this is Kṛṣṇa. So the highest devotees, they..., Kṛṣṇa, they, Kṛṣṇa accepts because He is playing the part of human being. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]. Those who are mūḍhas, they cannot understand, but those who are intelligent, they know that Kṛṣṇa is perfectly playing as a human being. As a human being takes birth in the womb of his father and mother by the father and mother, similarly, Kṛṣṇa also appeared, accepting Vasudeva as His father, Devakī as mother. But actually Kṛṣṇa is not born. That is being repeatedly explained by Kuntīdevī, that apare, apare vasudevasya devakyām: "They say like that." What is that? Devakī-nandana... There is a verse, that "It is a saying only. Nobody can become Kṛṣṇa's father or mother, but they get the reputation as father and mother. That is a concession to the devotee." Therefore, Kuntīdevī says, apare: "Others say like that." Somebody says like this; somebody says like that; somebody says like this. This is going on. But actually, Kṛṣṇa remains aja always. Because if we do not understand that Kṛṣṇa, what is Kṛṣṇa, then we'll misunderstand Him, that "He is also born. He is also born, so how He can become?" The Māyāvādīs say that "Kṛṣṇa is also having a body of the material body, māyā. Therefore real spiritual identity (is) impersonal. As soon as He assumes the body, it is material." That is called Māyāvāda. "Māyā. The Kṛṣṇa's body is māyā. The ultimate Absolute is no body, impersonal." That is their theory. Therefore we call them Māyāvādī.

But they do not actually know that ultimately the Absolute Truth is a person, the Supreme Person, Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas, tattva-vidaḥ [SB 1.2.11]. Tattva means one who knows tattva. They know that ultimately the Absolute Truth is person, not imperson. Therefore Bhāgavata says, vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. What is the Absolute Truth? Absolute Truth means tattvam. So Bhāgavata says, vadanti tat tattva-vidaḥ: "Those who are aware of the Absolute Truth, they say like this." What is that? Brahmeti... Yad, yaj jñānam advayam. Advayam: "He is without any duality, but the Absolute Truth is known as in three features: by somebody as Brahman, by somebody as Paramātmā, and somebody as Bhagavān."

Actually He is Bhagavān. Paramātmā is His universal feature.

eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.35]



Eko 'py asau, only one portion. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, athavā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna, viṣṭabhyāham... [break] ...this universe is only one only. That also, we cannot estimate what is the length and breadth, how many planets are there, and still, we are proud of becoming God. But God creates such millions of universes. Eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭim. Koṭi, million. Yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ. He is creating, and everywhere He is present. How He is present? Aṇḍāntara-stha. He's present within the universe and within the heart of all living entities, even within the atom. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara... That is Kṛṣṇa. That is only by His one part. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **.



So such Govinda has become the son of Vasudeva and Devakī. So how it is possible? And therefore the devotee is so great that although Kṛṣṇa, or God, is so great that by His one portion He can create the innumerable universes, He enters into the womb of Devakī and comes out as her son. This is Kṛṣṇa's grace. You see. He can make His devotee so great that the greater than the greatest is coming out of the womb of Devakī. So apare vasudevasya devakyām. And why He agreed? Yācitaḥ, yācitaḥ: "requested." Requested as Sutapā and Pṛśni. Vasudeva was Pṛśni in his former life, and Devakī was Sutapā. Sutapā. Sutapā means one who can perform austerities and penance very nicely. Su means nicely, and tapaḥ. So they underwent austerities and penance to get a son like Kṛṣṇa.

So when Kṛṣṇa was pleased with their tapasya, they wanted: "My Lord, we want a, a son like You." "So where is like Me?" Kṛṣṇa is asamordhva. There is nobody equal to Kṛṣṇa; nobody is greater than... Otherwise, how He can be great? If somebody is greater than Him, then how He can be great? Nobody can be greater than Him. That is greatness, either you say in English language or Muhammadan language. Allah akbar: "Allah, the Supreme Being, is the great." We also say, paraṁ brahma. So nobody can be greater than Him or equal. Asamordhva. So they wanted "a son like You." That means somebody must be equal to Him. "Like You" means equal to Him. So who can be equal to Kṛṣṇa? But He can expand Himself with many equals. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Kṛṣṇa can expand Himself in millions' and millions' forms. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Everything is there. Although He is living in Goloka, still, by His omnipotency, omnipresence, He can be everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-ca... So that Paramātmā, or the Supersoul, is equal with Kṛṣṇa. Not anything else equal with Kṛṣṇa, but the Paramātmā is equal with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore by His expansion, He agreed to become son of Devakī, and there may be hundreds and thousands of Devakī, devotees. He is unlimited. His devotees are unlimited. Their demands are unlimited.

So everything is Kṛṣṇa's unlimited. So therefore all-unlimited means Kṛṣṇa, all-attractive. That is the real name of God, if God can be given one name. Because God has no name, but His names are given according to His activities. Then how to concentrate in one name? That one name is Kṛṣṇa, all-attractive. That is the real name of Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730426SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.34

-

Los Angeles, April 26, 1973





Devotee:



bhārāvatāraṇāyānye

bhuvo nāva ivodadhau

sīdantyā bhūri-bhāreṇa

jāto hy ātma-bhuvārthitaḥ

[SB 1.8.34]



"Others say that the world, being overburdened like a boat at sea, is much aggrieved, and that Brahmā, who is Your son, prayed for You, and so You have appeared to diminish the trouble."



Prabhupāda: So Kuntīdevī is describing different statements of different persons why Kṛṣṇa appeared. Somebody says that He appeared on the request of Devakī and Vasudeva. Somebody says He appeared on the request of Brahmā.



So there is bhūri-bhara, bhūri-bhara. It is said: bhārāvatāraṇāyānye bhuvo nāva ivodadhau. Bhuva, this world becomes overburdened. Overburdened. As soon it becomes overburdened, there must be a war, pestilence, famine, epidemic and finish. This is natural. Overburdened. Nature's law. This is called... In economics there is some law. So why the world becomes overburdened? The earth planet... Not only earth planet. There are many millions of other planets also. They are bearing big, big mountains, big, big oceans. Why it becomes overburdened?

Yes. First of all, you have to consider how this planet is floating in the air. It is floating in the air as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, gām āviśya [Bg. 15.13]. Because Kṛṣṇa enters within this... Kṛṣṇa. Just like He enters within the atom. So He's the spirit, Supreme Spirit. So because the Supreme Spirit is within, therefore it is floating. Not that weightlessness. Weight is there, very heavy weight. Just like you can test. This body will float in the water so long you are living. And as soon as the spirit soul goes, then immediately the body goes down. The law of gravity acts. The so-called law of gravity. This is an example. A child, so long it is living you can take in one hand. But as soon as the child is dead, it becomes heavier. That is natural.

So everything is lighter as soon as it is spiritually advanced or there is spirit. Similarly when we'll be spiritually advanced, then there will be no impediment. Now we cannot fly in the air, but when you are free from this body, your spirit soul, within a second you can go to the Vaikuṇṭhaloka. It is so light. Within a second. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9].

So the conclusion is when the world becomes overloaded with the demons, nondevotees, it becomes disturbed, becomes... The mother earth feels load, very much load. So at that time, Kṛṣṇa comes. Therefore it is said: bhāra-avatāraṇāya, just to unload. And bhārāvatāraṇāyānye. Somebody says: bhuvo nāva ivodadhau. Just like if a ship or boat is overloaded, it is very dangerous. It can be drowned at any moment. So sīdantyā bhūri-bhāreṇa.

So mother earth was overloaded and she approached Brahmā on account of overloading of these demons. She was feeling too much uncomfortable. And Brahmā is the chief living being within this universe. So when there is need, others approaches Brahmā, and Brahmā approaches Viṣṇu to reduce the overburden. Then He takes His incarnation, and that is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, abhyutthānam adharmasya [Bg. 4.7]. Abhyutthānam adharmasya. "When the principles of religiosity becomes increased, at that time, I appear," Kṛṣṇa says.

Just like take for example, when there are too much criminals in the state, unlawful, lawlessness, the state becomes overburdened, disturbed, overburdened. At that time the administrators are puzzled what to do. Similarly when the world is overburdened by atheists, demons, nonbelievers, the world becomes overburdened. Otherwise things will go on nicely. Just like in the state, if people abide by the laws nicely, then it is very easy to administer. Things are going on very nicely. But if people become criminals, it becomes a overburden to the state administrators.

So such thing happens because this is material world. And the demons and the demigods, they are always there, existing. But when the demonic power becomes increased, then the world becomes overburdened. Sīdantyā bhūri-bhāreṇa jāto hy ātma-bhuvārthitaḥ [SB 1.8.34], ātma-bhū. Ātmabhū is Brahmā's name. He's directly born of the Supreme Soul, Viṣṇu. He's not born as usually we do from the womb of mother. So Brahmā was born from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Therefore his another name is Ātmabhū. Svayambhū, Svayambhū. These are different names of Brahmā. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ [SB 6.3.20]. These are the... Brahmā is one, one of the authorities. He's also mentioned in the list of authorities, dvādaśa-mahājana. Twelve authorities.

svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

[SB 6.3.20]



We have to follow the mahājana, great authorities.



If we want to be in knowledge of everything, then the Vedic instruction is that: tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigaccet [MU 1.2.12]. One has to approach guru. So guru means authority. So there are, originally... Original guru is Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa is teaching to Arjuna. Similarly He also taught Brahmā. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. That is the statement in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ svarāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. That should be the subject matter of research work. Where is the original source of creation? Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. From where janma, sthiti and pralaya is taking place. That we have got experience. Janma, we have taken our birth at a certain date. This body is born. The sthiti. We stay. This body will run on for some years, ten years, twenty years, fifty years, according to the body. Then it will be finished.

So wherefrom this body came and where, after finishing, where it goes? There are so many scientific laws, conservation of energy. So who is that conservation or the source of energy? That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. There is source. It is not blind. Just like these rascals think it has come out of nothing. How something can come out of nothing? There is no proof, but they claim like that. Therefore they are blind. No. Bhāgavata says: janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The original source from whom everything has come and in whom everything is existing and within whom everything will enter. Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante. These are the Vedic instructions.

So what is the nature of that thing wherefrom things are coming, emanating, things are existing, and again, after being finished, it is entering? Prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām. In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says: "The prakṛti enters into Me." So they do not know. So what is that source? Therefore Bhāgavata says that that supreme source is: janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Abhijña means completely conscious. Jña, jña means knowledge. So abhijña. Abhi means specifically jña. Not like our knowledge. We do not know. We have no sufficient knowledge wherefrom I have come, where I shall go after death. That we do not know. Therefore we are not abhijña. But the supreme source is abhijña. He's not a stone, void. No, how He can be?

Such a nice creation. Everyone can appreciate this created cosmic manifestation, how it is nicely working. The sun is rising exactly in time. Without any division even 1/10,000 part of a second. The moon is rising, the seasons are changing. In the season, the fruits and flowers coming. So in this way the whole cosmic manifestation is going on, very orderly, systematically. Everyone can understand that. So unless there is some abhijña, very clever brain who knows everything, how it is created? But they say that it has come out of nothing. What is this nonsense? Can such thing come out of nothing? Is that very good reasoning? No. Bhāgavata says no. It is coming from the person who is abhijña, very experienced. And that abhijñaḥ tene... Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣu abhijñaḥ tene [SB 1.1.1]. Tene means He broadcasted knowledge. To whom? Ādi-kavaye. Ādi-kavaye, the original creature.

So Brahmā is the original creature. Therefore he has got contact with the original source. He has got the original source. How he receives knowledge? Because we have got understanding that we get knowledge from another person when we are face to face. But Brahmā was alone. How he got the knowledge? That is explained in the Bhāgavatam: tene brahma hṛdā. Hṛdā means through the heart. Because the Supreme Person, Paramātmā, is also within the heart. So although Brahmā was alone, he was getting the knowledge, dictation from the Supreme. Tene brahma. Brahma means knowledge. Brahma means Veda. The Vedic knowledge was given to him first. Tene brahma hṛdā.

The Vedic knowledge is given to everyone because Kṛṣṇa is in everyone's heart. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. He's sitting in everyone's heart. But one must be qualified to receive the knowledge. Kṛṣṇa is helping us from within. He is giving us knowledge from within. Without also. So without, He's spiritual master. And within He's Supersoul, caitya-guru. In this way, we are getting knowledge.

So Brahmā is getting knowledge from Kṛṣṇa and Brahmā is distributing Vedic knowledge. Therefore he's authority. We, we belong to the Brahma-sampradāya. Our, this Caitanya Mahāprabhu's sampradāya... There are four sampradāyas. One from Brahmā, one from Śrī, Lakṣmī, one from Śambhu, Lord Śiva, and one from Kumāra. Kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ. So there are four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas. So we have to approach the authoritative representative of Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa. Then we can get the real knowledge.

Therefore this earth personified approached Brahmā. Bhuvārthitaḥ jātaḥ. So Brahmā prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead that: "This is the position of the world. So it is now overburdened with demons." So Kṛṣṇa comes:

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati (bhārata)

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



He appears. This is the process. So somebody says Kṛṣṇa appeared on the request of Brahmā when he prayed for His appearance on account of overburden, weight of the world.



So Kṛṣṇa came. And you have seen our Kṛṣṇa Book, how much He's engaged in killing the demons. In killing the demons. So Kṛṣṇa says that: "I come down, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya [Bg. 4.8], to kill the demons." So killing business is there. Kṛṣṇa. Although His killing and protecting the same thing. Because He's absolute. But the killing business is there. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has, the Nārāyaṇa has got two hands, club and disc. That is for killing the demons. And two hands, conchshell and lotus flower. That is for the devotees. The devotees are protected. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. Kṛṣṇa is bugling with His conchshell that: "My devotees will not be vanquished." And the lotus flower is the symbol of blessing. It is in the hands of Lakṣmījī also sometimes, blessing.

So somebody says that Kṛṣṇa appeared for this purpose, somebody says Kṛṣṇa appeared for this purpose, but the real conclusion is that Kṛṣṇa appeared for His own pleasure. Not, not being bound by any cause. Kṛṣṇa is fully independent. Just like we take our birth being bound by the cause of our karma. Kṛṣṇa does not come being bound up by somebody's request or by His karma. He comes out of His free will. Ātma-māyayā. It is said ātma-māyayā. He's not compelled by another's māyā. Just like we are compelled by the energy of Kṛṣṇa, external energy, this material energy. We are compelled to take birth. Kṛṣṇa does not take birth in such condition. Ātma-māyayā. Not by the... Because māyā is under the control of Kṛṣṇa. So how māyā can control Kṛṣṇa? One who thinks that Kṛṣṇa is also like us, controlled by māyā, they are called mūḍhas. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. Read the purport little.

Pradyumna: "Brahmā, or the first living being born just after the creation, is the direct son of Nārāyaṇa. Nārāyaṇa, as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, first of all entered the material universe. Without spiritual contact matter cannot create."



Prabhupāda: This is the beginning of creation. Those who are finding out the original cause of material creation, they should know this fact, that creation takes place when there is spirit soul. That means living. The matter is not created. Matter is created by the spirit soul. Not the soul is created by matter. This is rascal theory, that this living condition, living force, living energy which we have got, it is created by material condition. This is Buddhist theory. At the present moment, the whole world is going on on this Buddhist theory. That under certain condition the matter develops living force. No, that is not. Actually the fact is: upon the living force, matter increases.



That we can understand very easily. Apart from our knowledge within the womb of the mother, how the body develops, we can see if a child is born, he grows, his body develops. But if the child is born dead, no spirit soul, it will not develop. Everyone knows that. Therefore the spirit is the basis of development of matter. Not that by development of matter spirit grows. No. That's not a fact. This is... Everyone knows. Why a dead child does not grow? Because the spirit is not there. A tree grows so long there is life in it. A small seed of banyan tree, you sow in the soil and pour water favorably, then it grows. Because the spirit soul is there. But if somehow or other... Take for example you take one grain and fry it in the fire. If you sow it, it will not grow. Because the spirit soul is not there. Therefore they are searching after what is the original cause of creation. The original cause of creation is the spirit soul as everything is growing. Matter is growing, developing on account of the spirit soul. Similarly the whole universe is growing on account of presence of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Creation. Go on.

Pradyumna: "This principle was followed from the very beginning of the creation. The Supreme Spirit entered the universe, and the first living being, Brahmā was born on a lotus flower grown out of the transcendental abdomen of Viṣṇu."



Prabhupāda: Now... Just like sometimes we see. Take for example Brahmā. He grew from the lotus flower. So one can say this lotus flower is matter. No. The lotus flower has grown from the navel of Viṣṇu, the original cause is Viṣṇu. If you take the lotus flower as matter, then it has also grown from the spirit. This is the beginning. The spirit soul is the basis of creation. What is the difficulty to understand? We can see practically. Unless there is spirit soul, there cannot be...



Just like this body, your body, my body, even elephant's body... It has grown. It has grown because the spirit soul is there. As soon as the spirit soul is not there, there will be no more growth, no more growth and the body will be heavy. Due to the spirit soul within the body, the body is light. You can make an experiment. You just have a weight of a dead body and of a living body. You will find difference. What is the difference. Where is our scientist?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Well, the difference is, in the living body, there is a spirit soul. And in the dead body, has no spirit soul.



Prabhupāda: No, you, it, find the difference that the dead body is more weight. Why? Why? Because the spirit soul is not there. These are experimented even by the scientists. So the, the, this world is floating in the air because the spirit soul is within it. Therefore it is floating. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Gām āviśya [Bg. 15.13]. "I enter" and dhārayāmy aham ojasā. So as soon as the spirit soul will be off, everything will be destroyed. The destruction of this cosmic manifestation is like that. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Viṣṇu is therefore known as Padmanābha. Brahmā is known as Ātmabhū because he was begotten directly from the father without the contact of Mother Lakṣmījī. Lakṣmījī was present just before Nārāyaṇa engaged in the service of the Lord, and still, without contact with Lakṣmījī, Nārāyaṇa begot Brahmā."



Prabhupāda: This is all-powerful. Kṛṣṇa is omnipotent. When we want to beget a child, we require the help of a wife. I cannot beget a child alone. Of course, there are some instances, but generally this is not possible. But Kṛṣṇa, Lord Viṣṇu, produced Brahmā without taking the help of His wife, Lakṣmī. She was present there. That is called omnipotency. He's not dependent on anything. That is all-powerful. Try to understand. We say God is omnipotent. Here is the instance of omnipotency. That if I want to beget a child I must marry a wife, but Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, even in the presence of wife, without taking her help, He produced Brahmā. This is omnipotency. Go on.



Pradyumna: "That is the omnipotency of the Lord. One who foolishly considers Nārāyaṇa like other living beings should take a lesson from this."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Therefore in the śāstra it is forbidden, that don't compare with Nārāyaṇa. Don't be on equal footing with Nārāyaṇa. It is not possible. But the rascals, big, big swamis, they are exclaiming that: daridra-nārāyaṇa. Nārāyaṇa has become daridra. Manufactured word. Where is this word daridra-nārāyaṇa in the śāstras? But they have manufactured. That Nārāyaṇa has become daridra and He has come to my door to beg. Nārāyaṇa is the master of Lakṣmī, sahasra-śata-lakṣmī, and He has now become daridra, poverty-stricken. These foolish things are going on.



Therefore śāstra says:

yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vīkṣeta

sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam

[Cc. Madhya 18.116]



These rascals says that Nārāyaṇa, Brahmā, Śiva, and all other, so many demigods, I, you, everything is equal, all, all the same, on the level. This is rascaldom. Nārāyaṇa is asamordhva. Nobody can be equal or greater than Him. Just like Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā: mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. "There is no more superior thing above Me." Neither equal to Him, asamordhva. Asama, asama means no equal, and na ūrdhva. Everyone is down. That is the position. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8].



So these are all foolish theories that with Nārāyaṇa everyone can be equal. The lack of knowledge, poor fund of knowledge. That is not... Therefore śāstra has forbidden: "Don't do this. Don't equalize anyone, even Brahmā and Rudra." Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Lord Śiva, they are actually sitting on the same platform. Still Viṣṇu is the Supreme. Nobody should equalize Brahmā, Rudra even. What to speak of others? So if one does so... Yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ samatvenaiva vīkṣeta [Cc. Madhya 18.116], equalize, sa pāṣaṇḍī. This is the meaning of pāṣaṇḍī. Pāṣaṇḍī means nonbeliever, atheist, demon. That is called pāṣaṇḍī. Go on.

Pradyumna: "Nārāyaṇa is not an ordinary living being. He is the Personality of Godhead Himself, and He has all the potencies of all the senses in all parts of His transcendental body. An ordinary living being begets a child by the intercourse of sex, and he has no other means to beget a child other than the one designed for him."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Generally take birth from the vagina. But Nārāyaṇa is all-powerful. He begets a child from the navel. This is all-powerful, omnipotency. Why? Why it is so happened? That is Nārāyaṇa. Every part of the body has got every potency. That is explained in the Brahma-saṁhitā: aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti. Aṅgāni, the different parts of the... That is spiritual body. The different parts of the body of Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa has got all the potencies. Just like I can see with my eyes, but Kṛṣṇa can eat also with His eyes. So the foolish rascal people will say that: "You are offering Kṛṣṇa foodstuff, but where He has eaten? It is lying there. He has not eaten." He does not know, the rascal, that Kṛṣṇa by seeing can eat also. Aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti paśyanti pānti kalayanti. Just like the washerman who refused to supply cloth in Mathurā, Kṛṣṇa immediately cut his head with his hand. You know the story. So how it is possible to cut one's head with the hand? That is called omnipotency. Read little more.



Pradyumna: "But Nārāyaṇa, being omnipotent, is not bound to any condition of energy. He is complete and independent to do anything and everything by His various potencies."



Prabhupāda: That is explained in the beginning of Bhāgavata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: abhijñaḥ svarāṭ. Svarāṭ means He's not dependent to anyone. He is self-sufficient. Everything. That is God. Nowadays there is so many incarnation of God, but as soon as there is some toothache immediately: "Ooooonh, doctor, give me... Save me, save me. Save me, save me, save me, save me." You are God. You save yourself. Why you have come to doctor? So these rascals are going on. So it is very difficult to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The whole world is overburdened by these rascals and demons. So atom, atom bomb is waiting for them. Yes. It will be finished. All the demons will be finished.



Thank you very much. (end)



741014SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.34

-

Mayapur, October 14, 1974



Nitāi: "Others say that the world, being overburdened like a boat at sea, is much aggrieved, and that Brahmā, who is Your son, prayed for You, and so You have appeared to diminish the trouble."



Prabhupāda:



bhārāvatāraṇāyānye

bhuvo nāva ivodadhau

sīdantyā bhūri-bhāreṇa

jāto hy ātma-bhuvārthitaḥ

[SB 1.8.34]



So Brahmā's another name is Ātma-bhū. He is born from Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu without the help of Lakṣmī. Lakṣmī was there; she was massaging on the lotus feet of the Lord, but the Lord did not take help of Lakṣmī, and He gave birth to Brahmā. Therefore Brahmā's another name is Ātma-bhū, "born from the father directly, without taking the help of the mother." So another name is Svayambhū. Brahmā's another name is Svayambhū.



svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

[SB 6.3.20]



Out of the twelve authorities of śāstra, Brahmā is the origin, and he has been explained as Svayambhū. Ātma-bhū, like that.



So this is the Supreme Personality's omnipotency. He does not require the help of another woman to beget child. Even Brahmā, he has given birth to so many children not through woman but from his different parts of the body. So this we cannot conceive, because we are materially impeded. We cannot understand this is possible. So possibility and impossibility does not depend on our understanding. We have to take knowledge from the authority. Here, in the Vedic literature, we understand that Brahmā was born directly from the father. So we have to accept it. That is called Vedic knowledge. You cannot argue. That is possible. That is omnipotency. All potencies are there.

So Brahmā was approached by the earth, mother earth. She felt overburdened by the sinful activities of the demons. So Brahmā approaches Nārāyaṇa, er, Viṣṇu-not directly he can see, but he can stand on the bank of the ocean of milk, and from there he can submit his petition. And Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu gives His order. So once upon a time, when the whole world was overburdened-this is the history of Kṛṣṇa's birth-so the earthly planet approached Brahmā to appeal to Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu to have His incarnation to diminish the burden of the world. The world is, of course, it is very heavy. We can understand there are so many oceans and so many big, big hills, besides your skyscraper building, and certainly the whole lump of matter is very heavy. But not only this planet, but many other planets, even the sun planet. It is heavier by fourteen hundred thousand times. Still, they are floating in the air by... Why? Because Kṛṣṇa enters in each of them.

In each of them... Gām āviśya [Bg. 15.13]. Dhārayāmy aham ojasā. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "I enter into each planetary system, each universe, and by My power I hold it. It is floating." Why it is floating? Because Kṛṣṇa is there. The atheist may not believe it, but it is a fact. It is a fact. How? Just like an animal or a man, while he is living, he can float in the air or in the water. That everyone has seen. But if the man is dead, it will not float. It will fall down. Is it not a fact? So why it is floating? Because a very small particle of Kṛṣṇa's spiritual potency is there. That is living entity. Big, big... An elephant, he can also float in the water, and the horses, elephant, and what to speak of man? This is practical. Because a small particle of the Supreme is there within this body... Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Very small particle. How much small? One ten-thousandth part of the top of the hair, so small. It has got so power that it can hold the whole body floating in the air. Air... There are very, very big, big birds. They are floating in the air, very, very big eagle. They fly from one planet to another. Their resting place is... They start from one planet, and they go and rest in other planet. And they lay their eggs while flying. That eggs also become a bird simply by air cohesion. That's all.

Devotee: Friction.



Prabhupāda: Friction, yes. So there are so, so big, big arrangement in the kingdom of God. So it is not very difficult for Him to give birth to Brahmā or to float this whole universe or the planets in the air. We shall have to apply our intelligence by comparative study. So if it is possible to float a big body... There are many big bodies. The whale fish, it is as big as a ship. Still, it is floating. Why? That small particle of spiritual entity is there. Therefore it is floating. Then, if the Supreme Person enters into a big lump of matter, why it will not float? What is the reason? At least I try to understand in this way. Am I wrong or right? What is your opinion? Eh? No, it is...



So this is called faith. This is called faith. Unless you have got faith, you cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Ādau śraddhā. Śraddhā: "Yes, Kṛṣṇa can make anything possible." That faith we must maintain. That is the basic... That has been explained by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, what is faith. "Faith means complete conviction." Śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya [Cc. Madhya 22.62]. That is faith. Viśvāsa. If I say something and if you believe cent percent, that is called faith. That is called faith. Not that "It may be," or... No. So śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa. Viśvāsa means faith. How? What kind of faith? Sudṛḍha niścaya, firm faith, without any doubt. Niścaya. And what is that faith? Kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya. If one is surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, then his all duty is done, finished. He has nothing to do. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. As Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do-He has got so much potency that things are done very automatically-similarly, if you faith, have faith in Kṛṣṇa-kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma-then everything will be done automatically. Kṛṣṇa will do for him. What is the difficulty there?

So this big, big lump of matter, earthly planet, they are actually not heavy, but it becomes heavier when there are demons. Demons means material activities. If there is spiritual activity, it remains very light. And if there is too much material activity and materialistic persons, it become heavier and troublesome. So such time became possible, and therefore the earthly planet went to Brahmā to appeal to Viṣṇu to take His incarnation. So somebody says that bhārāvatāra..., tāraṇāya, avatāraṇāya, to diminish the burden, burden... Just like a bad son is a burden of the father. This has been explained by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita that a stupid son... Ko 'rthaḥ putreṇa jātena yo na vidvān na bhaktimān: "What is the use of getting a son who is neither learned nor a devotee? Useless." Ko 'rthaḥ putreṇa jātena: "Such kind of son, what is the use?" The son who is not a devotee... Two things are required: the son should be a devotee or a learned. Without being learned, nobody can become devotee. If one becomes devotee, he's learned also. But sometimes materially learned, not devotee, it happens. So if one is neither learned nor devotee, what is the use of such son? The example is given: kāṇena cakṣuṣā kiṁvā cakṣuḥ pīḍaiva kevalam: "If you have got one eye, cataract, you cannot see, but it is always troublesome." Unless you get it operated, it is simply troublesome. In many places it is said, Cāṇakya Paṇḍita... Ko 'rthaḥ putreṇa jātena. Varam eko guṇī putro na ca mūrkha-śatair api: "If you get one son, very qualified, that is preferred. What is the use of having many sons and all of them are rascals and fools?" Na ca mūrkha-śatair api.

So as a father becomes perplexed when there are rascal sons, similarly, when there are increase of rascal population the world becomes overburdened. Therefore it is called... It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, varṇa-saṅkara. Varṇa-saṅkara. Now the whole world is practically full of varṇa-saṅkara. First of all, there is no division of varṇas. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. According to quality, it can be done. But people are not interested. They want hodge-podge. Therefore they are suffering. They cannot systematically do anything. So when the system of varṇa and āśrama is destroyed... Just like in Western countries there is no such thing as varṇa and āśrama. Therefore the varṇa-saṅkara, the hippies... That is varṇa-saṅkara. So varṇa-saṅkara... In the Bhagavad-gītā... If the varṇa-saṅkara increases, strīṣu duṣṭāsu varṇa-saṅkaro jāyate. When women become polluted, no fixed-up husband-that is pollution for woman, no chaste, no chastity-then this varṇa-saṅkara will come out. And when the world is overpopulated by varṇa-saṅkara, it will become a burden. Therefore it so became, atheist, varṇa-saṅkara, demons. So it was unbearable by the earthly planet. And it is said, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. Therefore mother earth went to appeal, "Please come and save me. I am very much overburdened." Therefore it is said, bhārāvatāraṇāya: "diminish."

So five thousand years ago Kṛṣṇa came to kill some of the demons. Not all of them were demons. But next time, when Kṛṣṇa will come, it will be only demons. Only demons. Kalki avatāra. What is that stotra? Keśava dhṛta-kalki-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. So at that time Kṛṣṇa will not preach Bhagavad-gītā. Kalki avatāra will simply come to cut the throat only. That will be the preaching. That will be preaching. Mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālam, karālam. Karālam means death personified. Mleccha-nidhane. Mleccha means meat-eaters. Those who are meat-eaters, fish-eaters, they are mlecchas. Mleccha-yavana, they are called, according to Vedic... So people are becoming meat-eaters nowadays. I have... There is no secrecy. Formerly, at least in India, the meat-eaters used to eat meat very secretly. We had seen in our childhood. If somebody will meat-eat, it was not allowed within the house. They, formerly, rich men, they used to keep Muslim servants as the caretaker of the horse or the carriage driver. So in the (horse)(?) stable(?) they would secretly cook some meat, and the so-called Babu, Zamindar, will eat. It was not allowed. And those who are not rich men-poor men, śūdra class-they would go to Kālī-ghāṭa, and get one goat, sacrifice there, and cook there and eat, then come back. Meat-eating was not at all allowed. The higher caste, especially the brāhmaṇas, they would never touch. Still in some provinces, in Maharastra provinces, in Madras... Of course, they are now taking.

So meat-eaters means mleccha. So now that is increasing, meat-eaters. So when wholesale population will be meat-eaters, mleccha, they'll not understand anything about spiritual matter-"Why it is forbidden?" because the meat-eaters, they cannot understand anything about spiritual matter. It is very difficult. Vinā paśughnāt. Parīkṣit Mahārāja said,

nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt

ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt

pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt

[SB 10.1.4]



This chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is possible by a person who is nivṛtta-tarṣa. Nivṛtta-tarṣa. Nivṛtta means finished. Brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam. We have to finish this material business before we can understand spiritual thing. If one has got still inclination for material things, it is useless waste of time for him to understand, try to understand what is spiritual thing. So nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. Actually the holy name of Lord can be chanted by a person like Haridāsa Ṭhākura, who has no other desire, material desire. But those are not like Haridāsa Ṭhākura, they may take... Bhavauṣadhi. If he chants, then gradually he'll be released from this material disease. For them, this is the chance. Actually it is meant for liberated person like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Then why we are chanting? We are chanting-ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]-to cleanse our heart, to cure the material disease.



So it is actually relished by the liberated persons, but those who are diseased like us, they can chant and gradually cure the material disease. This is the basic principle of chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. Upagīyamāna, it is chanting. Why? Bhavauṣadhi. It is medicine of this bhava-roga. What is that bhava-roga? Bhava-roga... Bhava means you become, means take your birth and again die. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. This is our disease. This is called saṁsāra. All these rascals in the material world, they are simply getting one body and again... Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihā... When it is useless, no more can be used, then you get another body according to the price you pay. Just like when your garment is old, you purchase another garment. So you can purchase very good garment, or not very good garment, as you pay price. Similarly, to get a different type of garment or this body, you'll have to pay price. Price. If you are in higher status of consciousness, then ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ: [Bg. 14.18] you get your body in the higher planetary system where the comforts are thousands and thousand times better than this.

We can understand that, that the material comforts in the Western countries are better than in this country. Similarly, ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ. We can go to the higher planetary systems; we get more duration of life. Just like Brahmā has got very, very long, millions and millions of years to our calculation. Just like the insect who comes, attacks us at night. Their duration of life? That night only. Within the night, they are born, they have sex life, and they beget children and increase the population, and as soon as the night finished, all finished. They have got also duration of life. And if you say to them that "There is another animal called man. This night is only twelve hours. And he has got day, another twelve hours. In this way, one month. In... Thirty days. And then..." He becomes surprised: "How it is possible?" Similarly, when we calculate the age of Brahmā, we become astonished, "How such millions and millions of years...?" Because we, in comparison to Brahmā, we are like insect.

So this is scientific. This world is relative. This is relative world. According to your position, you get. The time is also relative. What is present, past, present, future for you, that is not past, present, future for others. So what is past, present for Brahmā, that is not past, present, future for us. Everything is relative. And in the creation of Kṛṣṇa there are so many relativities. Therefore it is called relative world. Time is eternal, but on account of our relative birth and death, we make our own past and present. Otherwise, time is eternal. Therefore, for Kṛṣṇa, there is no such thing as past, present and future. Because He is He, He's time eternal. Therefore He knows everything. Vedāham. Just like you know, present, everything-there is no past; there is no future-similarly, for Kṛṣṇa there is no such, past and future. Therefore He could say that "Formerly, millions and trillions of years ago," according to Arjuna's calculation, "I spoke this Bhagavad-gītā to sun-god." He did not believe it because he is relatively calculating past and present. But Kṛṣṇa is not within that past and present. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said that "Both I and you, you and Me, we appear many times." Bahūni me vyatītāni. "And you were also... But you forget because you have got past, present, future. I have no such thing. Therefore I remember."

So in this way, if people become irreligious or not spiritual, the burden of the world becomes heavier, unbearable. That you can understand. I have already explained. This body, this body, you weigh it. Say, it is one man, fifty seras or something like... But as soon as it will be dead, the burden will... The weight will increase. Is it not? What do you think? The weight will increase. Not the same weight. So, so long people are materialistic, the burden will increase. And so long people are spiritualistic, there will be no burden. So bhārāvatāraṇāya anye bhuvo nāva ivodadhau. Just like if there is a boat, then you can cross over the sea or the river with the help, so when you are Kṛṣṇa conscious, then you can cross over the sea of nescience very easily. Bhuvo nāva iva udadhau, sīdantyā bhūri-bhāreṇa [SB 1.8.34]. Bhūri-bhāreṇa, very heavily burdened. So she was lamenting, "My Lord, save me." So the conclusion is that if people become simply atheistic or materialistic... Materialistic means atheistic. And then the weight of the earth, or any planet, will increase and the situation will degrade, and everyone will be unhappy and there will be restlessness. And at that time, Kṛṣṇa comes. He says, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7].

So at the present moment, the actually it is overburdened by the material activities. So Kṛṣṇa has descended already. Kṛṣṇa has descended already. Nāma-rūpe kali-kāle kṛṣṇa avatāra. Kṛṣṇa has taken His incarnation in the form of Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. So if people take to it, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, the present situation of the world can be favorable for our living, and atmosphere will change. Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for this purpose, to give people relief from all these burdens so that they can peacefully live, understand the value of life, and become spiritualized so they live peacefully in this life and go back to home, back to Godhead. That is the mission of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)



741015SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.35

-

Māyāpura, October 15, 1974



Nitāi: "And yet others say that You appeared to rejuvenate the devotional service of hearing, remembering, worshiping and so on, in order that the conditioned souls suffering from material pangs might take advantage and gain liberation."



Prabhupāda:



bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām

avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ

śravaṇa-smaraṇārhāṇi

kariṣyann iti kecana

[SB 1.8.35]



This is a very important verse. Bhave asmin. Asmin means "this," and bhave, "the material world." Bhava means to grow, means... Grow means which has taken birth. That requires grow. In the material world, there are six kinds of changes: first of all birth, then grow, then stay for some time, then producing some by-product, then diminishing, dwindling, and then vanish. These are the six kinds of changes. Just like this body. It has taken birth at a certain date, and it has grown, that the child is growing. And growing, it will stay, not immediately vanish. It will stay. And while staying, it will create some by-product. From this body, so many sons and daughters will come, by-product. Even tree, they produce also, everyone. Then it becomes old, no more strength, and when it is very old, finish. These are called ṣaḍ-vikāra. That is on account of this body.



So after finishing this body, then I am not finished; I am there. I am, this gross body, finished, but I am within this subtle body-mind, intelligence and ego. The subtle body carries me to another gross body. These so-called scientists, medical men, they cannot see the subtle body, although one has to accept. Just like I have got mind, you have got mind-but I cannot see your mind; you cannot see my mind. I have got intelligence; you have got intelligence. Everyone knows. But you cannot see my intelligence; I cannot see your intelligence. They are very subtle. So, and beyond that, the spirit soul is still subtle, so minute quantity. So what these material scientists will see? They cannot see the mind, intelligence, ego, and what to speak of the soul? Therefore they say, "This body is everything, and there is nothing more." But actually that is not the fact. The fact is that the spirit soul is very, very small. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca [Cc. Madhya 19.140]. Keśāgra, the tip of the hair, agra-bhāga, front portion, front portion, śata-bhāgasya, you divide into... Can you do it? Take one hair and divide into hundred parts? No, that is not possible. But if... The direction is there. If you can, you can do it. Śata-bhāgasya. Then again take one part of that śata-bhāga, one hundredth part, again make it hundred parts.

So it is not possible, impossible by the so-called scientists. But how to learn? Then you have to learn from the authority, "It is like this," that much. It is not under your experimental knowledge. That is not possible. Because your knowledge is so imperfect, you cannot deal with these things. But these rascals, they think... Because they cannot deal with these things, they think that the matter is the cause of life. That's all-matter, material. But that is... They have not been able to do so. Take matter in the laboratory, chemicals, and produce a small with hands and legs and eyes. We see every night, a small, very, very small, but still, it has got hands, legs and everything, eyes. Otherwise how they are coming to the light? Very small.

So... So we are getting bhava, bhava from that small insect up to the Brahmā. Ābrahma-bhuvana-stambha,(?) ābrahma stambha. Everyone. That is called bhava. There are 8,400,000 different forms of life, and we are finishing one body, entering another body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Kṛṣṇa says. Either you have to reject Kṛṣṇa's word or you have to reject all this so-called scientific research. But we have... We are pledged to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We cannot reject Kṛṣṇa's word. So it is accepted that tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. Now, Kṛṣṇa says that you have to accept another body. Everyone has to accept. Now, He does not say that "After this body, the next change will be this body." He does not say. He does not say. So... Because that will depend, as it is said here, avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. Avidyā. The... Every living entity is within this material world under avidyā. Avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate.

There are many potencies of God, Kṛṣṇa. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. Many millions. So they have been summarized into three. What is that? The external potency, internal potency, two, and third, marginal potency. The marginal potency and internal potency, they are of the same quality. There are same quality. And there is another potency. That is called external potency. What is that external potency? Now, avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. Viṣṇu-śaktiḥ parā proktā kṣetrajñākhyā tathā parā [Cc. Madhya 6.154]. Viṣṇu-śakti, the Lord's potency, is parā. That is spiritual. Viṣṇu-śaktiḥ parā. And... Viṣṇu-śaktiḥ parā... Viṣṇu-śakti. And kṣetrajñākhyā tathā parā. And kṣetrajñāḥ, the living entities... The kṣetrajña is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, idaṁ śarīraṁ kṣetram ity abhidhīyate. And one who knows this kṣetra... Kṣetrajña ity abhidhīyate. These are stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. So the living entity is kṣetrajña. So kṣetrajña is also parā. But besides these two śakti, there is another, tṛtīyā śakti, which is avidyā, everything in ignorance.

Here in this material world everyone is in ignorance-everyone, even Brahmā. Brahmā, he was ignorant, but he was given knowledge by Kṛṣṇa. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. Ādi-kavi means Brahmā. So the Vedic knowledge, tene brahma... Brahma means this Vedic knowledge, śabda-brahman. So there was one creature, Brahmā only, but he was educated. How he was educated? Hṛdā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Because, at that time, there was no other way but to transfer the knowledge from within. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi taṁ yena mām upayānti te. That is caitya-guru, Kṛṣṇa, Paramātmā. So Brahmā was also educated. That means beginning from Brahmā down to the small insect, they are all in ignorance, all fools and rascals. That is the constitutional position. Nobody should be proud of his knowledge. Everyone is a rascal, everyone. Here it is said, kliśyamānānām avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. So Brahmā is desiring that "If I can get the opportunity, the post of Brahmā, and I can create a big universe..." He was also thinking like that. And the small insects, it is also thinking like that-"If I can create a small hole within the room, then I can live very peacefully and eat." The same propensity. As Brahmā is thinking to create an universe, you are thinking to create an skyscraper building, the ant is thinking to create a hole within the room-the quality of the work is the same.

But because we are fools, that these things are material... It will not stay. On account of ignorance, we are thinking that "This will be very nice. This will be very nice. This will be very nice. This will be..." Kāma-karmabhiḥ, creating some kāma, desire, and working in that way. Therefore kliśyanti. To become Brahmā, that is not very easy thing. Brahmā is such a big post, very qualified, highly advanced in austerities, penance. He is given... He's also a living entity. Just like in your America, you are also a citizen, and President Nixon or Ford, he's also citizen. But by dint of his ardent labor and diplomacy, this way, tha..., he has captured that post. But he's an ordinary citizen. Just like President Nixon. Now he's dragged down. He's no more president. Ordinary citizen. Similarly, if you like you can also become Brahmā. Kāma-karmabhiḥ.

Therefore Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, brahma-janme nāhi mora āśa, kīṭa-janma hao yathā tuwā dāsa. This is Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's song, that "Let me become one insect where there is Your devotee, because if I fall down on the dust of the devotee, my life will be successful." Therefore Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, kīṭa-janma hao yathā tuwā dāsa, bahir-mukha brahma... Brahma-janma is not easy. It is very difficult. But if Brahmā is bahir-mukha-bahir-mukha means not devotee of Kṛṣṇa-it is possible. Because we are in ignorance, māyā, at any time we can forget Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we have to always be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that we may not forget Kṛṣṇa. And that is stated here, śravaṇa-smaraṇa-arhaṇa. Śravaṇa means hearing, And smaraṇa means memorizing, and arhaṇa means worshiping the Deity. If you engage yourself always in this business... Our, all these centers are being opened only for this business-chanting, dancing, worshiping-so that we may not forget Kṛṣṇa. So sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6]. If we are always engaged in thinking of Kṛṣṇa, then there is chance at the end of life-ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Then there is chance. Everything has to be practiced. Just like if you want to dance in the stage, so you have to perform many rehearsal, how to dance, how to dance, how to dance. Then, if you become expert dancer, then when you dance on the stage, you get acclaim: "Ah." (makes sound of applause:) "Phut, phut, phut, phut." "Very good dancer." But that "very good dancer," you cannot say, "I go immediately to the stage, and I become a good dancer." That is not possible. If one says, "No, no, no, I don't... I shall not attend the rehearsal. You give me the stage. I shall..." No, no. No director will allow him. He's a rascal. He's a rascal. You cannot become all of a..., a nice dancer without practicing it.

So real purpose of life is ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante... [Bg. 8.6]. If at the time of death you can remember, you can memorize Kṛṣṇa, then your life is successful. Smaraṇa. So it has to be practiced. (aside:) Where...? You have got that? You could not? Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā [SB 2.4.18]. Kirāta...

Devotee: It's in the Second Canto, Fourth Chapter.



Prabhupāda: Ah, he knows. Second Canto, Fourth Chapter. So asmin bhave. This is the problem. These rascals, they do not care to understand. They are so absorbed in ignorance. Just like some of the, what is called, smugglers. Smugglers, they go on with their work. They do not know... Some of them know also that "We'll be punished. We'll be arrested." Still, they go on. That is the difficulty. A thief knows that "If I am arrested for these criminal acts, I'll be punished." He knows it. And perhaps he has been punished several times. But still, he commits the same thing. Still, he steals. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30].



So why? Ignorance. Ignorance. So therefore this very word is used, avidyā. He never thinks... He is so much absorbed in ignorance that he has no time to think that "Repeatedly I am stealing, and repeatedly I am arrested, and I am punished. I sent to jail. Why I am doing this?" Result is not very good. Just like a person too much sexually inclined. He suffers in so many venereal diseases, undergoes operation, and still, he goes to prostitute, again does the same thing. This is avaidha-strī-saṅga, illegitimate. And legitimate also. After sex, the woman is pregnant, and she has to suffer for ten months. And at the time of delivery it is very dangerous sometimes. And the man also, after he gets the child, he has to take care of the child. He has to work hard to give education. This is proper, proper sex. The proper sex there are so many difficulties. And what is the..., what to speak of the improper sex? You kill the child. You take contraceptive. You make this; you make that. Therefore śāstra says, bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ. After sex life, oh, there are so many troubles, bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ, simply trouble, either legitimate or illegitimate, simply trouble. Tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇā. But because he is a rascal, ignorant, he's not satisfied, again does the same thing. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Again. This is called bhava-roga. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham, kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha-duḥkham [SB 7.9.45]. Iva duḥkha-duḥkham. Simply trouble. Therefore Vedic civilization is to train these small boys to remain brahmacārī, not to take trouble. But if one is unable, he's allowed. So on being trained up in the beginning as brahmacārī, he does not stay for many years in the family life. He retires very soon and becomes vānaprastha, then sannyāsa. That is the training.

So here it is said, kliśyamānānām. They are... Everyone is suffering-birds, beasts, animals and trees, plants, and even Brahmā, even Indra. Indra is also not safe. He is always anxious: "Nobody, competitor, may come." So here in this material world everyone is kliśyamāna, suffering, at least with anxiety. Sadā samudvigna, asad-grahāt. Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. Everyone in this material world-always anxiety. Kliśyamānānām. Therefore it is called... Asmin bhave kliśyamānānām. Why kliśyamānānām? Why they are always suffering in anxiety? Avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. Because they are rascals. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is giving so much stress: "You rascal, give up all this business. You surrender unto Me," because everyone is rascal. That is Kṛṣṇa's very good mercy. He's the supreme father. Therefore directly He says that sarva-guhyatama: "This is the most confidential knowledge I am giving you: rascal, you give up everything and simply surrender unto Me." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Yes. That is required.

So Kuntī says that "You have come to teach rascals like this and engage them in this business: śravaṇa, smaraṇa, arhaṇa." Śravaṇa. Because this is bhakti. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. But they are so rascals, as soon as they, the Vaiṣṇavas begin, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, the rascal swami will say, "No, any name, śravaṇa, will do. Any name. Why Viṣṇu? Oh, Kālī." You know. In Bengal there is a party, kālī-kīrtana. What is this nonsense, kālī-kīrtana? In the śāstra there is no such thing as kālī-kīrtana. Kīrtana means śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, Viṣṇu-kīrtana. But these rascals have discovered because they are very fertile brain and they can discover so many things. Yata mata tata patha: "I have discovered this." What is this? Kālī-kīrtana, durgā-kīrtana. So... But śāstra does not say. Caitanya Mahāprabhu does not say. Śāstra says, harer nāma: the holy name of Hari, Kṛṣṇa, not any other name. Not any other name.

So śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. When there is question of śravaṇam, arhaṇam and..., these things are of Viṣṇu. Where is that verse? Yat śravaṇaṁ yat kīrtanam...? So this... Yes. So this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam has been described by Śukadeva Gosvāmī in Canto, Second, Chapter Four, very nicely. He says,

yat-kīrtanaṁ yat-smaraṇaṁ yad-īkṣaṇaṁ

yad-vandanaṁ yac-chravaṇaṁ yad-arhaṇam

lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmaṣaṁ

tasmai subhadra-śravase namo namaḥ



Very nicely explained. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, before speaking Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he's offering his obeisances to Kṛṣṇa. What is that? "I offer my obeisances," tasmai, "unto Him." Subhadra-śravase: "Simply hearing of Him is subhadra." Not abhadra; subhadra. Subhadra-śravase namo namaḥ. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī-yat-kīrtanaṁ yat-smaraṇam. Either you glorify Kṛṣṇa There are so many glorifications. The whole Bhāgavata is glorification. So you have got... This is... This is the glorification by Śukadeva Gosvāmī: yat-kīrtanaṁ yat-smaraṇam. Either you glorify or simply you meditate upon Him... Yat-smaraṇam. Yad-īkṣaṇam. Simply if you sit down in front of the Deity and go on seeing, bas, do nothing, simply see: "How nicely dressed is Kṛṣṇa. How nicely dressed is Rādhārāṇī," simply if you see, it is said, yad-īkṣaṇam, yad-īkṣaṇam. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. If you have no capacity to chant or if you have no such fixed-up mind-your mind is so disturbing that you cannot fix up your mind in Kṛṣṇa-then the chance is given: "Here is Deity. You simply see. Simply see." And if you are engaged in the service, there is good chance of seeing always, twenty-four hours. While you are cleansing the floor of the temple or the room, you are seeing. You are dressing-you are seeing. You are bathing-you are seeing. You are offering food-you are seeing. This is the process.



So people are so rascal, they do not come even to see. They are so fallen down. They do not come. "Oh, what is this, Deity worship? Idol worship. Idol worship." They will worship Gandhi's statue and this statue, that statue, but when they are asked that "Come here and see the Deity worship nicely," "No, this is idol worship." We... I have seen in Calcutta that Sir Asutosh Mukherjee's statue there is in the Chowrangi square. So in the morning, these ordinary sweepers, they'll cleanse the statue with their brush, because the whole year, the crows have passed stool on the face. So it has become a very solid stool, fixed up. So... I have seen it, brushing like this. This is their arcanam. This is allowed. And if you worship the Deity, bathe the Deity, this is idol worship. And that municipal brush, sweeping brush, and on the face of Sir Asutosh Mukharjee, brushing, that is very good. Just see how much rascal they are! In the morning this business is done. And in the evening all big, big men will come and flower him, garland him, full of garlands. And after evening, they'll go away, and again, next morning, the crows will pass stool. That kind of worship is accepted. And if we install Deity of Kṛṣṇa and worship Him nicely-"These are for the fools and rascals, less intelligent." And he's very intelligent. This is going on all over the world. They are worshiping Napoleon. They are worshiping... I have seen in Paris, Napoleon's statue. "France and Napoleon, one." I asked them, "Where is your Napoleon? France is there, but where is your Napoleon?"

So these things are going on all over the world. Why? Now, avidyā. The disease is avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. So people are so much embarrassed with this avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. And to educate them, to rescue them from these clutches of avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ, is this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. That is the sum and substance. So that is explained in this verse also by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, yat-kīrtanaṁ yat-smaraṇaṁ yad-īkṣaṇam. Kīrtanaṁ smaraṇam, and if you are unable to do that... Just like these children. They cannot meditate, but simply they sit down and see Kṛṣṇa: "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Here is Rādhārāṇī." That is also... A small child, he also gets the benefit. An animal gets the benefit-simply by seeing. Yad-vandanam. And if you are still more intelligent, then offer prayer. Either of these: yad-vandanaṁ yac-chravaṇaṁ yad-arhaṇam. The similar parallels(?), the arhaṇam. If you are expert, trained by your spiritual master how to worship, that is arhaṇam. And śravaṇam, the same thing. Yad-vandanam, offering prayers. Some way or other...

Therefore I say that the Christians, they're also Vaiṣṇavas; the Muslims, they're also Vaiṣṇava, very, mean, lower stage, because they're offering prayer. Yad-vandanam. They offer prayer: "O God, give us our daily bread." They do not know very much, but the beginning is there. Beginning is there because they have approached... Catur-vidhā bhajanti māṁ sukṛtino 'rjuna. That going to the church or going to the mosque, that is also pious activities. One day they'll come out pure Vaiṣṇava, one day. But that beginning is good. But atheism-"Don't go to church. Don't go to temple. Don't go to mosque"-this propaganda is very, very dangerous to the human society. Something do... Try to understand. That education, that a child is sent to school. Let him learn simply A,B,C,D. It doesn't matter. So one day, if he's interested, he may become very good scholar. But to give up religion altogether, secular, simply open factory, bolts and nuts, and work hard and drink and take meat... What is this civilization? What is this civilization? Therefore we are suffering. Again bhava.

Here it is said that avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. By ignorance, they are thinking by opening factories they will be happy. That is avidyā. He does not know that this is ignorance. Why you should open factory? That is... This is called ugra-karma. There is no need of opening factory. You have got land. Here are so many lands. You produce your food grains. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni [Bg. 3.14]. You eat sumptuously food grain, milk, and that will be available without any factory. The factory cannot produce milk or food grain. The present scarcity of foodstuff means everybody is engaged in the city, producing bolts and nuts. Who is producing food grain? This is the solution of economic problem. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni. Therefore we are trying to engage our men to produce their own food. Be self-sufficient so that these rascals may see that how one can live very peacefully, eating the food grains and milk, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. This is our mission. We don't deny this food. They are after daridra-nārāyaṇa-sevā, but why daridra-nārāyaṇa? Why not chief Nārāyaṇa, or the rich Nārāyaṇa? Everyone should be engaged-Bhagavat-prasādam. We don't make any distinction, daridra-nārāyaṇa or rich Nārāyaṇa, dhanī-nārāyaṇa. Everyone, you come on. Take prasādam.

So this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be very vigorously propagated all over the world. Simply by seeing the Deity, simply by joining Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra chanting, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam... Here it is said, yat-kīrtanam. The kīrtana word is first used. Simply by kīrtanam. Yat-kīrtanaṁ yat-smaraṇam. If you perform kīrtana, then you'll be able to think of Kṛṣṇa, that "I have danced two hours, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. What is the meaning?" That is smaraṇa, again smaraṇa, "Kṛṣṇa." He may think that "Foolishly, I have chanted for two hours, 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.' " That means again smaraṇam, Kṛṣṇa caught up. Then yad-īkṣaṇam. So just like people are purchasing our Kṛṣṇa book. Because Kṛṣṇa movement is going on, so they are purchasing out of curiosity: "What is this Kṛṣṇa? Let us see." Yad-īkṣaṇam. "Let us see the book." And immediately he will see the picture, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Yad-īkṣaṇam. And if they open the book, they'll see more. Yad-īkṣaṇam. Then there is vandanam. There are so many prayers, glorifying Kṛṣṇa. Then śravaṇam. Others will hear. Somebody will read. Then if he's fortunate enough, he'll become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Yad-arhaṇam: he'll be engaged in the worshiping of Deity.

So lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmaṣam. These processes, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ van... [SB 7.5.23], so perfect that as soon as you take them..., not all of them, either all of them or some of them or at least one of them, then what happens? Lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmaṣaṁ tasmai subhadra-śravase namo namaḥ: "I am offering worship to that Supreme Personality of Godhead. Simply by remembering Him, simply by glorifying Him, simply by seeing You, so many things happen." So Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the authority... He is one of the authorities, Vaiyāsaki. Balir vaiyāsakiḥ. Out of twelve authorities, Śukadeva Gosvāmī is authority. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. We have to follow the authority. So he says by..., simply by performing these processes, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, then what you are? Lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmaṣam: "This material contamination will be washed off." Lokasya sadyaḥ. When washed off? Immediately, sir, immediately, no waiting, sadya. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.35

-

Los Angeles, April 27, 1973



730427SB.LA



Devotee: "...say that You appeared to rejuvenate the devotional service of hearing, remembering, worshiping and so on in order that the conditioned souls suffering from material pangs might take advantage and gain liberation."



Prabhupāda: So, asmin bhave. Asmin means "this." Creation, bhave means creation. Bhava, bhava means "you become". "You become" means you vanish also. As soon as there is question of you become, you vanish also. Anything which is born must die. This is the law of nature. The so-called scientists are trying that they will stop death by their scientific research work, but they do not know that anything born must die. Janma-mṛtyu. This is relative. And anything which is not born, that will not die. The matter is born. Anything material, that is born. But spirit is not born. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācin. The soul is never born, and therefore never dies.



Now, bhave 'smin. Bhava, this bhava means this material world, cosmic manifestation. Bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām. Anyone who is within this material world must work. This is material world. Just like in the prison house, it is not possible that he will sit down and he will be honored just like son-in-law. No. In the, in our country son-in-law is very much worshiped. Worshiped means flattered. Never divorce the daughter. Therefore, nobody should expect that we may speak something humorous about son-in-law in India. Formerly... It is still the system that the daughter must get married. That is the responsibility of the father. It is called kanyā-dāna. A father may not get his son married. That is not very great responsibility. But if there is a daughter, the father must see that she is married. Formerly it was ten years, twelve years, thirteen years. Not more than that. That is the system. That was the Vedic system. Kanyā. Kanyā means before attaining puberty. Kanyā. So kanyā-dāna. She must be given in charity tosomebody. So, in the pulina brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇa, very respectable community, so it was very difficult to find out a suitable son-in-law. Therefore, formerly one gentleman may become a businessman simply by marrying. In my boyhood, when I was a student, a school student, so I had one class friend, he took me to his home. So I saw one gentleman was smoking, and he told me, "Do you know this gentleman?" So I asked, "Oh, how can I know?" That "He is my aunt's husband, and my aunt is the sixty-fourth wife of this gentleman." Sixty-fourth. So, these pulina brāhmaṇas, they, their business was like that. Marry somewhere, stay there some days, again go to another wife, again go to another wife, again go to another. Simply going to the wife, that is business. This was a social system we have seen. Now these things are now gone. Nobody will marry the husband who has married sixty-four times. (laughter) But (laughing) it was there. So, son-in-law, in that case, is very much honored. There are many stories. We should not wste our time in that way. (laughter)

So here in this material world, who is born, he should not think himself that "I am honored guest or honored son-in-law." No. Everyone has to work. That you see the whole world. In your country there is president, everywhere, that he is also working hard day and night. Otherwise he cannot keep his presidency. It is not possible. The whole brain is congested with political affairs. So many problems, solutions. He has to work. Similarly, a man on the street, he has to work also. This is the nature, material nature. You have to work. It is not the spiritual world. Spiritual world means there is no work. There is simply ānanda, joyfulness. That you see from reading Kṛṣṇa book. They are not working. Kṛṣṇa is going with he calves and the cows. That is not working. That is amusement. That is amusement. They are dancing, they are going to the forest, they are sitting down on the bank of the Ganges. Sometimes the demons are attacking, Kṛṣṇa is killing. This is all pleasure, amusement. Ānanda-mayo 'bhyāsāt. That is spiritual world. Just like, take a sample of spiritual activity. We are... We have got so many branches, so many members, but you are not working. Simple, a sample of spiritual life. Our neighbors are envious: "How these people dancing and chanting and eating?" (laughter) Because they are working hard like cats and dogs, and we have no such responsibility. We haven't got to go to office or factory. Just see, practical example. This is only a little tinge of spiritual life. Simply you are trying to come to the spiritual life, a sample. (break) ...so much enjoyment in the sample, just imagine what is reality. Anyone can realize. This is practical. You take to spiritual life, we are inviting! "Please come, join us. Chant, dance with us. Take prasādam, be happy." "No, no, we shall work." (laughter) Just see. What is our business? We are canvassing simply, "Please come." "No." "Why?" "I shall work like cats and dogs," that's all. So, just try to understand. This is the difference between spiritual life and material lie. Material life means you have to work. You will be forced. Avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. When analyzing the energy of Kṛṣṇa in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is said, viṣṇu-śaktiḥ parā proktā. Viṣṇu, Viṣṇu's energy is parā, superior energy or spiritual energy. Parā. Parā and aparā, you have read in the Bhagavad-gītā. Apareyam itas tu vidhi me prakṛtiṁ parā. When Kṛṣṇa is analyzing, two kinds of nature, parā and aparā, inferior and superior. This is also nature, bhūmih, āpaḥ, analo, vāyuḥ, land, water, fire, air. This is also Kṛṣṇa's nature. Kṛṣṇa says vidhi me prakṛtiḥ aṣṭadhā. "These eight kinds of material nature, they are My nature, they are My energy. But they apareyam. But this is inferior energy. And there is another, superior nature." "What is that, Sir?" Jīva-bhūta, this living energy. And these rascals, they do not know that there are two natures working-material nature and spiritual nature. The spiritual nature is within the material nature; therefore it is working. Otherwise material nature hs no power to work independently. This simple thing the so-called scientists cannot understand.

So, here in this material world, asmin bhave, bhave 'smin, saptame adhikāra. Asmin, in this material world. Bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām. Everyone! Everyone, every living entity is working hard. Hard or soft, it doesn't matter; one has to work. It doesn't matter. Just like we are also working. It may be soft, but it is also work. But it is practicing; therefore it is work. We should not take this work, bhakti, is not actually the fruitive activities. It appears like that. It is also working. But the difference is when you are engaged in devotional service you will not feel tired. And the material work, you will feel tired. That is the difference, practical. Materially, you take one cinema song and chant, and so after half an hour you will be tired. And Hare Kṛṣṇa, go on chanting twenty-five hours, (laughter) you will never be tired. Is it not? Just see practically. You take one's material name, "Mr. John, Mr. John, Mr. John," how many times you will chant? (laughter) Ten times, twenty times, finished. But Kṛṣṇa,"Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa," go on chanting you will get more energy. That is the difference. But the foolish persons they think they are also working like us, they are also doing like us. No, that is not.

So if they... Try to understand, material nature means anyone who has come here in this material world. It is not our business to come here, but we have desired to come here. That is also mentioned here. Kliśyamānānām avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. Why they have come here? No vidyā. Avidyā means nescience, ignorance. What is that ignorance? Kāma. Kāma means desire. They are meant for serving Kṛṣṇa, but they desire that "Why shall I serve Kṛṣṇa? I shall become Kṛṣṇa." This is avidyā. This is avidyā. Instead of serving... That, that is natural. Sometimes it comes, just like a servant he is serving the master. He is thinking, "If I could get such money, then I could have become a master." That is not unnatural. So, when the living entity thinks... He is coming from Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa bhuli' jīva bhoga-vāñchā kare. When he forgets Kṛṣṇa, that is, I mean to say, material life. That is material life. As soon as one forgets Kṛṣṇa. That we see, so many of..., not many, some of our students, they think that "Why should I work in ths mission? Oh, let me go away." He goes away, but what does he do? He becomes a motor driver, that's all. Instead of getting honor as brahmacārī, sannyāsī, he has, he, he has to work just like ordinary worker.

So, avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. Kāma. Kāma means desire. Just like so many scientists they are researching for new food, just like our scientist friend was talking this morning. Then what is new food? Food is already there, allotted by Kṛṣṇa, that "You are this animal, your food is this. You are this animal, your food is this." So, so far human being is concerned, their food is also designated, that you take prasādam. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. It is the duty of the human being to accept prasādam. Prasādam means foodstuffs which is offered to Kṛṣṇa first. This is civilization. If you say, "Why should I offer?" that is uncivilized. It is gratefulness. If you offer to Kṛṣṇa, then you are conscious that these foodstuffs, these grains, these fruits, these flowers, this milk, it is given by Kṛṣṇa. I cannot produce it. In my factory I cannot produce all these things. Anything one uses, nobody can produce, it is given by Kṛṣṇa. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. This kāmān. We are desiring and Kṛṣṇa is supplying. Without His supply you cannot get it. Just like in our India, after independence the leaders thought, "Now we have got independence we shall increase the tractors and other agricultural implements and we will get enough food." Now at the present moment, since two years, there is scarcity of water. There is no rainfall. So these tractors are now crying. You see? It is useless. Simply by so-called tractors, implements, you cannot produce, unless there is favor by Kṛṣṇa. He must supply water, that for want of... Recently the news is that people are so exasperated that they went to the secretary, they demanded food, and the result was they were shoot, shot down. Yes, so many people died. So actually, although we have got this arrangement that one has to work, but that work is simple. If you remain Kṛṣṇa conscious... That, after all, Kṛṣṇa is supplying the foodstuffs. That's a fact. Every religion accepts that. Just like in Bible it is said, "God give us our daily bread." That's a fact. God is giving. That you are..., you cannot manufacture bread. You can, you can manufacture bread in the bakery house, but the..., who will supply you the wheat? That is supplied by Kṛṣṇa. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān.

So we have created unnecessary problems simply by forgetting Kṛṣṇa. This is the material nature. Bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām. Therefore you have to work so hard. Kliśyanti. There is another verse in the Bhagavad-gītā, manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānī prakṛti-sthāni karṣati. Karṣati, you will be struggling very hard, but ultimately sense gratification. Ultimately. In this material world means sense gratification, because kāma, kāma means sense gratification. Kāma, the just opposite word is love. Kāma and..., kāma means lust, and love means loving Kṛṣṇa. So that is wanted. But here in this material world they are engaged in very, very hard work. They have invented so many factories, iron factories, melting the iron, these machinery, and it is called ugra karma, asuric karma. After all, you will eat some bread and some fruit or some flower. Why you have invented so big, big factories? That is avidyā, nescience, avidyā. Suppose hundred years ago there was no factory. So all the people of the world were starving? Eh? Nobody was staring. In, in, in our Vedic literature we don't find any mention anywhere about the factory. No. There is no mention. And how opulent they were. Even in Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, as soon as Kaṁsa invited Nanda Mahārāja, immediately they took wagons of milk preparation to distribute. And you will find in the literature they are all well dressed, well fed. They have got enough food, enough milk, enough cows. But they are village, village men. Vṛndāvana is a village. There is no scarcity. No moroseness, always jolly, dancing, chanting and eating. So we have created these problems. Simply you have created. Now, you have created so many horseless carriages, now the problem is where to get petrol. In your country it has become a problem. Brahmānanda was speaking to me yesterday. There are so many problems. Simply unnecessarily we have created so many artificial wants. Kāma-karmabhiḥ. This is called kāma.

So everyone, because of that unlimited desire, one after another... This desire, when this desire fulfilled, another desire, another desire, another desire. In this way you are simply creating problems. And when the desires are not fulfilled, then we become frustrated, confused. The frustration is there. One kind of frustration, just like in your country the hippies, that is also frustration. Another kind of frustration is just like in our country, that is very old frustration, to become sannyāsī. So to become sannyāsī, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā, this world is false. How it is false? He could not utilize it properly; therefore it is false. It is not false. Vaiṣṇava philosophy is, this world is not false; it is fact. But false when you think that "I am the enjoyer of this world." That is false. If we accept it, that it is Kṛṣṇa's, and you should be utilized for Kṛṣṇa's service, then it is not false. We have given it, this example, that these flowers, these flowers they are in the florist shop, there are so may flowers that people are purchasing, we are purchasing, others are purchasing. They are purchasing for sense gratification, and we are purchasing for Kṛṣṇa. The flower is the same. So one may ask that "You are offering to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme spirit, how you are offering material things, these flowers?" But they do not know that actually there is nothing as material. When you forget Kṛṣṇa, that is material. That is material. This flower is meant for Kṛṣṇa. This is spiritual. And when we take it, this flower, for my sense enjoyment, this is material. This is avidyā. Avidyā means ignorance. Nothing belongs to me. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam, everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore our movement is for awakening this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We should know that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is fact. The world is fact. This world is created by Kṛṣṇa, therefore it is also fact. So everything is fact when it is done in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise it is māyā, avidyā.

So by avidyā, by ignorance, we want to enjoy sense gratification, and we create problems. We create so many artificial work, ugra-karma. Although we are in avidyā, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa everything is very simplified. Just like anywhere, any part of the world, there is food. Everything is there, complete, pūrṇam idam, pūrṇam idam. Just like somebody is living in the Greenland, Alaska, that the atmosphere is not very favorable to our constitution, but they are living, the inhabitants there. There is some arrangement. Similarly, if you study minutely everywhere. Just like there are millions and millions of fishes in the water. If you are put on a boat, and you have to live for say one month, then you will die. You will have no food for you. But then in the..., within the water, there are millions and millions of fishes, they have got enough food. Enough food. Not a single fish will die for want of food. But if you are put into the water, you will die. So similarly, by God's creation there are 8,400,000 species, forms, of life. So God has given everyone's food. Just like even if you are in the prison house, the government provides your food. Similarly, although this material world is to be considered as prison house for the living entity, still there is no scarcity of anything. Our necessity, so far our bodily necessities are concerned, in eating, sleeping and mating and defending, that is arranged for everyone according to his life. That is arranged. So in the lower species of life they cannot understand that everything is there, arranged, although they know, just like a bird, a bird rises in the early morning, he knows there is some food. He knows. But still he is busy to find out the food. So little business, little flying from one tree to another, he..., he sees in all, most, fruits, all the small or big, there are so many fruits they can eat. Similarly, for all the living entities, there is arrangement for food, food grains. Eating, sleeping, mating and defending, there is arrangement. Even in Africa there are some trees which produces fruits, those fruits are harder than the iron bullet. But these fruits are used by the gorillas. They collect those fruits, just like we chew some nuts, so they also enjoy chewing that nut. But it is so hard. I read in some book, so perhaps you also know, that the quarter of the jungle where gorillas live, God gives them fruit: "Yes, here is your food."

So there is everything arranged. There is no scarcity. We have created scarcity, avidyā, due to ignorance. Otherwise, there is no scarcity. Pūrṇam idam. Therefore Īśopaniṣad says pūrṇam, everything is complete. Just like we want water, we want water very much. Just see how God has created these oceans. You can take the, whatever water we are using, that is from the ocean. The stock is there. It is simply distributed from that stock. By nature's arrangement, God, God's arrangement, it is evaporated by sunshine. It is evaporated, and it becomes gases, cloud. The water is there. By other arrangement this water is distributed all over the surface, and it is thrown on the top of the hill to supply you constantly. The river is coming down. The whole, throughout the whole year the water supply is there. In this way, if you study the whole situation, creation of the Lord, you will find everything is complete, perfect. That is philosophy. Everything is complete. There is no necessity. Our only necessity is... (end)





730428SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.36

-

Los Angeles, April 28, 1973



Devotee:



śṛnvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

smaranti nandanti tavehitaṁ janaḥ

ta eva paśyanty acireṇa tāvakaṁ

bhava-pravāhoparamaṁ padāmbujam

[SB 1.8.36]



"O Kṛṣṇa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat Your transcendental activities, or take pleasure in other's doing so, certainly see Your lotus feet, which alone can stop the repetition of birth and death."



Prabhupāda: So in the previous verse it is explained



that: bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām. Anyone who has come to this material word, bhave, in this material world, asmin, in this, kliśyamānānām, they are all working very hard or taking trouble very much like ass, work, kliśyamānānām. He cannot bear the so much burden. Still he's loaded with so much burden. That is kliśyamānānām. If you, if you can bear some load, that's all right. But if you cannot, if it is overloaded, then it is very difficult to go on. So in the previous verse it was suggested that śravaṇaṁ smaraṇam arhāṇam. To get out of this troublesome life, kliśyamānānām avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ... They have created kāma-karmabhiḥ, kāma, lusty desires, desireful. They have created work, heavy work. Therefore kliśyamānānām, always in trouble. So to mitigate that trouble, the recommendation is: smaraṇa smaraṇam arhāṇam.

So Kṛṣṇa comes to introduce the system by which one can get relief from this continuous, troublesome life. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says: yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir, glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. Just like you suffer when you create some disturbance in the law. Then you suffer. We haye got experience. If we violate the state laws, then you have to suffer. Similarly, religious, religion means God's laws. They do not know. "Religion means faith." Faith, you may have faith something. I may have faith something. I may believe you or you may not believe me. That is not religion. Religion "I do not believe in God." Just like this big mission, they say; "You can manufacture your own way." Yata mata tata patha. "Whatever you think right, that is right." This is their philosophy. But that is not science. I am a madman. Whatever I am thinking, that is all right? How it is? Two plus two equal to four, it is science. If I believe, no, two plus two equal to five, or two plus two equal to three No. So dharmasya glānir bhavati means there is codes, laws of God. When you violate that laws of God, that is called dharmasya glānir, dharmasya glānir. Glānir means deviation, discrepancy. So we are suffering by violating the laws of God. Just like we suffer by violating the laws of the state, similarly as soon as we violate the laws of God, we're subjected to so many tribulations. Now how to get out of it? That is bhakti-yogam. So Kṛṣṇa comes to take you out from this position, dharmasya glānir, and that is ... The process is, Kṛṣṇa recommends that: "You do this," and if you take it, then you'll be delivered, you'll get relief. And that is śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, bhakti-yoga.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



Tan manye adhītam uttamam. Prahlada Mahārāja said one who is engaged in these activities, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, hearing and chanting. Hearing means to hear about somebody else, his activities, his form, his quality, his entourage, so many things. If I want to hear about you, you must have some activities, just like history. We hear about history. What is the history? History means the record of activities of different persons in different ages. That is history. So as soon as there is the question, hearing, then the next question will be to hear what? Or what about? What is the subject matter? So that is said: Viṣṇu. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. The activities of Lord Viṣṇu or Lord Kṛṣṇa. That is hearing. Not that hearing the news in the newspaper, not that sort of hearing. Brahma-jijñāsā. These things are statement in the Vedas. Inquiry about Brahman. Hearing about Brahman. Just like here, we are also hearing and chanting. What is the subject matter? The subject matter is Kṛṣṇa. We are not hearing here any market report. What is the price of this, what is the price of this share or that share. No. We are hearing about Kṛṣṇa. And when there is question of hearing, there must be speaking or chanting. So we are speaking and chanting about Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakti. Simply always be engaged in hearing and chanting about Krsna. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ.



Then further. As soon as you become expert in hearing and chanting, then the next stage is smaraṇam. Smaraṇam, thinking of. Anything you speak or hear, later on you contemplate, you meditate, smaraṇam. So smaraṇam is the third stage. First of all, one must begin with hearing, śravaṇam. Otherwise, what about, meditation? Therefore we must first of all hear about the subject matter of meditation. If you do not know the subject matter of meditation, where is the question of meditation? And that is chanting. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. About Lord Viṣṇu. Actually yoga meditation means to see the form of the Lord, four-handed viṣṇu-mūrti within the heart. That is real meditation. Now these rascals, they have manufactured so-called meditation. That is not meditation. Meditation means to see the form of the Lord within your heart. Because in, in the heart there is the Lord. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So by controlling all the senses. The senses are very restless. They are going this way and that way, this way and that way. Mind is going this way, that way. So by this aṣṭāṅga-yoga system, by sitting posture, by controlling the breathing, by modes of different posture of seeing, so many things there are. The real thing is to control the mind and concentrate it on the form of Viṣṇu. That is the real thing. That is called samādhi. Pratyāhāra samādhi. So aṣṭāṅga-yoga means to come to this point of smaraṇam, smaraṇam, arcanam. This is arcanam.

Just like we are worshiping the Deity. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. Śrī vigraha, the Deity worship. Ārādhanam, ārādhanam, worshiping. Śrī-vigraha ārādhanam. Śrī-vigrahārādhanam. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya. Nitya, daily. Not that ārādhana after one week or one month. No. Nitya, twenty-four hours. So you should have such program for worshiping the Deity that you may be engaged twenty-four hours, twenty-four hours. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya, nitya-nānā, nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra, dressing, decorating. Daily, new dress, or twice new dress, or four times new dress. As much as you can. Śṛṅgāra. This is called śṛṅgāra. Kṛṣṇa is opulent, the most opulent enjoyer. And we should supply. We should supply by which He can enjoy. Just like if somebody gives me a new dress, so I say: "Oh, it is a new dress. Very nice." So that is my enjoyment. Similarly if you satisfy Kṛṣṇa daily a very gorgeous dress. Just like today I see it is very nice. This kind of dress should be supplied to Kṛṣṇa. First-class clothing, first-class. Everything first-class. No third-class thing for Kṛṣṇa. All first-class. The gopīs must be first class, the dress must be first-class, the eating foodstuff must be first-class, the sitting place must be first-class, more than first-class. That is called: śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. Cleansing the temple as clean as glass, always. Everyone remarks this that our temples are very clean. Yes. Temple means must be very clean. The more you cleanse the temple, the more your heart becomes cleansed. This is the process. The more you dress Kṛṣṇa, you become satisfied. At the present moment, we are accustomed to see my dress. "How costly dress I have got, I become satisfied..." No. When by dressing Kṛṣṇa you'll feel satisfied, that is spiritual satisfaction. That is spiritual satisfaction.

Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau, yuktasya bhaktāṁś ca niyuñjato 'pi **. So this is the business of the spiritual master, yuktasya, to engage them always. Vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam. Such guru, spiritual master, I am offering. This is Gurv-aṣṭaka. So here it is said: śṛṇvanti. Kuntī-devī ... The first business is śṛṇvanti. One must be eager to hear. Lesson, everything is hearing. You go to school, college. What purpose you pay the school fee, college fee? For hearing. You hear from the learned professor, teacher, you sit down and you get knowledge. The first thing is śṛṇvanti. Therefore a devotee is always engaged in hearing about Kṛṣṇa, śṛṇvanti. That is devotee's business. Tavehitam. Those who are cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness, their first business is hearing. So śṛṇvanti gāyanti. And if you actually, you have heard about Kṛṣṇa, then next business will be to chant, gāyanti.

Just like our preachers are going from here to interior parts of the village. Why? What is the purpose? For gāyanti., for preaching, for chanting. So that they may get the opportunity of hearing. Giving the opportunity to the people for hearing. That is gāyanti. And gṛṇanti, and takes seriously. Abhīkṣṇaśaḥ. Abhīkṣṇaśaḥ means twenty-four hours, without any stop, always. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore recommends: kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ. One should be engaged twenty-four hours in chanting. That is the business of Kṛṣṇa conscious men. Hearing, chanting, śravaṇam kīrtanam. Either all the items or take to one item. Simply hearing. Just like Parikṣit Mahārāja did. Parikṣit Mahārāja did not do any other things. He sat down tight before Śukadeva Gosvāmī and went on hearing, hearing, hearing for seven days. And then his life is finished. So anyone or all of them. If you simply hear, without doing anything. Simply sit down in the temple and whenever there is talk of Bhagavad-gītā, Bhaga..., you go on hearing. Bas. Even if you do not understand, please hear. That's all. That vibration, that mantra vibration will help you. Understanding is not very important thing. There may be so many fools and rascals, they do not know grammar, do not know Sanskrit. No, there is no need of...

Apratihatā. Bhakti is apratiha... Nothing can check the progress of bhakti. So simply you have to adopt the process. The process is hearing. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was criticized by Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya in the beginning. He was, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was son of Jagannātha Miśra, and Jagannātha Miśra ... Jagannātha Miśra and Jagannātha Miśra's father-in-law, that means Caitanya Mahāprabhu's grandfather, grandfather, Nīlāmbara Cakravartī, he happened to be class friend of Sārvabhauma's father. That means Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya comes on the level of His father. So he asked that: "You are a boy, twenty-four years old only. You have taken sannyāsa. It is very difficult to keep sannyāsa because there are so many attractions for the young man. So you hear Vedānta-sūtra." This, the hearing. So hearing. So hearing's so important. Even amongst the Māyāvādī school, they hear Vedānta-sūtra. We also hear, but we hear, hear real Vedānta-sūtra. Because they falsely interpret, their hearing is spoiled, but we don't interpret. We hear actually. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the Supreme." We accept it. That is hearing. And if you interpret, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa means this, Kurukṣetra means this," that mean you're spoiling your time. Why this, that? As it is, hear as it is. Then the...

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked to hear Vedānta. You know. And He was hearing. And Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya was going on speaking, reciting Vedānta-sūtra. But He was simply hearing and then He was not asking any questions. So Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya asked that: "My dear boy, You are hearing, but You are not asking anything. What is this? You cannot understand? Or what is the reason that You are silent?" He said: "Yes, I'm understanding. But I am silent because you are explaining in a different way. Therefore I am simply hearing the verses of Vedānta-sūtra. I am not hearing you." Indirectly ... Of course, He was offering respect. Indirectly, he said that: "You are explaining the meaning foolishly." He said later on that: "I see, I hear the verses just like sunshine. But you are explaining just like covering cloud. This is your explanation." Sun is ... Nobody requires any lamp to see the sun. Everyone can see. But if it is covered by the cloud, it is very difficult to see. So this Māyāvāda interpretation is, explanation, means covering the real meaning. That's all. They do so like that. They'll never accept the direct meaning. Kurukṣetra dharmakṣetra... Even big, big political leaders. They will cover: "Kurukṣetra means this, dharmakṣetra means this." No. Hearing should be ... Our policy is hearing the original, as it is. Then it will be effective.

Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. Viṣṇu should be heard as He is. Gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ smaranti. The same, meditation, remembering, smaranti nandanti. Nandanti means he becomes jubilant, pleasure, reservoir of pleasure, nandati. Nandana means pleasing. Nandanti... Who? Tava īhitaṁ janaḥ. Those who are cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness, their business is śṛṇvanti, śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ. This is the program, everywhere. We have to hear about Kṛṣṇa, we have to speak about Kṛṣṇa, we have to deal about Kṛṣṇa. Simply There are so many activities in relationship with Kṛṣṇa. We have to adopt everything. Then such persons, sa eva paśyanty, ta eva paśyanty. "By this process one day will come that he will see You." Ta eva paśyanty. And what is that vision? When you see God, Kṛṣṇa, then what is the effect? The effect is: bhava pravāha uparamam. Bhava pravāha. Pravāha means current. Now we are going on. Caitanya, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that: māyāra vaśe yāccho bhese.

Just like there is very, mean, forcible currents in the river, and if some animal is thrown in that, he'll be washed away. So we are being washed away by the currents one after another, of this material nature. Just like you have seen the big, big waves in the Pacific Ocean. Similarly, because we are under the grips of the material nature, prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni gunaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27], so we become under the influence of the three modes of material nature, and the, by the current of such material nature, we are being washed away, washed away. Therefore Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says: māyāra vaśe yāccho bhese. "You are being washed away, carried away, by the currents." The currents also described. The first current is hunger. The second current is thirst. Similarly another current, janma mṛtyu, birth, death, old age. These are all currents. These are different currents of the material nature. We become hungry, we become thirsty. We become overwhelmed with regret, śoka moha, illusion, then birth, death, so many currents. We are being carried away. I am spirit soul. I am put into the material ocean, and the currents, currents are carried away. So here, if you be engaged, śṛṇvanti gāyanti abhīkṣṇaśaḥ, twenty-four hours, then the current, upāsanam, uparamam, the current will stop. No more you'll be carried away by these material current. Bhava pravāha uparamam. Where? Padāmbujam. "Your lotus feet. Your lotus feet." One how has learned how to see Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet and offer a little tulasī and sandalwood pulp, his, this current will stop. This current of material life will stop.

There is another nice verse in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: samāśritā ye pada-pallavam-plavam. Just like in the current... The currents are in the ocean. So if you get a nice boat. then you can cross over the currents very nicely. So it is recommended: samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam. You have seen the lotus petal. That is also just like boat. Is it not? Like small boat, imitation. So if you get the help of the pada-pallavam, the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, bhavam, then by that petal boat, bhavāmbudhir, this great ocean of birth and death, vatsa-padam, it becomes just like the water contained in the hole created by the hoof of a calf. Vatsa-padam. You have no experience, but in India, during rainy season, the roads become muddy and the cows and the calves go. They have got holes created, and there is some water. So such vatsa-padam water, you can jump over, at a time, one dozen. So similarly, this great ocean of bhavāmbudhir, birth and death, although it is very great for others, for a devotee, it becomes like that hole. He can jump over one dozen at a time. Bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padam. Then, by that way, he attains the paraṁ padam, the supreme abode. Then what about this world? Now this world is padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. It is simply full of dangers at every step. Na teṣām, not for the devotees. This is not a, this not the place for the devotees. This is for the persons who are suffering, kliśyamānānām. Therefore Kuntī-devī is suggesting "This is the medicine for your suffering." Take it and be happy. Thank you very much. (end)



741016SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.36

-

Māyāpura, October 16, 1974



Nitāi: "O Kṛṣṇa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat Your transcendental activities, or take pleasure in others' doing so, certainly see Your lotus feet, which alone can stop the repetition of birth and death."



Prabhupāda: Where is that boy who said that some Nepalese boy has come? You told me some new boy has come?



Bhavānanda: This young boy.



Prabhupāda: Eh? Oh.



śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

smaranti nandanti tavehitaṁ janāḥ

ta eva paśyanty acireṇa tāvakaṁ

bhava-pravāhoparamaṁ padāmbujam

[SB 1.8.36]



So in the previous verse it has been explained, bhave 'smin kliśyanti. This is the problem, kliśyanti, simply laboring and... Kliśyanti means suffering, suffering the hard work. Everyone. Kliśyanti. Everyone is working very hard for maintenance, struggle for existence. Tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. Karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. Here, in this material world, you have to work very, very hard. Just even for maintenance, and what to speak of sense gratification? This is the position. Bhave 'smin kliśyanti. Bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ. If you work hard, at least there is some expectation... Just like ordinarily a man, a boy, takes education, works very hard so that he may be very successful in examination. And then he passes. Then he works hard to get a good job. Then, in the job, in the service, he works very hard so that he get, he may get promotion. So the hard working is going on. You cannot stop it. Kliśyanti. But unfortunately they do not know the aim of life, "Why we are working so hard." That is the difficulty. But generally they want-"We are working hard for sense gratification. That's all, enjoy the senses." That is the whole civilization.



So intelligent persons, they should be aware that "Simply for sense gratification if we are working so hard, then this is being done by the animals also. Then what is the difference between us and the animal?" But they are so mad after sense gratification... Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vi... They are prepared to work for something which one should... Just like stealing or black-marketing and... There are so many things. They are working hard. Even a, a thief, he is risking his life not to work hard, but he's risking his life. Especially in the Western countries, the burglars, they risk their life because there the law is that anyone trespassing within your house, even ordinarily, you can kill him. Is it not? The law is so hard that even if you, if you enter anyone's gate, anyone's property, without permission, he can kill you. Is it not I am right? Yes. Here in India we don't take it so seriously. So many people are passing here and there. But in your country... I know that one of our boy went to pick up some flowers in Los Angeles, and he was fired. Of course he did not like to kill him, but the firing was there. So just see. For sense gratification the thief taking the risk of his life... The working... Not only working hard. Those who are not thief, they are working very hard to get some money, honestly or dishonestly, and those who are not very honest, to steal they make so many plans, so many devices to steal at the risk of life.

So the life in this material world is not very easy-going. Therefore this very word is used, bhave 'smin, bhave 'smin kliśyamānānām. Everyone is working very, very hard. But they do not know what is the aim. Why they are working so hard, that they do not know. Generally, as I have already explained, that a man works very hard to get some money, some good bank balance, so that in old age he can live very peacefully, without any disturbance. Of course, that is not possible because at that time he may have money, but he is full of anxieties. A family man, old man, is always cintā-magna, cintā-magna, as "This boy is not well-situated. That boy has not educated... His education is not yet finished. And that girl has lost his husband. Husbands are rejected." Where is the peace? There cannot be peace. Kliśyanti. Again he tries to adjust that boy, that girl, that grandchildren, that..., going on. Therefore Śaṅkarācārya, he has said, bālas tāvat kriyāsaktaḥ.(?) The children, they are very working hard for playing. They're also getting perspiration, but they are taking pleasure in jumping and this way and that way.

So bālas tāvat kriyāsaktaḥ. And yuva... What is another name of yuvaka?

Devotee: Youth.



Prabhupāda: Yes. What is the Sanskrit name? Yuvakas tāvad yuvatī-raktaḥ,(?) that "Young men, they are busy working very hard: 'Where is woman? Where is woman? Where is that girl? Where is that girl?' " He's also busy. The boy is busy, and the young man, he is also busy, love affairs, to find out a suitable mate. Similarly... Yuvakas tāvad yuvatī-raktaḥ. And after young life, when one becomes old, vṛddhas tāvad cintā-magnaḥ: "The old man is full of anxiety, absorbed in thought, 'How to do it, how to do that? It is not...' " In this way everyone is busy. Parame brahmaṇe ko 'pi na lagnaḥ: "Nobody's interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." This is the difficulty. That they do not know. They... That the... "This human life, we are working so hard..." Just like we have taken this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are also working very, very hard to collect money and to construct temple and to educate people. This is also working hard. But we have got an aim. It is not without aim. Theoretically or practically, we have accepted it that if we can please Kṛṣṇa, then our future is hopeful. We have got some hope. But what these people have got hope, these karmīs? They have no hope. Simply wild goat chasing, that's all. They do not know what is the aim of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know the real aim of life is to satisfy Viṣṇu, svārtha-gatim. Yajña.



The varṇāśrama-dharma... When Rāmānanda Rāya was asked by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, "What is the actual aim of life for which one should work?" so immediately Rāmānanda Rāya quoted one verse from Viṣṇu Purāṇa that,

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



The aim is to satisfy Viṣṇu. We should always remember this fact, that we are eternally servant, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu. As I have given many times the example, there are so many parts of the body, but what are they meant for? To satisfy the belly. You are walking, you are catching, you are thinking, you are doing so many things-what is the aim? The aim is satisfy the stomach. You cook, you earn hard money, and then you purchase goods and cook nicely and put it into the stomach. Is it not? So that...



There is a story in the Hitopadeśa: Udarendriyāṇām. Udara. Udara means this belly, abdomen, and indriya means senses. Udarendriyāṇām. What is that? All the different parts of the body, hands, legs, fingers and everyone, they held a meeting, that "We are working day and night, and this rascal abdomen is sitting down and eating only. (laughter) He is doing nothing. We are collecting everything, and putting into the stomach, and he is eating, very..., sitting nice. So strike: 'We shall not work.' So strike." Udara... Udara said, "All right, you strike. What can I do? I cannot work. You can strike." So they did not work. Did not work means there was no food, no food given to the stomach. They..., gradually they became weak. The indriyas, the different parts of the body, they became weak, because if there is..., if you cannot eat, naturally you shall be... Then again, next meeting they held that "What is this? Why we are becoming weak?" Then they decided that "The stomach must be given, sir. We have to work."

This is our position. Kṛṣṇa is bhoktā, and we are parts and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. That means we have to work for Kṛṣṇa. This is a fact. If you don't work for Kṛṣṇa, then you'll starve. That is the position. But these rascals, they do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Exactly in the same way as these rascals, different parts of the body, limbs, they did not know that "Without satisfying the stomach, we shall die," similarly these rascals, these karmīs, these, those who have come to this material world, they do not know that without conscious, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, without satisfying Kṛṣṇa, they'll simply starve. Struggle for existence. Kliśyanti. Simply their labor will be frustrated. That is the philosophy.

Therefore bhave 'smin kliśyanti. Kliśyamānānām. Simply wasting time. Without knowing what is the aim of... The aim of life is you have to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. We have repeatedly that... Therefore Kṛṣṇa says nothing, that "The most confidential knowledge, Arjuna, I am giving you. I have spoken to you Bhagavad-gītā in so many detail, but because you are My intimate, dear friend, I give you the most confidential knowledge." Guhyatamam. This word is used. What is that? "Surrender, that's all." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām... [Bg. 18.66]. "This is the most confidential... Simply surrender and do what I say." That is the fact. If we act as Kṛṣṇa says, then we shall be very, very happy. There is no doubt about it. And if we do not act, then we shall suffer. This is fact. There is no question about it. Just like... Just like I have several times told you that Kṛṣṇa says, parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. No. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni [Bg. 3.14]. Bhavanti means you flourish, you become healthy. Your mind becomes sound. Your brain becomes sound. If you eat properly, naturally... Just like the stomach must be satisfied. If the stomach is satisfied, you get the energy immediately. Different energy is produced, different secretion is produced, and one secretion is sent to the heart, one secretion... That is medical science. And then it is turned into blood, and there are different veins, they are distributed all over the... This big machine is going on, big factory; simply you have to give the raw materials to the factory, and things will come out.

So similarly, you have to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. But we do not know that. Durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ. These rascals, they are thinking that "Without Kṛṣṇa, without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, without satisfying Kṛṣṇa, we shall adjust by this material advancement." That is durāśayā. Everything has been discussed. It will never be possible, sir. If you don't take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness... This is your wrong idea, that you will be able... Durāśayā. Therefore this very word is used, durāśayā. Āśā. Āśā means hope. So this is a wrong hope. You cannot. The exact, the same example: If the combined together, all the senses, they pass resolution-"Not to give any food to the stomach, and we shall be easier, not to work so hard"-but that is durāśayā. That is not possible. You are hoping wrongly. That is not possible.

So durāśayā ye... Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Then why people are leading in that way, the so many political leaders, social leaders? Nobody speaks of Kṛṣṇa. They are simply making plan... This party, the Communist Party, is making one plan. The other party is making plan; another party... But the world is suffering. So therefore they have been described in the śāstra: andha. Andha means blind, rascal They do not know. Actually they have no knowledge that without Kṛṣṇa consciousness the human society can be happy. That is not possible. They do not know this. But by Kṛṣṇa's grace, by our guru-paramparā's grace, we understand, we people who are conducting this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that without being Kṛṣṇa conscious, nobody will be happy. Therefore our struggle is different. We are trying to make the people actually happy. Sarve sukhino bhavantu: "Everyone become happy." Otherwise, what is the use of collecting so much money and constructing such big building and inviting them, "Please come here. We have got nice room, and you shall get food without any hard work"? Why we are...? Still, they will not come. Still, they will not come. Now, in this village, we have got such a nice building. We invite, "You come here and..." But still, how many are coming? So therefore it has been used: kliśyamānānām. These rascals and fools must suffer, must suffer. There is no other way. Kliśyamānānām.

The next step, it is said that, that bhava-pravāha uparamam, in the next verse. What is that? Śṛṇvanti gāyanti. This is the process. Śṛṇvanti. Simply sit down. You haven't got to work very hard. Śṛṇvanti. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ: "You, you don't require to change your position. You simply hear." Therefore this very word is used in the beginning. What is that? Śṛṇvanti. Śṛṇvanti means "hears." Simply hear. And gāyanti. So... Just like we say "Hare Kṛṣṇa," and all repeat, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." Gāyanti. Śṛṇvanti. First of all hear: Hare Kṛṣṇa. The leading, I mean to, singer, he says, "Hare Kṛṣṇa," and we repeat, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." So śṛṇvanti gāyanti. Very simple method. Śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti. And takes it very seriously, accept: "Yes, this principle will alleviate all my sufferings." Seriously. Śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ. Abhīkṣṇaśaḥ means continuously, not that "For some days I do, and then again I go to my own habits." No. Abhīkṣṇaśaḥ, continually. And smaranti. And if you take it, then naturally you will think of Kṛṣṇa. Smaranti nandanti. And then gradually you'll be pleased. You'll feel pleasure. Otherwise, hackneyed, how you can continue? From early in the morning you are chanting. Unless you feel some pleasure, how you can do it? Artificially, it is not possible. Nandanti. And what is the subject matter? Tava īhitam. Simply glorifying the activities of the, of Kṛṣṇa. Just like we sing, udilo aruṇa pūraba-bhāge, dvija-maṇi gorā amani jāge. This is our subject matter of singing. What is this? Now, activities of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that as soon as there is early rise of the sun, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately started His nagara-saṅkīrtana. Not of any other. Śrī Caitanya... Tavehitam. Simply... The subject matter must be there. If I hear, the subject matter must be there. The subject matter is Kṛṣṇa's activities. Caitanya and Kṛṣṇa is not different.

So tavehitaṁ janāḥ. Janāḥ, public, if they do it, then sa eva paśyanti. Such person... What will be the result? By this śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ, by this process, what will be result? The result will be sa eva, ta eva paśyanti: "They will be able to see You-simply by this process." Has anybody seen Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa cannot be seen. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. They are... So many people, they ask, "Where is God? Can you show me God?" That... That means people in general, they cannot see God. That is not possible, because with these eyes, these senses, we cannot understand. We cannot understand even that why they are chan... Just like yesterday this man was asking, "Why this chanting?" Because blunt senses, they cannot understand what is the meaning of chanting and why chanting. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ. It is not possible. But sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When we take to the service spirit... Here we are training people how to render service. Then, gradually, he will be able to understand what is this name of Kṛṣṇa, what is the form of Kṛṣṇa, what is the activities of Kṛṣṇa. And that is explained here.

So if you follow this process, śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanty abhīkṣṇaśaḥ smaranti nandanti, then ta eva paśyanti. When? Acireṇa: "Very soon." Not that after millions of years, no. Acireṇa: "Immediately." If he is actually serious, if he has no offense, then acireṇa. Śṛṇvan... Acireṇa, ta eva paśyanty acireṇa tāvakam. "Your..." What is that? "Your..." Padāmbujam: "He can see Your lotus feet." Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi, jānāti tattvam [SB 10.14.29]. Padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśā... If one can see... Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā sa... [Bg. 7.25]. Nobody can see. But if one is fortunate, if he can see... That is possible by this process. Śṛṇvanti gāyanti. That is possible. Then what will be the result? The result is bhava-pravāha uparamam, finish this business. What is that business? Working hard, day and night, without any aim of life. This will be finished. As soon as one is able to see the padāmbujam, lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then immediately bhava-pravāha.

So who can see unless he is advanced spiritually? First of all, everyone is under the impression there is no God. And another way of denying God: "Yes, there is God, but He has no form. He has no head, He has no tail, He has no leg, He has no... He has no, no, no..." It is another way of denying God, definition by negation. I... One says directly, "There is no God," and another man says, "Yes, there is God, but He has no leg. He has no hand. He has no mouth. He has no this. He has no that." Then where is God? It is another way of denying God. This Māyāvādī philosophy... (aside:) What is that? Crows? No.

So here the devotees, they are not impersonalists. They first of all see the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, not that "No hand, no leg, no head." They means... Just like Upaniṣad, the Brahma Samaj, Rabindranath Tagore. So he addresses, "Ohe, tumi..." No, "Ohe tumi..." Who is that "Ohe," they do not know. Ohe. Impersonalist. Ohe tumi. In the Brahma Samaj, they pray, "Ohe." "Ohe." Why "Ohe"? If you know God, then you address Him by His name. Just like we say, he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho... We know what is God. We don't say, "Ohe." Ohe. Why...? No. We know, "He Kṛṣṇa," directly address Kṛṣṇa, he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate. So that is the benefit of the devotee. By this process, śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti, you immediately, acireṇa, very soon, the more you are sincere, you'll be able to see first of all the lotus feet of the Lord. Padāmbujam, the lotus feet of the Lord, you'll be able to see.

And that is the way of seeing. First of all, you have to see the lotus feet. Then, gradually, the thighs. And then, then... At last, the beautiful face. Therefore the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the First Canto, Second Canto, are two lotus feet of the Lord. We have to read very carefully, because we have to see, first of all, padāmbujam. Don't go all of a sudden to see the face of the Lord, just like the sahajiyās did. Their reading of Bhāgavata means rāsa-līlā. Rāsa-līlā is the smiling of Kṛṣṇa, where Kṛṣṇa is personally enjoying very sweet smiling. So you don't try to see the smiling of Kṛṣṇa immediately. First of all see, try to see, the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, padāmbujam. Then gradually rise. When you are accustomed to see, as soon as you close your eyes, immediately see Kṛṣṇa's..., then you go further. Go further. Go further. Go further. And that is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto, Second Canto, Third Canto, Fourth Canto. In this way, you have to go to the Tenth Canto. Then Tenth Canto means the head. And then, in the Tenth Canto, the chapters, Twenty-nine through Thirty-five chapter, that is smiling. Don't try to see Kṛṣṇa smiling immediately. Then you will be baffled. It requires qualification, and it requires time, but if Kṛṣṇa is pleased, He can show His plea..., I mean, smiling immediately. That is a special favor. But the general way is to see, first of all, the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and make your endeavor perfectly done by this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, śṛṇvanti gāyanti [SB 7.5.23]. This is the process.

Thank you very much. (end)



730429SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.37

-

Los Angeles, April 29, 1973





Devotee:



apy adya nas tvaṁ sva-kṛtehita prabho

jihāsasi svit suhṛdo 'nujīvinaḥ

yeṣāṁ na cānyad bhavataḥ padāmbujāt

parāyaṇaṁ rājasu yojitāṁhasām

[SB 1.8.37]



"O my Lord, You have executed all duties Yourself. Are You leaving us today, though we are completely dependent on Your mercy and have no one else to protect us now, when all kings are at enmity with us?"



Prabhupāda: So this conversation was going on between Kuntī and Kṛṣṇa when Kṛṣṇa was going home after establishing the Pāṇḍavas in their kingdom and finishing the battle of Kurukṣetra. Kṛṣṇa is going back home, Dvārakā, and was taking leave, farewell, from the aunt. At that time, Kuntī offered this prayer. Now she's asking directly that "After finishing Your duty, is it a fact that You are going away, leaving us alone?"



This is the devotee's position. Here it is said, yeṣāṁ na ca anyad bhavataḥ padāmbujāt: "We have no other means of protection than Your lotus feet. This is our position." Anyat. Anyat means "anything else." This is full surrender. Just like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings, hā hā prabhu nanda-suta vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta. "Nanda-suta, Kṛṣṇa, You are present here with the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. Both of You are here." Hā hā prabhu nanda-suta vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta. We don't want to see Kṛṣṇa alone. (aside:) Why everyone is coughing? What is the difficulty? Yesterday also I heard. What is the difficulty?

Devotee: I think there's a cold going around.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee: I think there's a cold going around, a lot of people.



Prabhupāda: But you have no sufficient warm cloth, so you are affected? That you must arrange. You must take care of your health. Yuktāhāra-vihārasya yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, yuktāhāra. You should take food just to maintain your health nicely. Similarly, other necessities of body must be taken care of. If you become diseased, then how you can execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Just like Brahmānanda could not go today. So we must be careful. We should not eat more or less. Better eat less than eat more. You'll not die by eating less. But you may die eating more. People die for overeating, not for undereating. This should be the principle. Here... Medical science always forbids not to eat more than you require. Voracious eating is the cause of diabetes, and undernourishment is the cause of tuberculosis. This is the medical science. So we should not take under, neither more. In children case, they can commit the mistake of taking more, but adults, they cannot commit. This mistake, taking more. Children, they can digest. All day they are playing.



So anyway, we should take care of our health also. Sanātana Gosvāmī, he was suffering from itches, very much, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was embracing him. So the, the itches were wet itches. There are two kinds of itches, wet and dry. Sometimes itching spot is dry, and sometimes it is wet. After itching, it becomes wet. So Sanātana Gosvāmī's body was all covered with wet itches, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was embracing him. So the wetness, the moisture, was sticking to the body of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So he felt it very much ashamed, that "I am suffering from itches, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu's embracing, and the wet thing is smearing over the body. How much unfortunate." So he decided that "Tomorrow I shall commit suicide instead of allowing me to be embraced by Caitanya Mahāprabhu." So next day Caitanya Mahāprabhu inquired that "You have decided to commit suicide. So do you think this body is yours?" So he was silent. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "You have already dedicated this body to Me. How you can kill it?" Similarly... Of course, from that day, his itches were all cured and... But this is the decision, that our body, those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, those who are working for Kṛṣṇa, they should not think that the body belongs to him. It is already dedicated to Kṛṣṇa. So it must be kept very carefully, without any neglect. Just like you are taking care of the temple because it is Kṛṣṇa's place. Similarly... We should not take overcare, but some care we should take so that we may not fall diseased.

Anyway... So Kuntīdevī says, yeṣāṁ na ca anyad bhavataḥ padāmbujāt. This is called full dependence. In the śaraṇāgati, in the surrender process, there are six things. The six things is that completely, one of the..., completely dependent upon Kṛṣṇa. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ. The first śaraṇāgati is to accept everything favorable for Kṛṣṇa's service. Ānukūlyam. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Devotional, first-class bhakti means accepting everything which is favorable for devotional service. And prātikūlyasya varjanam. And reject everything which is unfavorable to the procedure of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we forbid that "You don't do this," because they are unfavorable. And we say something, "You do this, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa sixteen rounds," that is favorable. Śaraṇāgati means to give up the unfavorable things and to accept the favorable. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanam. And believe that "Kṛṣṇa will give me protection." Full faith. And to count oneself as one of the servants of Kṛṣṇa. In this way, śaraṇāgati.

So here Kuntī says that "If You think, My dear Kṛṣṇa, now we are well established, we have got our kingdom back, so everything is nicely done, so You want to leave us, that is not a very good proposal. Because we are not free as yet. Because we have killed so many kings, all their relatives and friends, they're also planning to come and again fight with us. This is our position. Parāyaṇaṁ rājasu yojitāṁhasām. They are still engaged. So You don't think that we are already all free from all dangerous conditions. We are not. And we have no other protection except Your lotus feet. This is our position." So indirectly she was asking Kṛṣṇa, "Do not leave us. Don't think that we are safe now. We are not safe. Without Your protection, we are always unsafe." This should be the position of the devotees. We are actually in a dangerous position, this material world. At any time, māyā will catch, at any time. As soon as we are a little inattentive... "Now I have done my duty. Now let me take rest little." No, there is no rest. We must be always alert.

There is a verse from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. What is that? Avyartha-kālatvam. Avyartha-kālatvam. A devotee should be so much careful that he should see, "Whether my time is unnecessarily being spent? Whether I am now engaged in māyā's service or Kṛṣṇa's service?" That one should be very much alert. Avyartha-kālatvam nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ, prītis tat vasatis tale(?). These are the symptoms of advanced devotees. What is that? Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. He's, he's never tired of chanting, or singing or dancing. No tiresome feeling. Nāma-gāne sadā. Sadā means always; ruci, taste. "Oh, very nice. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma..." This is the taste. This taste, to awaken this taste, it takes time. To become... Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī. When he was chanting, he was thinking, "I have got only one tongue and two ears. What I shall chant?" He was thinking, "If I could get millions of tongues and trillions and ears, then I could relish something by chanting and hearing." This was the...

So we should not imitate, but at least we must be very careful to complete the sixteen rounds, the minimum. Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. We have to increase our taste for singing and chanting. Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ prītis tat vasati tale(?). And we should increase our inclination to live in the place where Kṛṣṇa is living. Kṛṣṇa is living everywhere-that is, that is the vision of the higher devotees. Actually He's living, but still, because we are in the lower condition, we should know that here is Kṛṣṇa in the temple. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, but for us, because we have no such vision to see Kṛṣṇa anywhere and everywhere, therefore we should come here in the temple and see Kṛṣṇa, "Here is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has kindly appeared here in a manner in which I can see Him. That is Kṛṣṇa's mercy." That is temple. We cannot see... Kṛṣṇa has completely spiritual body, but we have no eyes to see what is that spiritual body. Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. We are accustomed to see this material, jaḍa, gross things. We can see stone, we can see metal, we can see wood. We can see all these material elements. But Kṛṣṇa is everything. Therefore to be visible to our imperfect eyes, Kṛṣṇa has appeared in the stone form, but Kṛṣṇa is not stone. It is not that we are worshiping stone; we are worshiping Kṛṣṇa. But because we cannot see except stone, therefore Kṛṣṇa has kindly appeared in the form carved from the stone. This is the conclusion.

So prītis tad-vasati-sthale. So one should be very much inclined to live within the circle of temple environment. Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. And increase our inclination to chant more and more. Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ prītis tad-vasati-sthale... And one thing, always thinking dependent on Kṛṣṇa. To... This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, always thinking that "Without Kṛṣṇa, my life is useless. I am in danger." Actually you are in dangerous position without Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa..., Kuntī is offering that prayer that "Kṛṣṇa, You are thinking that now we are safe, but I don't think we are safe. We are always in danger. So if You think that we are safe, then who will give us protection? Because we have no other protection except Your lotus feet." Yeṣāṁ na cānyad bhavataḥ padāmbujāt, padāmbujāt. Pada means "feet." Ambuja means "lotus." "So except Your lotus feet, we have no other shelter. We have no other shelter. And so far our safetiness is concerned, we are already encircled by so many enemies, because in the fight one's father has died. So his son is preparing to fight with us. So we are not at all free now."

So apy adya nas tvaṁ sva-kṛtehita prabho. Now Kṛṣṇa is addressed as prabhu. Although Kṛṣṇa has come to Kuntīdevī to take the dust of his feet, of her feet-she's superior aunt-but Kuntīdevī is addressing Him the prabhu, the Lord. Kuntīdevī is not addressing Him... She's asking her beloved nephew... But He, she knows that "Kṛṣṇa, although playing the part of my nephew, my brother's son, still He's Prabhu, He's the supreme master." Therefore she's addressing Him, "Prabhu." Jihāsasi. Jihāsasi means, "Are You actually leaving us?" Jihāsasi svit suhṛdaḥ. Suhṛdaḥ means those who are well-wishers. Anujīvinaḥ. Anujīvinaḥ means, "They are living under Your mercy only. Our life is always under Your mercy."

So these things, these are the symptoms of really Kṛṣṇa conscious person, that one should think always in danger without Kṛṣṇa. This is the first step. And by taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, one should always feel safe. Now I am under the protection. Kṛṣṇa says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. It is a fact. If you become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, there is no question of danger. Praṇaśyati. Kṛṣṇa gives protection to everyone. Without His protection, nobody can live even for a single moment. That's a fact. So if you think that "Kṛṣṇa is giving protection to everyone; then what is the use of becoming a special devotee?" No, there is use. Just like the king gives protection to everyone, every one of the citizens. That is his duty. But he has got special protection for his own men. This is the distinction. This is not unnatural. One is directly engaged in the governor's or the president's service, so when he is in some difficulty, he has got special protection. Although President Nixon is giving protection as president to every citizens, but those who are personally associated with him, giving him the service, they are a special consideration. That is not unnatural. That is natural. That is not partiality. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu: [Bg. 9.29] "I am equal to everyone." He's God. How He can be partial to somebody and partial to some...? No. Samo 'ham. That is samatā. That is natural. When a gentleman loves all children but he has special love for his own children, that is natural. That is not partiality. Nobody will..., you will say, "Oh, why you are loving your own children more than others?" No, that is natural. This is not partiality. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa loves everyone because everyone is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. But He takes special care of the devotee. Therefore He says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. His bhakta, His devotee, will never be... He's always allowed to see the comforts of the devotees. And the devotees are always busy to see how Kṛṣṇa is satisfied. By dressing Him, by supplying Him food, by serving Him-always engaged. Similarly Kṛṣṇa is also always engaged to see "How My devotees will be happy?" This is the process going on.

So this is intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa. The ordinary living entity, they have got relationship; but when one becomes devotee, it is intimate relation, intimate friend. Therefore Kuntī is requesting Kṛṣṇa that "How You can leave us? We are Your intimate friends." And anujīvinaḥ. Anujīvinaḥ means, "We are simply living by Your care, by Your mercy. So don't think that we are safe and You are leaving us. We have no other shelter than Your lotus feet. Kindly don't leave us." This is the Kuntī's prayer. Similarly Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, hā hā prabhu nanda-suta vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta koruṇā karoho ei-bāro: "Now I am fully surrendered. You can show Your mercy." Because without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, when one thinks that "I shall protect myself, my society will protect me, my community will protect me, my state will give me protection. What do I care for God...?" This is the general tendency. So, "I have got so many protections. Why shall I go to Kṛṣṇa? These rascals, those who have no protection, they can go to Kṛṣṇa." That is their view. But that is not the fact. Unless Kṛṣṇa gives you protection, there is no protection.

This is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: bālasya neha śaraṇaṁ pitarau nṛsiṁha. When Prahlāda Mahārāja offering prayer to Kṛṣṇa, Nṛsiṁhadeva, he said, "My dear Lord, bālasya, for the children, it is not to be thought that because one child has got father and mother, he has got full protection. No. That is not." If Kṛṣṇa does not give protection to a child, in spite of having thousands of father and mother, he'll not be protected. This is the fact. Similarly he says, nārtasya cāgadam udanvati majjato nauḥ. It is not that good physician or good medicine can give one protection. No. Suppose one is suffering from some disease and one is very rich man. He engages first-class physician, first-class medicine is being... Does it mean that his life is guaranteed? No. If Kṛṣṇa does not give him protection, despite all supply of good medical treatment and medicine, he'll die. This is a fact. Similarly, if you have got good, nice boat, it is not guarantee that you'll not drown in the ocean. No. At any moment, if Kṛṣṇa does not give you protection... This is our position.

So we may have invented so many counteract, counteractions for our protection. That is scientific advancement, struggle for existence. Nature is offering difficulties, and the human beings, so-called scientists, they are trying to invent something to check this difficulty. This is called struggle for existence. But it is not possible. Unless Kṛṣṇa gives you protection, your invention has no use. So Kuntī knows it. Although Kuntī happens to be the mother of big, big warriors-Arjuna, Bhīma-still she thinks that "They are not sufficient to give us protection. My sons are so big, big warriors, but that is not protection. Except Yourself..." Therefore she says, yeṣāṁ na ca anyat: "It is not that anyone can give us protection except Your lotus feet."

So this is a very nice verse for the surrendered soul seeking the protection of Kṛṣṇa. And if we remain in that position, that our only protector is Kṛṣṇa and our only duty is to serve Kṛṣṇa, then our life is successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



730430SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.38

-

Los Angeles, April 30, 1973



Devotee:



ke vayaṁ nāma-rūpābhyāṁ

yadubhiḥ saha pāṇḍavāḥ

bhavato 'darśanaṁ yarhi

hṛṣīkāṇām iveśituḥ

[SB 1.8.38]



"As the name and fame of a particular body is finished with the disappearance of the living spirit, similarly, if You do not look upon us, all our fame and activities, along with the Pāṇḍavas and Yadus, will end at once."



Prabhupāda: So this is the case not only with the Pāṇḍavas but every one of us. When somebody dies, big man, big scientist, big politician, big philosopher, when he's dead, the big name, "Here is Mr. Nixon, here is Mr, Sir Isaac Newton, or...," this is name. Nāma-rūpābhyām. Nāma means name and rūpa means form. So, so long we are living, our name, our fame, our form, our activities, are glorious, very good. And as soon as the life is gone, nobody cares. It is a lump of matter. That's all. Now at the... When one is living, a big man, nobody can go before him or touch him-there are so many guards. But the same man, when he's dead, if he's lying on the floor, if somebody kicks on his face, nobody cares, finished.



So we should understand this. That after the disappearance of the body, soul, this so-called big name, big fame, important body, has no value. And what is that soul? That soul is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we are energy of Kṛṣṇa. So when the energy is withdrawn or Kṛṣṇa is not there, the energy... Kṛṣṇa's energy and Kṛṣṇa is no difference. Śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ. Just like the sun. The sun is the śaktimān, energetic, and the sunshine is the energy. So, so long the sunshine is there, the sun is there. There is no difficulty. When the sun is not there, the sun's energy's also not there. Similarly Kṛṣṇa, so long Kṛṣṇa is within us, within this body... Kṛṣṇa's energy... There are... Two things are always. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they do not accept the energy. Simply they accept the energetic impersonal. No. We must accept the energy and the energetic, both. Śakti-pariṇāma. Śakti, śakti means energy. By the energy everything is going on. The energetic is aloof. Just like the sun, we can very easily understand. The example is just before us. The sun is there, the sunshine is there, and within the sun-globe there is the sun-god. But we, so-called scientists, we are studying the sun from ninety-three millions of miles away, and we are taking very pride that we are studying the sun. If you have studied sun, why don't you go there? Go there, and enter into the sun planet. This is a material thing. And what to speak of the spiritual thing?

So the sunshine is working because the sun globe is there, the sun-god is there. Similarly, the material energy is working. This cosmic manifestation made of earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and ego, these are the eight ingredients of this material manifestation. So these eight material elements, they are energies, separated energies. Bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā. And, because the energetic is there behind this energy... Just like electric power. We are using electric power, but behind this electric power there is the powerhouse and there is the engineer who is producing the power. The rascals, they do not understand this. They simply see the power. But behind the power there is the power-maker, the source of power. They do not understand it. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes and says that "I am the power-maker. I am behind this power." Kṛṣṇa personally comes, because we have no eyes to see Kṛṣṇa, neither we can understand Kṛṣṇa. He therefore comes. What kind...? God, we are simply contemplating God. What is the form of God? God must be very old man. Because He has created millions and millions of years ago, therefore He must be very old man. This is our contemplation. We are going on. Therefore God comes before you: "Here, see what is God." He's so kind. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7].

So God comes here in His person. He leaves behind Him His instruction, just like Bhagavad-gītā. He leaves behind Him His devotees who can explain. But still we are so stubborn, we shall not accept God. This is the foolishness, mūḍha. They have been called mūḍhāḥ, rascals, fools. God is there; God's energy is there. If you cannot see God, you see God's energy. Just like if you cannot see the electric powerhouse and the engineer who is within the powerhouse generating the power, but you should understand you are using electricity in so many ways. You are using in kitchen, you are using floor cleansing, using your, I mean to say, cleansing and so many things you are using. Your tape recorder, everything. In your country, especially, everything electric, every... So one should inquire-that is intelligence-that wherefrom this electricity's coming?

So if you make research, that is intelligent research. Then you'll find, "Here is the electric powerhouse." Similarly, if you further study, that who is running on this powerhouse, you'll find a human being. He's not impersonal; he's person. The electricity is impersonal. Even the powerhouse is also imperson. But the man behind the everything, that is a person. Therefore God is person. Logical conclusion. How He can be imperson? Imperson has no brain. The... Just like so many machines now we have invented, very wonderful machines. But the machine is not the brain. The operator is the brain. Why do they not understand? Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "You are seeing the energy or the wonderful action and reaction of this material cosmic manifestation. But don't think that they are working independently. No. I am behind there." So what is the difficulty to understand? Or from example you can understand how things can go on nicely without a nice brain behind these things? It is conclusion. Mayādhyakṣeṇa. And Kṛṣṇa says further, mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam avyakta-mūrtinā [Bg. 9.4]. Avyakta, avyakta is also mūrti, a form. Just like the sky. The sky is avyakta, not manifest, but it has also a form, a round form, the universe. Without form there is nothing. Everything has form. The so-called impersonal, that is also form. Just like you go to the ocean, you will find a form, a big circle. That is also form. How you can say there is no form?

So this formless, nirviśeṣa... You offer your prayers: nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi. This is all foolishness. "Zero, impersonal" is all foolishness. Behind this impersonal feature and so-called zero, there is the supreme form. That is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Īśvara means controller. That nature is not controlling. The real controller is Kṛṣṇa. Icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā. Brahma-saṁhitā says prakṛti. Prakṛti is..., the Deity is Durgā. So it is said that she is working under the direction of Govinda. How she's working? Just like shadow. You have got your hand, and the shadow is the down. Your hand moves, the shadow moves. Similarly the motion is set. This is scientific truth. Behind all this manifestation, the..., there is a motion. And who set up that motion? The last, yesterday I was giving this example, just like shunting of big, big wagons in the railway line. One engine gives the motion, pushes one wagon, and it pushes other one, kat-kat-kat-kat, like that. You might have seen it.

So motion-giver is Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise you can give very big, big name or very big, big form and dress, they are all useless. Useless. That is being explained by Kuntī, that "We are very big. People says we are Pāṇḍavas. Similarly we have become famous. How? Because You are our friend." Kṛṣṇa is the friend of the Pāṇḍavas. Kṛṣṇa is the friend of Arjuna specifically. Therefore Arjuna is so great warrior. He has got gigantic vigor. So Kṛṣṇa, Kuntī is... Kuntī knows that "What is the value of my sons, Pāṇḍava. They are saying, 'Oh, Pāṇḍavas are so big warriors and heroes.' " Similarly yadubhiḥ. Yadubhiḥ. Kṛṣṇa took birth in the Yadu dynasty. That is already explained. So Kṛṣṇa has made famous the Yadu dynasty because He took His birth in that family. Therefore two words are used here, yadubhiḥ saha pāṇḍavāḥ. The Pāṇḍavas are famous and the Yadu dynasty is also famous. Ke vayam. "What we are? What is our value?" Ke vayaṁ nāma-rūpābhyām: [SB 1.8.38] "Simply a so-called name and so-called form. Otherwise without You, it is all useless. It has no value." Ke vayam.

So people do not understand this. He's very proud of having a nice body and nice name. "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am this," "I am German." So what is this, German, American, Indian? A bogus name and bogus form, that's all. It has no value. Just make Kṛṣṇa minus, everything is zero, finished. This is fact. But people are so rascal, they do not understand this fact. Who can deny it? If the body, the American body or Indian body, or good name and big name, it has no consciousness, then what is the value? No value. Therefore it is said that,

bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya

jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ

aprāṇasyeva dehasya

maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam



So Kṛṣṇa consciousness means... Consciousness is there. But this consciousness, what is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness? This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We have forgotten Kṛṣṇa; therefore we simply say "consciousness." Really consciousness means Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because without Kṛṣṇa, you cannot have consciousness. Therefore the right name is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not "consciousness." Right name is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like without sun how there can be sunshine? Therefore we say "sunshine," not "shine." Sunshine. Therefore as soon as there is consciousness, it must be Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one makes Kṛṣṇa minus, he's a rascal. He's a rascal. Consciousness means Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Shining means sunshine. The sunshine means without sun, how there can be sunshine? Similarly consciousness means Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Without Kṛṣṇa how there can be consciousness? How it can be Kṛṣṇa consciousness? This requires a little brain to understand.



So the devotees, they have got brain. They understand. Just like Kuntī: "What is the value of our... We are so big, big men, Pāṇḍavas, Yadus. What is the value?" Therefore she admits, ke vayaṁ nāma-rūpābhyām: [SB 1.8.38] "Simply big name and big form, it has no value." Bhavataḥ adarśanam. Because Kṛṣṇa was taking farewell, parting. So regretting, Kuntī regretted that "You'll go. So we cannot see You. Then if we cannot see You, then what is the value of our name, fame?" This is... She's lamenting. Bhavataḥ a... yarhi hṛṣīkāṇām iva īśituḥ. It is exactly like the senses. Now we are after sense enjoyment. This material world means sense enjoyment. But without Kṛṣṇa or without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no possibility of sense enjoyment. The senses are there. You have got big hands, big legs, and everything big, big. But when there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even you cannot utilize these. Hṛṣīkāṇām. Hṛṣīka means senses. Therefore intelligent person, he knows that "My senses without Kṛṣṇa has no value." That is devotee. "Therefore so long my senses are active, it may be used for Kṛṣṇa." That is bhakti. Right conclusion. Because without Kṛṣṇa, these senses have no value. Therefore there is some intimate relationship with my senses and Kṛṣṇa. That's a fact. Because without Kṛṣṇa, what is the value of your senses?

Therefore it is the duty of everyone to use the senses for Kṛṣṇa. Just like the property of somebody should be used for him, not for others. I have given this example many times. Perhaps you may remember. Suppose here is the assembly and there is one hundred dollar note is there, fallen from somebody's pocket. So if I take or you take the hundred dollar note and put your in the pocket: "Here is a hundred dollar note," then you are a thief, because that hundred dollar note does not belong to you. You are taking it without his information. That means you are a thief. This is called bhoga, enjoyment. And another is tyāga. One thinks, "Oh, why shall I touch it? Somebody's... Let it remain there. I have no, nothing to do." This is called tyāga, giving up. So the hundred dollar note is the same. One is trying to enjoy it, and one is trying to give it up: "I don't care for it." So both of them are fools, bhogī and tyāgī. Bhogī means the karmīs. The karmīs, those who are working very hard, utilizing... The scientists are utilizing the resources, material resources. That means all are making policy how to steal that note. That is their policy, the karmīs. And another, while he was unable to steal, he says, "Oh, grapes are sour. There is no need of..." That is tyāgī.

So both the bhogīs and tyāgīs, two classes of men, you'll find. Mostly they're bhogīs. They're trying to enjoy anything for his sense gratification utility. And another, when he's baffled, he says, "No, no, we don't require it." Similarly the same example: If one takes that note and says, "Somebody has lost his hundred dollar note, sir." So one who has really hundred doll..., he says, "Yes, yes. I had..." And if you deliver to him, that is real service. To give up that note or to take that note, both is useless. So similarly karmī and tyāgī, bhogī and tyāgī, they're all useless. And bhakta, devotees, they know that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa; now it should be offered to Kṛṣṇa. That is real service. The same example. You take the hundred note and you ask, "To whom this hundred dollar note belongs?" If you give him, that's a great service. That man becomes very much pleased upon you: "Oh, you are so nice."

So similarly this everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. What is this body? This body, material elements, earth, water, fire, air, and then within the body, subtle psychological, mind, intelligence, ego. So Kṛṣṇa claims, "All these eight elements are My separated energy." Then where is your body, your mind? You cannot, you do not know even how this body is working. Although I am claiming, "This is my body..." Take, for example, just you are a tenant in an apartment. You are getting all supplies. But you do not know that how these, I mean to say, tap water is working, fire is working. You do not know. But you pay rent, or somehow or other, you have occupied the apartment. You are utilizing. Similarly, we are utilizing this body. But this body does not belong to me; it belongs to Kṛṣṇa. This is real fact. So this body means senses. Therefore senses also belong to Kṛṣṇa, mind also belong to Kṛṣṇa. Everything I have got. I am a spirit soul. I have given the opportunity to utilize a certain type of body because I wanted it. Kṛṣṇa has given me. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. If you want a body of a king, Kṛṣṇa will give you. You do the prescribed method; you, you get a body of a king. And if you want the body of a hog, to eat stool, Kṛṣṇa will give you.

So Kṛṣṇa is giving you the body. So now in the human form of life, one should understand that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. So why I am hankering after satisfying my so-called bod?. Rather, I have got now the senses and the body. Let me serve Kṛṣṇa." That is intelligence. That is bhakti. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Here is the hṛṣīka, hṛṣīka word is... Hṛṣīkāṇām iva īśituḥ. Hṛṣīkāṇām Hṛṣīka, hṛṣīka means the senses. The senses actually belong to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Hṛṣīkeśa. Another name is Kṛṣṇa, you know, Hṛṣīkeśa. Tvayā hṛṣīkeṣeṇa hṛdi sthitasya yathā karomi. So hṛṣīka, hṛṣīka means senses. These senses have no value without Kṛṣṇa. Therefore natural conclusion is the senses belongs to Kṛṣṇa. But I wanted some sense gratification; therefore Kṛṣṇa has given us some facility. But everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. That when I forget that actually everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, I have been given some facility... That's all. So much. So when I have got this facility, why not utilize all these facilities for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction? That is called bhakti.

Thank you very much. (end)

