#+title: Lect1 3 1



This question I asked... (aside:) Don't be sleeping. Professor Kotovsky. I asked him that "Where is the difference of philosophy between your Communist philosophy and our Kṛṣṇa consciousness philosophy? You have to accept one chief man, that Lenin or Stalin, and we have also selected one chief man, or God, Kṛṣṇa. So you are following the dictates of Lenin or Stalin or Molotov or this or that. We are following the philosophy or the instruction of Kṛṣṇa. So on principle, where is the difference? There is no difference." So the professor could not answer that. You cannot conduct your daily affairs without being dictated by somebody else. That is to be accepted.

So that is the law of nature. So nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). Then why don't you accept the supreme authority? This subordinate authority... We have to accept somebody as our leader. It is not possible that we can live without leadership. That is not possible. Is there any party, is there any school, or is there any institution that they're conducting without any chief leader or director? Can you show me any instance throughout the whole world? Is there any instance? No. Just like from our camp somebody has left, but he has accepted Gaurasundara or Siddha-svarūpa Mahārāja as chief. The principle is there, that you have to accept one chief. But intelligent is that which, what kind of leadership we shall accept. That is knowledge. We have to accept the servitorship or underhand, to become underhand of some person. So the intelligence is that "Whom we have to accept?" That, there lies intelligence: "What kind of leader we shall accept?"

So our principle is that Kṛṣṇa should be accepted as the leader because Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme leader. Eko bahū..., nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). Leader means he must... Just like father. Father is the leader of the family. And why father is the leader? Because he earns, he maintains the children, wife, servant, and establishment; therefore naturally, he's accepted the leader of the family. Similarly, you accept the President Nixon as the leader of your country because in dangerous time he gives direction, in peace time he gives direction. He's always busy how to make you happy, how to make without any cares, anxiety. This is duty of the President. Otherwise, why you select one President? Any man can live without any President, but no, it is required.

So similarly, the Veda says, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. There are two sets of living entities. One... Both of them are nitya. Nitya means eternal. And cetana means living entity. So nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. This is the description of God, that God is also a living entity like you and me. He's also living entity. Just like you see Kṛṣṇa. What is the difference between Kṛṣṇa? He has got two hands; you have got two hands. He has got one head; you have got one head. You have got... He has got two legs; you have got two legs. You can also keep some cows and play with them; Kṛṣṇa also. But the difference is there. What is that difference? Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. That one Kṛṣṇa, although He's similar in so many ways with you, similarity, but one difference is there-He is maintaining every one of us, and we are being maintained. He's the leader. If Kṛṣṇa does not supply you foodstuff, you cannot have any foodstuff. If Kṛṣṇa does not supply you petrol, then you cannot drive your car. So eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti. Whatever necessities of life we have got-we require so many things-that is supplied by eka, that one living entity. That is the difference. We cannot maintain even a small family, our capacity is so limited. At the present moment especially, in this age, a man does not like to marry because he's unable to maintain even a family, wife and children. He cannot maintain them, even a family consisting of four or five living entities.

But God is the whole family. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti. He's supplying food to the elephants. We are, we are so much advanced in civilization that because we cannot take care of a child, therefore we are killing child even within the womb of mother, abortion. We are so unfit. But God, you see, He's feeding millions of elephants in the Africa. Not only elephants, there are so many. Out of 8,400,000 species of life, there are 8,000,000 species of life nonhuman being, the majority-the birds, beasts, reptiles, trees, so many other living entities. But they have no business. They have no occupation, profession, to maintain themselves. So who is maintaining them? Who is there? Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. Even if within your room, there is a little hole, sometimes you'll find thousands of ants coming out. Have you got this experience? And who is feeding them? Who is supplying them food? They are living within that hole, millions, and hundreds and thousands of ants, but they're also eating, they're also sleeping, they have got their wife, they have got their children. But who is supplying food? So in this way, if you analyze that everything is being maintained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that is real understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, how Kṛṣṇa is great, or God is great. So that is a real civilization of life, to understand, to appreciate, to appreciate the greatness of God. That is real civilization.

So, there is a process how to appreciate, how to become qualified to appreciate, and that system is called varṇāśrama-dharma, to divide the whole human society into four classes of men: the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. And those who are not regulated, they are pañcamas, below the śūdras. So the, our subject matter was unlawful meat-eaters. So even the śūdras, who are meat-eaters, they're lawful meat-eaters. What is that lawful meat-eating? Lawful meat-eating is... In any religion, formerly, even the Muhammadans or Hindus or the Jews, they used to kill one animal as sacrifice. They used to kill. Not in the slaughterhouse. Even up to date, those who are strictly religious followers... Suppose the Muhammadans. There in the Koran, the injunction is that "You should sacrifice one animal in the mosque." The Jews also, they sacrifice animal in the synagogue. I have read one book, Lord Jesus Christ, when he was a young boy he was very much shocked when he saw that animal-killing is going on in the synagogue. Therefore he differentiated from the Jews and he started his own religion, Christian religion. Is it not a fact? Am I right? Why... He was also a Jew. Why he deviated? Why he deviated from the Jews? Because when he saw in his young age that animals are being killed in the synagogue, he differed, "No, no, this is horrible. This should be stopped." Therefore, his first commandment is "Thou shall not kill." Am I wrong or right? Eh? That was his first impression, that people should stop killing. So who is Christian? Everyone is violating this first commandment, what to speak of other commandments. Everyone. So it is very difficult to find a real Christian. But if you violate the commandments of Christ, then what kind of Christian you are? This is our question. Who will answer this?

So this is the problem. Animal-killing is not within the category of human civilization. When a man becomes civilized, he knows how to produce food. He can till the ground. He can produce food grains. He can produce fruits and flowers and so many things. Even in the animal kingdom, there are different kinds of animals. They do not touch meat-eating even. They do not touch. Every, every animal has to live by destroying or killing another animal. That is nature's law. Jīvo jīvasya jīvanam. Either you eat vegetable or you eat meat, it doesn't matter. Vegetable has also got life. But there is allotment. Just like the cows or other animals, they do not eat meat, they live on grass. Grass has got (also) life, but because they eat grass life, therefore they will eat meat? No. The allotment. Similarly, human being should be also... There is allotment. For human being, God has given us the foodgrains, the fruits and... Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find. Kṛṣṇa is saying that "Anyone who is supplying Me this patraṁ puṣpam..." Patram means leaves, vegetables, and puṣpam means flowers. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalam, fruits. Toyam, and milk. So why? He is speaking in the human society. He's not speaking in the animal society. Therefore it is already described what kind of foodstuff we shall take. So patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalam. This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We offer to Kṛṣṇa the patraṁ puṣpam-flower, vegetables, grains, milk products-and we take prasādam. This is our movement.

So here it is said that puruṣādair ivārtān. So not only eating meat, but there are cannibals also. I've heard that in Africa still, there are cannibals. Not only Africa, in other parts of the world, they also sacrifice a human being. I think in America also formerly, the Red Indians used to kill a human being? Eh?

Devotees: In Mexico.



Prabhupāda: Mexico. So anyway... So they are called cannibals, and in Sanskrit it is called puruṣādaiḥ, puruṣādaiḥ. Puruṣādaiḥ means the cannibals and the man-eaters. Still there are. So here it is said, arakṣyamāṇāḥ striya urvi bālān śocasy atho puruṣādair ivārtān. So puruṣādaiḥ means... "Unscrupulous men" also can be drawn. But puruṣādaiḥ means the man-eaters. So suppose in this Hawaii city, in Honolulu city, you understand that some cannibals have come. They are taking away human being for eating. Then what is your concern immediately? Immediately concern will be, if you are at all actually responsible, then the immediate concern will be striya urvi bālān: to give protection to the weaker section of the population, namely the women and the children. So in other words, it is our first duty to give protection to the women, the weaker section, the woman and children.



So Dharmarāja is asking, "Mother Earth, whether you are concerned because you are not at the present moment very much strong or very much able to give protection to the women and the children?" This is Vedic civilization. You give protection to the women, to the children, to the brāhmaṇa, to the cow, and to the old man. First duty. First duty is to give protection to the old men, women, children, cow, and brāhmaṇa. That is questioned in the next part, brahma-kule kukarma, kukarmaṇy abrahmaṇye rāja-kule. Brahma-kule. The brāhmaṇas should be protected, but if there are, even in the brāhmaṇa family, who are addicted to these sinful activities, that is also becomes a concern. Similarly, if the royal family, or the ruling class of men, they do not respect the brahminical culture, that is also a subject matter of concern.

So in the Vedic civilization there was no such problem as petrol problem and food problem or... No. The problem was whether the civilization was going nicely, whether the human civilization is making progress toward the ultimate goal of life, not to bother with the temporary problems. Temporary problems has been described in the Bhagavad-gītā, tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya.

mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

[Bg. 2.14]



Anything except this problem... There are problems always. This is a world of problems. So... Just like this summer season, that is also problem. The winter season, that is also problem. So many people come here in Hawaii because they cannot tolerate too much severe cold in the mainland. They come here. Again, when you come here, when it is too much hot, warm, then we require fan, we require refrigerator, we require so many. So problem is there. So Kṛṣṇa is saying, "My dear Arjuna, problems there will be." This is material world. You cannot avoid problems. But you should tackle with the main problem, not the insignificant or temporary problem. That is the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā.



The main problem is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. That is main problem. So our cultivation of knowledge, advancement of civilization, should be on the basis of solving the main problems, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi, not the temporary problem. For the temporary problems, it is advised that the temporary problems, they come and go. Just like nowadays there is the petrol problem. Petrol is there, but because the Arabians are restricting supply, it has become a problem. So there are, as soon as there will be some peace agreement between the Arabians and others, this problem will be solved. Take for example. Best example is given in the Bhagavad-gītā, śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ. You can solve your petrol problem, but you can never solve the problem of winter and summer. That will come and go. So it is not that winter will remain for good, or the summer will remain for good. Āgamāpāyino 'nityāḥ. They will come and go away. So don't be bothered about them. If you feel botheration, just try to suffer or tolerate. That is not your real problem. Real problem is how to stop the birth, death, old age and disease, and that is Vedic civilization, and that is depending on the brahminical culture.

So the king's duty is to see that everyone is following the brahminical culture. The brāhmaṇa is executing his occupational duties nicely, the kṣatriyas are doing nicely in their occupational duties; similarly, vaiśyas, śūdras. That is the duty of the government, that everything is going on nicely. Otherwise, it will be a great concern and people will be always filled up with anxieties. There will be so many troubles and problems. We cannot solve them. And it is very difficult to solve in this age of Kali. Therefore śāstra has given us injunction that

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



Because we are so weak in this age and there are so many problems, it is very, very difficult to make a solution. Therefore śāstra says that "You simply take to the chanting of the holy name of God."



harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



In this age there is no other way. That you'll feel when you take to chanting without any offense, very simple thing, which has... You haven't got to spend any money for this chanting, neither we are charging. We are simply distributing this knowledge, that "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra; all problems will be solved."



Thank you very much.

Sudāmā: Any questions, Prabhupāda?



Prabhupāda: Hm hm.



Sudāmā: Any questions?



Devotee (1): Prabhupāda, I just... When Lord Jesus Christ was talking to his disciple John, he mentioned... John said, "Well, what should I do?" He says, "Well, the first great commandment is to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and to love your neighbor as yourself, as thyself." When he's talking about the neighbor, isn't that true that all living entities is man's neighbor?



Prabhupāda: Yes, certainly.



Devotee (1): I mean, even the bugs and everything?



Prabhupāda: There are beings who lives with animals, who live with trees, who live with human being. So many. All of them are neighbors. Just like in the modern sense, national. What is the definition of nationality? A living entity who is born in that country, he's called national. Is it not? So why you are killing cows? Are they not national? So the human law is imperfect always. They... There is partiality always. But in God's law there is no such thing, partiality. Therefore, Christ says that you shall love your neighbor.



Devotee (1): So all living entities...



Prabhupāda: Yes, all living entities. We are taking, according to Vedic civilization, devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41]. We are indebted, we are obliged to the devas, the demigods. Just like we are indebted to the sun. Sun... You require so much heat and light, and the sun is supplying you profuse heat and light. Are you not indebted? Do you think, or not, that we are indebted to the sun?



Devotee (2): Yes.



Prabhupāda: Are you agreeing or not?



Devotee (1): Well, I guess I think.



Prabhupāda: Yes, you must. If you cannot pay your electric bill one month, your electricity will be immediately cut off. And you are getting so much light from the sun, and you do not pay the bill. Then you are becoming indebted, indebted, indebted. You see? (laughter) You have to pay it. If you don't pay, then you'll be punished. So we do not know that. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta. We are taking so much milk from the cows, and we are killing instead of giving them protection. So in this way, we are simply committing sinful life. How you can expect to become happy? So the only means is to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyaḥ [Bg. 18.66]. Because you are habituated to commit sinful life only, so if you want to be saved, then you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise, you have to be punished, in this life or next life. And you do not know what is your next life because you are all ignorant. But there is next life. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. But if you are most sinful, then you are going to become abominable living creatures. Adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. You go down. And if you become pious, then you are promoted. But our program is not to become pious, not to become sinful: to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That will save us.



Devotee (3): Prabhupāda, Jesus had a relationship with Kṛṣṇa, or God, as his father...



Prabhupāda: Yes. Jesus said, "I'm son of God," and Kṛṣṇa is God, that's all.



Devotee (3): Is there a spiritual planet where Kṛṣṇa plays the part of one's father?



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee (3): Is there a spiritual planet where Kṛṣṇa. . .



Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇa is already father for everyone, either in spiritual or material. Father is father. Does it mean, if your father goes somewhere and the relationship changes, you become father and he becomes son? He's always father, either in this apartment or that apartment. So spiritual, material world means different atmosphere only. So father is always father, and son is always son.



Devotee (4): I have a question about the living entity, the spirit soul. Is the living entity in the area of the heart, in the heart, or in the lotus of the heart?



Prabhupāda: What is that? I could not follow.



Sudāmā: Would you say it again?



Devotee (4): If the living entity, the spirit soul, is in the heart, in the area of the heart, or in the lotus of the heart?



Sudāmā: How is the living entity, or the spirit soul, situated...



Prabhupāda: So why you are anxious to know so particular? He's in the heart. That's all right. Are you medical man?



Devotee (4): No, I...



Prabhupāda: Then why you are anxious about these details? Eh? What do you gain by that? It is said... In the śāstra it is said, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: [Bg. 18.61] "The heart, in the heart, the, the Supreme Person is also there, and the living entity is also there." So much knowledge is sufficient. Still, you cannot find out. So we are not so much anxious to know whether in western side of the heart or eastern side of the heart. We do not waste time in that way. He is in the heart. That's all.



Sudāmā: Any more question?



Devotee (5): What will happen to the souls who have not become Kṛṣṇa consciousness at the end of Kali-yuga? What does Kṛṣṇa do with them?



Prabhupāda: He'll suffer. He'll suffer. Anyone who does not... Kṛṣṇa conscious means God conscious. The human life is meant for realizing God. So every religious system is meant for giving education about God. That is the system. Either you take Christian religion or Hindu religion or Muslim religion, the idea is to understand God. So therefore, any religion you take, it doesn't matter. If you understand what is God and if you know what is your relationship with God, then you are perfect. (end)





740711SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.21

-

Los Angeles, July 11, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.)



arakṣyamāṇāḥ striya urvi bālān

śocasy atho puruṣādair ivārtān

vācaṁ devīṁ brahma-kule kukarmaṇy

abrahmaṇye rāja-kule kulāgryān

[SB 1.16.21]



"Are you feeling compunction for the unhappy women and children who are left forlorn by unscrupulous persons? Or are you unhappy because the goddess of learning is being handled by brāhmaṇas addicted to acts against the principles of religion? Or are you sorry to see that the brāhmaṇas have taken shelter of administrative families that do not respect brahminical culture?"



Prabhupāda: Arakṣyamāṇāḥ striya urvi bālān. According to Vedic culture, first protection-to the cows, to the women, to the brāhmaṇas, to the children, and to the old man. This is the first business of the government, to give protection. Practically, there is no criminal charge against them-against a brāhmaṇa, against a woman, a child. Suppose a child steals something. Who is going to prosecute him? It is not taken very seriously. So they require protection. They should not be given freedom. Like a child, he is not given freedom, similarly freedom... Of course, there is. Protection means to some extent no freedom. If I want to protect the child, then I sometimes say, "Don't do this." That is one of the items of the protection.



So here description of cow-killing is already done. Now in this age, Kali, these things will be lacking. First thing is that no protection for woman. Woman requires protection by the father, by the husband and by the elderly children. But that is now finished. Practically no protection. They are, under the name of so-called freedom, loitering in the street. It is a very abominable condition of life. Now these things are very prominent in the Western countries especially. In India they are still dragging the Vedic culture. So woman are given protection. The father gives protection to the woman, child, and up to sixteen years, utmost. Then she must be married. The father's duty will be finished when the daughter is given to a suitable boy to take charge. That is marriage system. Marriage system is that it is necessary, necessary for social equilibrium. And it is the duty of the father to get the daughter married to a suitable boy. And when she is married, then the father's duty is finished. Unless she is married, the father's duty is not finished. This is Vedic culture. It is called kanyā-dāya. Kanyā means daughter, and dāya means obligation. Kanyā-dāya.

There are so many debts. Putra-ṛṇa, pitṛ-ṛṇa, deva-ṛṇa, bhūtāpta.

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

[SB 11.5.41]



We have got debts to so many people. First debt is to the demigods. Just like the sun-god, moon-god. They are supplying heat, light. The Varuṇa. In this material world. We have got so many debts. But people do not care for it. Just like we are receiving light from sun, but what we are paying to the sun? Therefore we remain debtor. This is the Vedic idea. You are getting this electricity. If you don't pay the bill, how long you will be able to use it? After some days the connection will be cut off. But although we do not pay any bill to the sunlight, because it is the order of Kṛṣṇa, it is giving us light. But how long it will go on? This is sinful. If you take something from a person and if you do not repay, that is sinful. Ṛṇa, it is called ṛṇa.



So there are so many debts. First to the demigods, then to the ṛṣis, saintly persons. Because we get knowledge, Vedic knowledge from the ṛṣi, we must be debtor. Guru-ṛṇa. Debtor to the spiritual master, to the sages, to the saintly persons, because we are getting knowledge from them. Therefore the Vyāsa-pūjā is there. Once in a year the disciples are worshiping the spiritual master and trying to repay what he has received from the spiritual master. Devarṣi-bhūta. Similarly, in our ordinary dealings also, you are my friend, I am your friend, you are getting some help from me, I am getting some from you. So we are debtors, obligation. Devarṣi-bhūta, āpta. Āpta means relatives or family. We are indebted to the father, mother, elderly family members. In this way we are implicated with so many debts. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41].

So you can liquidate the debts simply... It is practically impossible. Therefore, if you take shelter of Mukunda, śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam, the worthy of taking shelter... If you take shelter of anyone else, he cannot give you protection. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. If you cannot liquidate your debts, you become sinful. But if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa says,

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



"I shall get you released." This is one side. And... From spiritual angle of vision. But from material angle of vision ṛṇa, debts, you can become insolvent. "I cannot pay." If you apply to the court... I do not know whether this act is there in your country. In India there is insolvency act. If one is debtor, then his assets, then he submits to the court that "I have got so much asset and I have got so much debt. So people may not harass me, the court may divide amongst my creditors whatever I have got." This is called insolvency. So court decides that he has got thousand dollars' debt, but he has got only hundred dollars, so that hundred dollars is divided: "You take this and be satisfied." He is not... That is called insolvency. That is in terms of debts.



But so far the debts of the daughter, it is not debt, it is called dāya, kanyā-dāya. Debt you can take insolvency, but dāya means it is so obligatory, there is no such question that you can get relief from it. It must be... Therefore the word is used, kanyā-dāya. Still in India, the process is as soon as the girl is grown up the father is very anxious to find out a suitable boy and hand her over. Then... So that protection will be finished. It is already finished, at least in the western countries. There is no obligation of the father how to get the daughter married. Therefore the question is, "Whether you are lamenting that in this age of Kali these things will happen: cow slaughter, no obligation for the daughter..." And bālān, children. They are also not taken care of. Not only that, they are taken care of, but now child or baby is being killed. This is Kali-yuga. This is conclusion(?)

And how one can be happy? So many sinful activities are going on. How they expect to become happy? It is not possible. Therefore it is being asked that "Whether you are thinking of all these things and therefore you are unhappy?" Sober man becomes unhappy. Para-duḥkha... Especially Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava has no problem for himself, but he has many problems for others. Because a Vaiṣṇava... That is Vaiṣṇava, unhappy by seeing others unhappy. That is Vaiṣṇava. That is a first-class Vaiṣṇava, para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. By His practical example... He was a very learned scholar, many students, very respectable. He was so respectable in Navadvīpa that in one night He collected a hundred thousand of people to challenge against the Kazi's judgment, civil disobedience. Kazi acted against saṅkīrtana, so Caitanya Mahāprabhu challenged, "Now, tonight, we shall perform saṅkīrtana with 100,000 of people." And 100,000 of people gathered together and chanting and went to the house of Kazi.

So the example is... He was at that time hardly twenty years old, but how much influence He had that simply by His order 100,000 people collected and chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and challenged the Kazi, that "You are forbidding. We shall continue. Do whatever you like." So this is His popularity. And Lakṣmī-devī, the, directly the goddess of fortune, wife, most beautiful young wife. And seventy-years-old mother. So He has got obligation. But still, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Vaiṣṇava, para-duḥkha-duḥkhī... That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Tyaktvā su-dustyaja-surepsita-rājya-lakṣmīṁ dharmiṣṭha ārya-vacasā yad agād araṇyam [SB 11.5.34]. He had no business to take sannyāsa at very young age, only twenty-four years old, such nice family, good wife, mother. In a family where there is good mother and good wife, that is happy family. And one who has no good mother and good wife, then it is hell. This is Vedic culture. So Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said, mātā yasya gṛhe nāsti. If somebody has no mother at home, bhāryā cāpriya-vādinī, and the wife is very harsh, dealing with the husband not very properly, araṇyaṁ tena gantavyam, he immediately give up that house and go to the forest. This is Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. That what is the use of such nonsense house?

mātā yasya gṛhe nāsti

bhāryā cāpriya-vādinī

araṇyaṁ tena gantavyaṁ

yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham



For him the home is as good as forest. Therefore there is no family system. Everything finished.



So it is only Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement trying to bring back Vedic culture so that people may be very happy. It is not a business; it is not a religious sentiment. It is a program to make everyone happy. Sarve sukhino bhavantu. This is Vedic culture. Not that "I exploit you, you exploit me, I cut your throat, you cut my throat." This is not human society. And this has begun already. Because you cut throat of the animals-you are very expert, cutting throat-now you will cut throat each other. This is the... So a sober man, thinking all this downfall of the human civilization, he becomes very unhappy. He becomes, very unhappy. Oh. This human civilization, human being, human form of life, was given by God or the nature for cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness, spiritual. That is not possible in the lower form of life, animals, the cats and dogs. And this is an opportunity given by nature's law. Now we get this body. Now you understand your position, what you are, to understand that you are not this body. So long in the lower grade of life you were under the impression that you are a body, the cats and dogs. They do not know that the body and soul is different. But it is the human form of life to understand that "I am not this body."

That education begins in the Bhagavad-gītā in the beginning: dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehī means the possessor of the deha is within the body, not the body is the person. But no education. Throughout the whole scientific world, university education, there is no concern that "I am not this body; I am soul." Such a foolish, rascal civilization is going on in the name of advancement. No protection for woman, no protection of children, no respect for brahminical culture. So it is the animal civilization. Polished animal, that's all. Otherwise it is not civili... That is Vedic culture. Therefore...

And another: brahma-kule kukarmaṇi, kukarmaṇi. Ku means bad, and karma means work. So they are very much proud. Here, you have no such thing here because there is no question of brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Everyone is the same. So, but India still, there are four classes of men-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Here it is in Kali-yuga. Therefore kukarmaṇy abrahmaṇye rāja-kule kulāgryān. Brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya... Brāhmaṇa means the persons learned, very intelligent, the Vedic culture, knowledge in Vedas. Śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam. These are the brahminical qualification. Control the senses, control the mind, very clean. Śamo damas titikṣā, tolerant, ārjava, simplicity. These are the brahminical qual... Then jñānam, full knowledge. Not that I am talking of becoming a brāhmaṇa, but I have no knowledge. That is not brāhmaṇa, allowed. A brāhmaṇa must be very much learned. Brāhmaṇa's another title is paṇḍita. Paṇḍita means very learned, paṇḍitajī. Where is our paṇḍita? He is not here?

Devotee: He's not here.



Prabhupāda: He is not well? (hears response) Hm. So this is civilization, this is culture. So at the present moment there is no respect for brahminical culture. Just like we are trying to make our disciples perfectly men of character. No illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling, no meat-eating. And people will take it very lightly. They laugh. Because they do not know what is brahminical culture, what is the perfection of human life. So all these are happening and will continue to happen till the end of this age, very, very dangerous. We must always consider. Don't be allured by big, big highways and skyscraper building with full advertisement of wine and cigarette. This is not life. This is not life. Life, here is life. Let anyone come and compare this life in this temple and outside. This is life.



So be careful that this material world is itself dangerous. Especially in this age of Kali, it is dangerous. It is stated in the śāstra, padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58], every step there is danger. This is the position. Māyā is so strong that you should always expect simply danger. But if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, you can overcome these dangers... Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām. It is not... This dangerous position is not for them. Who? Samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam, one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet. It is a great ocean, just like the Pacific Ocean. It is just like a great ocean, big ocean of ignorance. As in the ocean, if you go, even on a boat, it is always dangerous, similarly, we are in the ocean of material civilization. There is always danger. But if you take shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, paraṁ padam, then you overcome the danger and you go back to home, back to Godhead.

Thank you very much. (end)



740118SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.22

-

Hawaii, January 18, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



kiṁ kṣatra-bandhūn kalinopasṛṣṭān

rāṣṭrāṇi vā tair avaropitāni

itas tato vāśana-pāna-vāsaḥ-

snāna-vyavāyonmukha-jīva-lokam

[SB 1.16.22]



Translation: "The so-called administrators are now bewildered by the influence of this age of Kali, and thus they have put all state affairs into disorder. Are you now lamenting this disorder? Now the general populace does not follow the rules and regulations for eating, sleeping, drinking, mating, etc., and they are inclined to perform such anywhere and everywhere. Are you unhappy because of this?"



Prabhupāda: So śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. The study of Bhāgavatam means complete knowledge. This is the mature contribution of Vyāsadeva to the human society. Lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. Before writing, by the instruction of his spiritual master, Vyāsadeva meditated in bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite amale. Samyak praṇihite 'male, apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam [SB 1.7.4].



yayā sammohito jīva

ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam

paro 'pi manute 'narthaṁ

tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate

[SB 1.7.5]



It is said... Vyāsadeva, before writing... Writing book is not a whimsical, whatever I like. No. You must be empowered by superior authority; then you can deliver the right things. So Vyāsadeva was empowered by his guru, Nārada.



Vyāsadeva, after writing so many books, he could not find any peace of mind. So he was sitting, morose, and his spiritual master Nārada came there, asked him, "My dear Vyāsa, you have done so much in writing for the welfare of the society. Why you are not happy?" Vyāsadeva replied, "Yes, my lord, I think I have done so much things, but I am not happy." So he was instructed that "You have written so many books, but not about the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I admit that you have written so many books. So because you have not described about the superiority or glories of the Lord, therefore you are unhappy." So after that instruction... That means after his writing of the Vedānta philosophy, he was also not happy. But when he wrote Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam under the instruction of Nārada, he became happy.

So the purpose of writing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is lokasyājānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. All the people of the world, they're fools and rascals, lokasyājānataḥ. Why they are fools and rascals? There are two things. Vyāsadeva, by his bhakti-yoga meditation, he found out that there is God and there is māyā. Two things are there. Bhakti-yogena manasi samyak praṇihite 'male, apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam [SB 1.7.4]. There is the Supreme Person, the supreme controller-apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam-and there is also māyā, which is on the back side. Just like if you stand before the sun or light, your shadow will be on the back side. You have got, all, experience. You stand up; you'll see a long shadow on your back side. So that is māyā. The māyā is the back side. That means if you stand before the sun, in the front, you can see in the sunlight very nicely. But if somebody stands on your back side, he cannot see you. This is the position. Apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam.

What is this māyā? Why this māyā? That is also explained. What is that? Yayā sammohito jīva: "These conditioned souls, they're bewildered by māyā, illusion." That is māyā. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam: [SB 1.7.5] "Being bewildered by this māyā, this soul, who is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, or God, he's thinking that 'I am a material product. I am made of these material things.' " Just like the so-called rascal scientists, they'll never accept that within this body there is the soul because they're always thinking there is no such thing as soul. Only the material, that's all. This is illusion. They cannot explain how this body is moving, why the dead body does not move, what is the difference, what is the thing that is missing. These rascals will not understand. Even there is instruction by higher authorities that within this body there is the soul... Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanam [Bg. 2.13]. Dehino 'smin dehe, in this body, dehī. The dehī... Dehī means the possessor, the owner of the body. It is said clearly, and we can understand that when I meditate upon my body, actually what I am. So if one is deep thinker, he'll immediately understand that "I am not this body." Take, for example, study on this finger; and if you think, "I am this finger"? No, you'll come to the conclusion, "It is my finger." Any part of your body, you study; you'll never agree that "I am this." It is "I am in possession of this." We say also, "My body, my finger, my head, my hand." And where is that "I"? You are simply thinking, "My, my, my, my," but where is that "I"? But they have no brain. And still, they're passing on as great philosopher, great scientist, and getting Nobel Prize.

But they are illusioned. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam [SB 1.7.5]. Ātmānam means the soul. Soul, they're thinking that it is a product of this matter, by evolution, or so on. So many nonsense theories they have, all rascaldom. There is no evolution. Evolution is there in the matter of consciousness. Just like a child. His consciousness is not developed. A child goes to capture a fire because his consciousness is not developed. But that does not mean the child has no consciousness or the child has no soul. Just like some rascal says, "The animals, they have no soul." So why the animals have no soul? Their consciousness is not developed, but soul is there. If the animal has no soul, then the child has also no soul because the child behaves like an animal. In the family, a small child and a dog, they're behaving similarly, and therefore dog is also considered as one of the family members, children, because his consciousness is not developed.

So the evolution means developed consciousness, and according to the developed consciousness, one gets a particular type of body. This is nature's law. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham... [Bg. 3.27]. The evolution means evolution of consciousness. The same child, when he's... He'll get a different body. Just like a female child. By evolution, means when she gets another body, youthful body, her consciousness is different. If you get the body of a pig, your consciousness is different from the consciousness of a man. A pig will very easily eat stool, but a human being will not eat. Similarly, in every behavior... Just like we, Kṛṣṇa conscious people, we have given up intoxication. Now, if somebody comes and bribes and offers some money that "You take this one thousand dollars and drink," you'll not agree. Because your consciousness is developed. So evolution is not of the body. Evolution of consciousness. And as your consciousness develops, you get a particular type of body. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. Therefore, the evolution should be of the consciousness. And this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When you come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then your life is perfect. And fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, then you, after giving up this body-tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], no more material body.

So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. And it is the duty of the guardians like guru, like father, like the state, they should look to the interest of the wards, subordinate, that he is developing his Kṛṣṇa consciousness nicely. That is the duty. So when that duty is not done... Just like... We have no business to come so far. In Vṛndāvana I could live very peacefully, there is two room still, in Rādhā-Dāmodara Temple. But because there is Kṛṣṇa consciousness... Kṛṣṇa consciousness means serving the Lord. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So Kṛṣṇa dictated that "You are sitting here very peacefully without any botheration. No, you go to the Western countries. Teach them." So that is also Kṛṣṇa consciousness, developed Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to render service to the ignorant of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is better, because Vyāsadeva saw that māyā, illusory energy, or the shadow, darkness... Yayā sammohito jīva. The whole world, living entity, conditioned soul, they're bewildered by this māyā. Yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam [SB 1.7.5]. Thinking this body as self, foolish, rascal. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. One who thinks that "I am this body," he's no better than dog and cat. However nicely dressed he may be, he's a dog, he's a cat. That's all. No more than animal. Because he has no knowledge of his self. (aside:) Don't do that. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke... (aside:) You cannot sit like this? Yes. Sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. This is going on. People are bewildered, thinking "I am this body," just like cats and dogs. "And the issues from the body or connection with the body, that is mine." Sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu. "I have got some connection, bodily connection, with woman. Therefore she's my wife or my protected," something like that. Children, also-the same thing, bodily. They have no idea of the spirit soul, simply body. "So the body is born in a particular land. Therefore I am national." Bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. They're sacrificing so much their energy for the particular land because by accident, he's born in this life in that land. Everything is described in the Bhāgavata. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Bhauma means land.

So this is going on. This is called illusion. He has no connection with all these things. When one realizes that "I have no connection with this body, this country, this wife, these children, this soc... They're all illusory," that is called liberation. That is called brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. People are suffering, identifying himself with these false things, which is not. Ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. Tri-guṇa, these, all these materials, they are manufactured by the three modes of material nature, and he's, he has no connection with the material nature. But somehow or other, he is now fallen in the ocean of the... Just like you have no connection with ocean. Your place of living is land. But some way or other, if you are thrown in the Pacific Ocean, that is a very troublesome business. You have to swim always. You have to protect... But still, you are unsafe. It doesn't matter you are a very great swimmer, doesn't matter. When you are in the Pacific Ocean, you are in danger. So similarly, when that very man is taken away from the Pacific Ocean and put into the land, then he becomes prasannātmā, "Oh, I am saved." Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā. "Now I am on the saved..." Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54], that when one is in full knowledge that "I have nothing to do with this material world, that everything made by the material nature, that is illusion, I have nothing to do with anything of them, I am spirit, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. I am spirit soul. Now I have my business with the spiritual world," that is liberation. That is liberation. And the means which help you to come to that position, that is called spiritual life, sanātana-dharma.

So here it is said, the enquiry, that kiṁ kṣatra-bandhūn kalinā upasṛṣṭān rāṣṭrāṇi vā tair avaropitāni: "Are you very much anxious that, on account of this Kali-yuga, that kṣatra-bandhūn, the rulers, they have occupied the rāṣṭra position, the government position?" So what is the symptom of such a rascal government? That is also stated. Itas tato vāśana-pāna-vāsaḥ-snāna-vyavāyonmukha-jīva-lokam. There will be no fixed position of these things. Just see. What are these? Aśana, eating. Aśana, pāna, drinking; vāsaḥ, residence; snāna, taking bath; and vyavāya, sexual intercourse. There is no rules and regulation. Irresponsible government means, the Kali's government means, that these things will be irregular, not regularized. Just see. This is Vedic civilization. Aśana, eating-there must be regulative principle, not that like hogs and pigs you can eat everything, no. There must be control. Control is there already. Just like in government, when you open a restaurant, immediately there is control. You have to take license, that "You have to supply food like this or like that. You cannot supply anything rubbish." Is it not? Control is there, but because it is controlled by another rascal, group of rascals, so they allow everything to eat. Everything eat. Control is there, but they do not know what kind of control should be there. The control should be, as we are prescribing, Kṛṣṇa consciousness move..., "You cannot take anything without Kṛṣṇa's prasāda." That is real control. Then you'll be happy. Control is already there, but they do not know because they are being governed by kṣatra-bandhūn. Kṣatra-bandhūn means kṣatriya. Kṣatriya means the ruling class. Kṣat, kṣat means injure, and trāyate, one who gives you protection from being injured. He's kṣatriya. It is the duty of the government that every citizen, never mind whether human being or animal, he may not be injured by anyone. That is responsible government. It is not responsible government that one poor animal, because he does not know how to give him protection, although there is government, he is taken away to the slaughterhouse. This is not government.

Here we see Mahārāja Parīkṣit, as soon as he saw that a cow was being attempted to be killed, immediately he took his sword..., "What are you, nonsense? You are killing my citizen." This is good government. This is good government. Why the cow is not national? He's also, she's also born in the land; so she's as important a national as you are. Kṛṣṇa has given her the grass to eat. She's not interfere, interfering with your food. Why? What right you have got to kill? You have got your own food. The cow has got the grass for her food. You have got food grains. You have got... Cow is giving you milk, just to give her protection, that "You take my blood, turn into milk. Please do not kill me." So why these things are happening? Because there is rascal government. Kalinā upasṛṣṭān. Rascal government. So one should lament that this, "We are under this rascal government, under the rascal guru, rascal father. But who are meant for giving protection, they are all rascals. This is our position." This is called Kali-yuga. This is Kali-yuga.

So if you study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you'll be able to understand the whole material position and how you are situated in that material position, how to get out of it. Everything you'll understand, provided you have got the brain. If you have got a dull brain, filled up with cow dung, that is another thing. If there is brain substance, then you'll be able. Tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām. Alpa-medhasām and su-medhasām, they are two words in the Vedic language. Medhā means brain substance. So one who has got su-medhā, nice brain substance, they will understand something. And one who has got no brain substance but cow dung, they will understand something else. So we are selecting, or even if he is filled up with cow dung, by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness education, we can make him su-medhā, fine brain. That is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Even one is filled up with cow dung, su-medhā.

Therefore, Bhāgavata says,

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



Su-medhasaḥ. Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam. Lord Kṛṣṇa, or Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He's Kṛṣṇa. Tviṣākṛṣṇam: by complexion golden. Therefore, by complexion, is not kṛṣṇa or blackish. But He's Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has four colors. That is in the śāstra, śuklo raktas tathā pīta idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ. So when the colors of Kṛṣṇa is yellow, golden, that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam [SB 11.5.32]. That Lord Kṛṣṇa now, in the form of Lord Caitanya, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, and sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam, associated with His personal expansions, Śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda... This is described. Sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam, with these... In the former incarnation, He was killing the demons directly with sword or the sudarśana-cakra, some way or other. Now, in this age, they're already dead. So if Kṛṣṇa comes to kill them with sudarśana-cakra and sword, they will not be profited. Therefore, these are the astras, these are the swords: the devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa who are preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They are the Lord's weapon. And they're getting victory. Sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam. So those who are intelligent, su-medhasaḥ, they will worship this form of God in this Kali-yuga. And what is the process of worshiping? Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ.



So these rascals, position, the rascal guardians, you have to fight with them, but not with sword or any other weapon; the saṅkīrtana movement, yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ. If you stick to this principle of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, yajñaiḥ, if you have got good brain, su-medhasaḥ, then you will take this means, and by the help of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you'll conquer all over the world. All over the world. You cannot take up any other means. That will not be successful because the śāstra says, yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. So at the present moment, our position is very precarious. We are in the darkness, ignorance, and so many other things, corollaries to these things. Rāṣṭrāṇi vā tair avaropitāni itas tataḥ. Just see. Five thousand years ago this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was written, the symptoms of Kali-yuga. Now you see that, itas tato vāśana-pāna-vāsaḥ-snāna. Now everywhere, all over the world, the young boys and girls, they have no fixture where they'll live, where they'll take their bath, where they'll eat or how, or how they'll have sex. No. These are preliminary necessities of life. One must have a good place to live. One must have sufficient nice foodstuff to eat. Sleep. Eating, sleeping, mating-this is physical necessities. So in the Vedic civilization, these necessities are prescribed in a regulated way so that he can satisfy his physical necessities, at the same time, become Kṛṣṇa conscious and go back to home, back to Godhead.

So at the present moment there is no fixture even for the physical necessities. Physical necessities. No home. When I first came to America, when I saw in the Bowery Street, they're lying on the street, "And how is that?" I understood, "The Americans are very rich. Why they are lying on the street?" I was surprised. But see, even in such rich country like America, they're lying on the street, no fixture of sleeping, no fixture of sex life. Nobody knows with whom one has to satisfy his sex life. Nobody knows. In New York City I was, I saw, that one friend asking another friend, "Can I take my showers in your room?" Then I understand, "Oh, there is no fixity of even taking bath." There is no fixity of where to sleep. There is no fixity of where to satisfy sex. Everything, although such a rich country. Why? Because the leaders are rascals. The leaders are rascals. These are the first duty of the government to see that everyone is nicely situated, so far his physical necessities are concerned. But a sane man, when he sees this disturbance, or everything mismanaged, he becomes very unhappy and tries to set up by Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much.

Sudāmā: Any questions?



Devotee: Śrīla Prabhupāda, sometimes it is seen that even materialistic political power is successful in overthrowing government. So is it not possible in this age for devotees to overthrow government?



Prabhupāda: Yes, if you become all devotee, it is very easy. Because nowadays, the "government of the people, by the people." So if the people are Kṛṣṇa conscious, naturally the government will be Kṛṣṇa conscious. And if you are fools and rascals, the government will be fools and rascals. Because government is the representative of the people. You have got the opportunity because nowadays, democracy, that "government for the people, by the people." Is not that? So if you are Kṛṣṇa conscious, naturally the government will be, because government is by the people, for the people. So not that kind of revolution. So if you make a revolution of this saṅkīrtana movement, everyone chanting and dancing, the government will be changed immediately. So push this movement.



Bali-mardana: Prabhupāda, there are certain groups saying that there's a comet in the sky and there's going to be some very inauspicious effects because of that. Do you know anything about that?



Prabhupāda: What is that?



Satsvarūpa: The comet.



Bali-mardana: There's a comet in the sky and they're saying that some very inauspicious...



Prabhupāda: And what is auspicity now? Eh? What is auspicity now? We are describing all inauspicity, even without the comet. (laughter) Where do you find the auspicity? One man said that "He has kicked me, he has beaten me with shoes, and again he has said that 'I shall insult you.' " Where is the scarcity of insult? If he is beaten by shoes and kicked by his leg, and still he's expecting some more insult? You are already in inauspicity. Why you are expecting more inauspicity by the presence of comet? We are already in inauspicity. And therefore these descriptions are there. You have no fixture anything-where to live, where to take bath, where to eat, where to have sex life-nothing fixed up. Everything catastrophe, chaos. What more inauspicity you want? Everywhere. Here even one problem, another, in another country, another problem, another problem, another problem. He must be problematic. Daivī hy eṣā... Because anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, he must be punished by the laws of nature. He must be punished. Therefore it is said, daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā, mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ... [Bg. 7.14]. They're already, in inauspicity. The whole atmosphere is inauspicious. So if there is little more inauspicity, what is the wrong there? There is nothing... The more inauspicity will come. Now, still, in your country you are not poverty-stricken. You have got enough food. These things also will be stopped. Now you have got food in chaos, but there will be no food also. Then the mother and father will eat his own children. This is world, this Kali-yuga, everything. No food will be produced. Now by your talent, you are producing nice food, but producing food, the, tilling the ground some way or other, by machine or by this way... There must be rain, so many conditions. But time will come when there will be no rain. Then what you will do with your tractor and machine? You'll have to eat the tractor. (laughter) That's all. What you will do? There will be no rain. It is said that "There will be cloud, there will be lightning, but there will be no rainfall." These are stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is the result of our sinful life, restriction. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā [Bg. 3.27]. These rascals are thinking, "We are master." What master you are? You are under the control of nature fully. And they are, these rascals are thinking, "I am free. There is no God. I am free." So, gradually... [break] ...don't you appreciate how, the difference between them and ordinary people? Don't you feel it? You are already known as "the bright-faced." Is it not?



Devotees: Yes, Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Before coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, see the photograph of your face and now see. Practical. But if you deviate, if you fall down again, that is your business. But if you strictly follow the rules and regulations and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you'll go forward, nobody can check it. Thank you very much. (end)





740712SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.22

-

Los Angeles, July 12, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.) "The so-called administrators are now bewildered by the influence of this age of Kali, and thus they have put all state affairs into disorder. Are you now lamenting this disorder? Now the general populace does not follow the rules and regulations for eating, sleeping, drinking, mating, etc., and they are inclined to perform such anywhere and everywhere. Are you unhappy because of this?" [SB 1.16.22]



Prabhupāda:



kiṁ kṣatra-bandhūn kalinopasṛṣṭān

rāṣṭrāṇi vā tair avaropitāni

itas tato vāśana-pāna-vāsaḥ-

snāna-vyavāyonmukha-jīva-lokam



In this Kali-yuga everything is topsy-turvied. The Vedic way of life... For living condition, we require to eat, we require to take bath, we require to sleep, we require to have sex also. Everything must be in regulative principle. Because human life means regulative principles. Unfortunately, the human life has become irregulated than the animals. This aśana, pāna, vāsaḥ, and snāna, and sexual intercourse, there is, at the present moment, there is no regulative principle. The Vedic principle is early in the morning one must take bathing, then worship the Deity, read Vedic literature, mantra, then offer foodstuff to the Deity, then take prasādam. Everything is regulative principle. And it is the duty of the government to see that these regulative principles are being observed by the citizens. This is government. The Vedic system, these brāhmaṇa, the topmost class of the human society, their business is to study the Vedas, paṭhana pāṭhana, yajana yājana, dāna pratigraha. Ideal character, very learned. Still in India... Now it is formality. A brāhmaṇa is called paṇḍitajī. Paṇḍita means very learned. Without being very learned scholar, one cannot become brāhmaṇa or Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava is farther above the brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa is the preliminary qualification for becoming a Vaiṣṇava later on.



So how this principle should be observed? Just like government, still they regulate. In your country there are so many regulative principles. Just in the shop, foodstuff or fruits, they should not be too old, or rotten. The inspector is there. If there is not to the standard, they are thrown away. Similarly, not only, only these stores and shopkeepers, but even in household affairs, there should be government inspection. That is stated in the śāstra. Whether a man who is professing to become a brāhmaṇa, whether he is following strictly the brahminical rules and regulations. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. Similarly, kṣatriyas, whether he is powerful, he is brave, he has got forwardness to fight. When there is fight he does not go back, and whether he is making charity. The kṣatriya qualifications also there. And similarly, the vaiśya qualification. Kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyam [Bg. 18.44]. Whether one who is professing to become vaiśya, whether he is making agricultural attempt, giving protection to the cows and making trade. And śūdra-karma, paricaryātmakam. Śūdra's business is to serve these higher class, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Śūdra cannot live independently. That is śūdra. Nowadays the education is that nobody can live independently. Higher education means if he does not get a suitable service, then it is useless. Nobody. The education means nobody can live independently. So one takes titles in education degrees, "agriculturist." But he does not go to the field actually to act as agriculturist, kṛṣāṇa, no. He is finding some job in some school, college, how to teach agriculture. Nobody goes to the land practical, how to plow the land, how to produce foodgrains. Simply theoretical knowledge. "I am teaching you; you are teaching," that's all. This is going on. No independence.

So why this has happened? Because here it is said, kiṁ kṣatra-bandhūn. Kṣatriya, the administrator class, the government. So in Kali-yuga they will take charge of the administration or government, but they are not real kṣatriya. They are less than śūdra. So how the government will be nice? Therefore it is lamentable, that those who are not kṣatriyas, they are taking the position of government officers. And further it is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Twelfth Canto: kriyā hīnā... They are not following the rules and regulation of kṣatriya or brāhmaṇa. Still they are claiming to become brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya. And there is a mercantile class nowadays, interested in business, but business is one of the items of the vaiśya. The first business is to become agriculturist. Vaiśya. Vaiśya class, they are meant for making arrangement for our eating. That is also required. Kṣatriya is meant for give us protection. And the brāhmaṇa means to give us the ideal life, what is the goal of life, and śūdras, they cannot do anything of these... Therefore they are śūdra.

So in the Kali-yuga the śūdras... Śūdra means the last. Less than śūdra, the caṇḍāla, they are taking the part of kṣatriya or brāhmaṇa or vaiśya. That is the effect of this Kali-yuga. Therefore it is very lamentable. One must be trained up. This very word kṣatra-bandhu means even though one is in the royal family, but he cannot administer. Just like in England, now the royal monarchy is finished all over the world... Even there is monarchy in some countries... Just like in England there is monarchy. The queen is there. But the queen is also uneducated. She does not know how to rule. It is an official post only. The parliamentary sanction, simply she signs, that's all. She has no power to rule over. So power or no power, in Kali-yuga, the administration will be done by less qualified, no qualification. Kim kṣatra-bandhūn kalinā upasṛṣṭān. The system will be disturbed on account of this Kali-yuga. Kalinā upasṛṣṭān rāṣṭrāṇi. Rāṣṭrāṇi means states. Tair avaropitāni, put into disorder.

So in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you will find everything, whatever is necessity, for the advancement of human civilization, everything is there described. And knowledge also, all departmental knowledge. Even astronomy, astrology, politics, sociology, atomic theory, everything is there. Vidyā-bhāgavatāvadhi. Therefore if we study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam very carefully, then you get all knowledge completely. Because Bhāgavata begins from the point of creation. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Vedānta. It is the explanation of Vedānta-sūtra. Vedānta means the essence of cream of Vedic knowledge. That is Vedānta. That cream of Vedānta knowledge is further explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So we are publishing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Our students specifically, they should take care of reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. We have therefore prescribed in our school, Dallas, that let them simply learn Sanskrit and English, because English translation they will be able to read, and the Sanskrit verses are there. And from the very beginning, if they begin education with Bhagavad-gītā and then comes to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and reads the whole literature, then they will be more than M.A., Ph.D. More than. The knowledge will be so advanced.

These ordinary university degrees, M.A., Ph.D... Because the essence of knowledge is there. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3]. It is stated that what is the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam? Nigama-kalpa-taru. Nigama means Vedas. It is just like kalpa-taru, desire tree. We have no idea of desire tree, what is desire tree. It is in the Vaikuṇṭha-loka. The trees are desire tree. Desire tree means from any tree you can get any fruit or anything you want. That is called desire tree. Here it is fixed up: you can get mango from the mango tree. But in the desire tree, whatever you want, you can get. So kalpa-taru. Kalpa-taru means any departmental knowledge that you require to execute your human form of life, so that you will find in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam [SB 1.1.3]. Galitaṁ phalam means the fruit matured in the tree. Here we artificially mature. We take the fruit unripe, and by artificial method, we get it ripened. But that is not acceptable. But the fruit which is ripened fully in the tree, that is very palatable, sweet. Nigama galitam. Galitaṁ phalam, fully matured fruit, this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Fully matured fruit of the desire tree known as Vedas.

So in this verse we find that due to mismanagement of the government, people will have no regular principle even for taking bath or eating or sleeping or sexual intercourse. And another point is here, that vyavāya unmukha-jīva-lokam. They can give up eating, they can give up sleeping, they can give up everything, but cannot give up sex life. And the Vedic civilization is to avoid sex life. Just like these hippies. Hippy means they have given up bathing, given up eating, given up sleeping, but they cannot give up sex life. And everyone, not only the hippies... Vyavāyonmukha. Ultimately, so many yogis, incarnation and others, others, are coming in your country, but they cannot give up the sex life. You have seen advertisement, so many yogis, they are having sex life. So many incarnation of God. (laughter) Having sex life. You see? Big, big sannyāsīs, swamis. Long, long ago some swami came here. He returned with three woman, and we do not wish to discuss. Many more. You see. The sex life is very strong in this material, in this age. But sex life should be regulated. Not that anywhere and everywhere, or any time. Therefore the population is unwanted population. One irregular sex life produced the Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu's mother became very sexually agitated, and she wanted to sex, with her husband (have) intercourse. And just in the evening. Kaśyapa Muni, he said, "No, no, this is not the time, proper time." But she was insistent. So the result was two demons were born.

So everything should be regulated. But in this age there is no regulation, there is no knowledge. Less than animals also. They have sex life at a certain period of the year, not always. But human being has become so low-graded that... And that is due to Kali-yuga. Therefore it is very lamentable. Everything is topsy-turvied. It's no regular. It is the Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mercy that we are reforming the whole society very simple way-chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. You see. It is so nice. You see? The examples are here. It is no story. Simply by chanting. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended,

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



There is no other alternative. Simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Everything will be reformed. Life will be polished and everything will be successful. This is ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Human life, he is also a soul. Animal is also a soul. Everyone. But the human form of life is meant for God realization, athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is Vedānta-sūtra. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Not only human being, everyone. But everyone less than human being, they cannot inquire about the Absolute Truth: "What is the aim of life? What is the Absolute Truth? What I am? What is my relationship?" These things are the subject matter for discussion in the human form of life.



But unfortunately, on account of Kali-yuga, the heart being full of dirty things, they cannot think of the aim of life, how to achieve it. That is called Kali-yuga. Therefore so much fallen socially, politically, economically, culturally, everything, religiously, we are so fallen and down-trodden that the only method, as recommended in the Vāyu Purāṇa and other Purāṇas: kalau nāsty eva... Kalau means "in this age of Kali," nāsty eva, "there is no other alternative." And factually by spreading this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are seeing practical result. The most wretched, most rotten, they are coming to life, they are understanding the value of life, the aim of life, and they are trying to be elevated more and more. Of course, it is an attempt. Not that anyone will be successful. But if everyone follows the simple rules and regulation, he will be successful. There is no doubt about it. There is no doubt about it. The four simple regulative principle: no illicit sex, no meat-eating, no gambling, no intoxication, and chant sixteen rounds. Very simple method.

Because the difficulty is they do not know what is the aim of life. The aim of life, that we are conditioned by this material nature, embodied by the material elements, and that is the cause of our all miserable condition of life. Therefore Ṛṣabhadeva says, nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma. Pramattaḥ [SB 5.5.4]. We are so mad under the bodily... Everyone is under the... Big, big scientists also, they are also. They don't believe there is soul. Big, big scientists, politicians, philosophers. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. They remain animals. If anyone has taken this body as the self... Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. So the modern Kali-yuga is very, very dangerous for the human being. They are given chance by the laws of nature, "Now take your birth as human being." Because to get a body as a human being or as a demigod or as a king or as a lower class man or as an animal, as an..., that is not in our hands. That is in the nature's hands.

Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. I have several times explained. As you are infecting yourself with the quality of material nature, you get a different type of body. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu. The lower and higher grade of life, different types of body, how we get? That is explained in the Bhāgavata. Kāraṇam. Kāraṇam means reason, cause. What is that cause? Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. The living entity, the soul, is associating with certain quality of the material nature, and therefore he is getting different types of body. We are all living entities, even the trees and plants and cats and dogs. But why there are so many different species of life, 8,400,000 species of life? Why? The reason is given in the Bhagavad-gītā. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. The guṇa-saṅgaḥ. As we are infecting the quality of this material nature, we are getting. This is completely in the hands of the material nature. So therefore it is the duty of the human being how to get out of the control of the material nature. That is the greatest science. But they do not know it. That is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ. The rascals have become mad. Pramattaḥ means mad. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Simply acting sinfully. If they are advised that "Don't do this. This is very dangerous. You will be involved again in the birth and death cycle..." They have no knowledge what is birth, what is death, what is this body, what is the aim of... No. Simply blind animals. Simply blind animals. And still, they are going under the name of scientist, philosopher, politician. This is the misfortune of the present age. So nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti [SB 5.5.4]. The same thing is explained here: vyavāyonmukha-jīva. Indriya-prītaye. Simply for sense gratification they are doing anything nonsense, as madman. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute yad indriya-prītaye. What is the aim? Aim is not self-realization. Aim is how to satisfy. "Never mind. Risk everything. Satisfy your senses." Therefore real civilization is to teach the children from the very beginning of life how to control senses. That is called brahmacārī. That is called brahmacārī life. To learn how to control the senses.

So everything is topsy-turvy and five thousand years ago or more than that, these things were being discussed, and people were very sorry that very bad days were to come. And still we can predict. There is no... It does not require very much advanced knowledge. In the śāstra it is stated what will be the later ages of Kali-yuga. That is also in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The beginning is already there. Anāvṛṣṭyā kara-pīḍitāḥ. One side there will be no rainfall. Now yesterday somebody was telling that in this California, the rainfall is now not so much. I think Jayatīrtha. So rainfall will be practically very, very little. Anāvṛṣṭi. And another difficulty will be kara-pīḍitāḥ. One side there will be famine, scarcity of food, no rainfall, and another side, there will be excessive taxation by the government. So people will be so much disturbed. Because you (indistinct) no food. You are... There is scarcity of rain, you cannot produce food. And at the same time, government will give some morsel of food and levy taxes. So durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ [SB 12.2.9], disturbed, yāsyanti giri-kānanam, ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā yāsyanti giri-kānanam. Being disgusted, they will give up their family and children, separated, and they will go to the forest or the hills. This is another. And another will be, there will be no more available these foodgrains, especially wheat, rice and milk. These will be finished.

So very, very bad days are awaiting in this Kali-yuga. Therefore it is our duty to finish this business of material life and go to home, back to home, back to Godhead. That is business. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



740119SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.23

-

Hawaii, January 19, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



yadvāmba te bhūri-bharāvatāra-

kṛtāvatārasya harer dharitri

antarhitasya smaratī visṛṣṭā

karmāṇi nirvāṇa-vilambitāni

[SB 1.16.23]



Translation: "O mother earth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari incarnated Himself as Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa just to unload your heavy burden. All His activities here are transcendental, and they cement the path of liberation. You are now bereft of His presence. You are probably now thinking of those activities and feeling sorry in their absence."



Prabhupāda: So Dharmarāja is suggesting so many things why mother earth in the shape of a cow was morose. He was suggesting so many. So one of the suggestion is that "Kṛṣṇa was present. Now He's not present. Therefore you are so morose." So Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



Kṛṣṇa incarnates when there is discrepancies in the matter of discharging religious principles. Just like, when there is discrepancy in the discharge of law and order, the government takes special measure, what is called, that? A special law?



Devotees: Martial law.



Prabhupāda: Not martial. There is another word. Martial law is also one of the emergency law. So anyway, the nature's arrangement is like that. Just like children, they're allowed to play, but under certain condition. So we all, we are all children of God, Kṛṣṇa. So we have come hear to enjoy, to lord it over the material nature. That is the tendency. So Kṛṣṇa has given us the facility. Just like in the beach, there are many young men who are playing in the sea with surf, but still, the government has watch over it. Government's duty is that they may not be drowned.



So here it is risky. We have come here to enjoy. Actually, we are not meant for enjoying. We are meant for serving. Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, jīvera svarūpa haya-nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa: [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109] "Our real identity is to serve, to remain under the protection..." We are always under the protection, this way or that way, but we are thinking falsely that we are free. We are not free. Kṛṣṇa is taking care of us. He has allowed us, "All right, you have come here. Try to satisfy yourself, but there are certain rules and regulations." If you break those rules and regulations, for your interest Kṛṣṇa takes measures.

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



So here Kṛṣṇa came, and this incident took place after disappearance of Kṛṣṇa. Kali-yuga entered after disappearance of Kṛṣṇa. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was also very vigilant. The Pāṇḍavas, they left their kingdom because they could understand that Kali-yuga has already entered. So bhūri-bharāvatāra-kṛtāvatārasya. Bhūri-bhara, when people become too much sinful, the earth becomes overburdened by the sinful activities of the people. Therefore it is called bhūri-bharavatāra. And Kṛṣṇa comes to mitigate. Dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham. Kṛtāvatārasya harer dharitri. This is the purpose of avatāra. Avatāra, this word is very significant. The tara, tara means movement; and ava, ava means down. Just like avanati. So avatāra. Kṛṣṇa lives in the spiritual sky, beyond this material sky, very high, and Kṛṣṇa-loka, the planet of Kṛṣṇa, is the topmost planet in the spiritual world. That is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya [Bs. 5.43]. The topmost planet is Goloka, Goloka Vṛndāvana planet. You have seen the picture. It is lotuslike. So goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni: "That is His personal abode." Tale ca tasya, "below that," goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya [Bs. 5.43], "below that planet," goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu. Devī. This universe, this material universe, is called devī-dhāma. Devī-dhāma means under the protection, or supervision, of mother nature. That is called devī-dhāma, material nature. So goloka-dhāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya devī, devī-dhāma.



This material world is devī-dhāma, under the... You have seen the picture of Durgā. So material nature is also devī, devī-dhāma. And maheśa-dhāma. Above this, there is maheśa-dhāma, the region of Lord Śiva. Devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu. Then the Vaikuṇṭhas. And the topmost is kṛṣṇa-dhāma. That dhāma, or that universal system, that is very, very big, many times. This material universe is considered one fourth creation. It is one... Ekāṁśena sthito jagat [Bg. 10.42]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, "This material world is one fourth creation of God." And the three-fourth creation is the spiritual world. Just imagine. This material world, this universe, which you are seeing, the big sky, dome, this is one universe. That is also stated. We get all this information from Vedic literature. This universe is only one single universe, and there are so many planets, stars. These are all stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. Jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi. Jagad-aṇḍa means universe, and koṭi means millions, 100,000 one hundred times.

So yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi. Jagad-aṇḍa means this one universe, and aṇḍa... Aṇḍa means egg. Therefore it is called jagad-aṇḍa, "egglike, round." We are within the egg. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. There are millions of eggslike clustered together. This is material world. Millions, not one. And each universe... Koṭiṣu vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam. In each universe there are millions and trillions of stars and planets. Koṭiṣu vibhūti-bhinnam. And each one of them is different from the other. Just like you are going to, trying to go to the moon planet, but you cannot stay there because the atmosphere is different. Everything is there. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-koṭiṣu vasudhādi [Bs. 5.40]. Vasudhā means planets. This is also called vasudhā, this planet. So just imagine what insignificant this vasudhā in comparison to the whole material world. There are millions of universes, and in each and every universe there are millions and trillions of the stars and planets. This is the whole creation of material world. And taking them together, this is one-fourth creation of God. The three-fourths creation is the spiritual world, and in that spiritual world, the topmost planet is called Goloka Vṛndāvana. That is the place of Kṛṣṇa.

So Kṛṣṇa comes down from there; therefore, avatāra: "comes down." Therefore He's called avatāra. Or any Viṣṇu incarnation who comes down, they come down from the higher planetary system. Therefore it is called avatāra. Incarnation means avatāra who comes down from higher position. Therefore, here it is said, kṛtāvatārasya hareḥ. Hareḥ, "of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Hari, hari means "who takes away all your miserable conditions." Hari, haran, harati. Harati means take away. He comes here just to give you benediction, to save you from all kinds of miseries. Therefore His name is Hari. Yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi, er, yasya aham anugṛhṇāmi, anugṛhṇāmi... I forget now. Kṛṣṇa says that "When I shows to somebody special favor, I take away all his possessions." That is special favor.

This question was asked by Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, no, Parīkṣit Mahārāja to Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi, hariṣye dhanam. Because here in this material world, the more we possess material wealth, it is our bondage. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Because our bondage is we are entrapped here by material opulences. Material opulences are not very good for spiritual advancement. Just the Western people, they are materially advanced. They possess... They do not possess, but their energy is utilized for converting things from one shape to another, that much, the energy being wasted. It is good credit for you, materially, that you have so nice cars, nice skyscraper buildings, and so many nice things you have created. That is good credit-good credit materially. Spiritually, it is not good credit. Spiritually, it is waste of energy, waste of energy. Because however nicely you have made all these material facilities, amenities, you cannot stay here. You cannot... You have got a certain amount of energy. So that energy is meant for some other purpose. So your energy not being utilized for the real purpose of life, if you utilize it for increasing your so-called material happiness... Actually, they have not become happy. Otherwise, why so many young boys and girls, they are disappointed? Because this kind of advancement will not make us happy. That is a fact. Therefore, if you waste your energy for things which are not wanted, then you are not advancing, you are being defeated. That they do not know.

That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. Parābhava. Parābhava means defeat. Tāvat, "so long." All activities of the materialistic person are simply defeat. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jātaḥ. Abodha. Abodha means fools, rascals, ignorant, born foolish rascals, ignorant. We are all born foolish. So if we are not properly educated, then we remain fools and rascals, and the activities of fools and rascals, this is simply waste of time. Because... What is called? Busy rascals, busy rascal. If a rascal is busy, that means he's simply spoiling the energy. Just like monkey. Monkey is very busy. Of course, according to Mr. Darwin, they are coming from monkey. So monkey's business is simply waste of time. He's very busy. You'll find always busy. So the busy fool is dangerous. There are four classes of men: lazy intelligent, busy intelligent, lazy fool and busy fool. (laughter) So first-class man is lazy intelligent. Just like you'll see the high-court judges. They're very lazy and most intelligent. That is first-class man. They are doing everything very soberly. And the next class: busy intelligent. Intelligence should be used very soberly. And the third class: lazy fool-lazy, at the same time, fool. And the fourth class: busy fool. Busy fool is very dangerous. So all these people, they're busy. Even in this country, everywhere, all over the world, not this country or that country. They have discovered this horseless carriage-very busy. "Ons, ons," (imitates cars' noise) this way this way, this way. But actually, they are not intelligent. Busy fool. Therefore they are creating problems after problems. That's a fact. They are so busy, but because they are fools, therefore they are creating problems. This is fact. Even the animals, lower than the human beings, they have no problem.

What is the problem? First of all, we have got some physical necessities. So āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. Our physical necessity is that we want to eat. That is necessary to maintain this body, āhāra. Nidrā, rest. We must have some rest also. So āhāra-nidrā-bhaya. Bhaya means being, to become afraid of. That is material nature. We are always afraid of. Therefore we have military strength. Your country is very busy in that way, how to protect. Everyone should be, protection. We also sleep at night, closing the door because we are afraid of burglars and others, so many dangers. So that is also required, to take protection from enemies. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya, and maithuna, and sexual intercourse. These are physical necessities. So these physical necessities, if you study, they, amongst the animals, they have no problem. But as yesterday we were talking, in the human society, they have created problem. Nobody knows where to eat. These hotels means, increase of number of hotels means that people have no place to live. They have no fixed place to live. Today in this hotel, the next day, another hotel. The so many restaurants means people have no fixed place where to eat. The solution... In India still, because they are not so materially advanced, even the poorest man has got some certain fixed up place, his cottage, he has got his wife, he has got his child, and he works, whatever he can do. He lives peacefully still, in the village, although he hasn't got very gorgeous dress and motorcar. But he's peaceful. You'll find still. And sometimes, say, about ten years ago, I was in Ahmedabad. I saw one poor man, he was pulling cart, hand cart. What is called?

Devotees: Rickshaw.



Prabhupāda: No, not rickshwa. For carrying loads...?



Devotees: Wheelbarrow.



Prabhupāda: Anyway, we call ṭhelā, in India. So the ṭhelā, in that cart there was sufficient load. So one side of the ṭhelā there was the wife, and the other side was the husband, and they had a little child, and that child was put up on the load. You see? And they were pulling. That means the husband and wife, working as God has given them to work. So they're working, taking care of the child. So after earning money, they'll go home. They have got a little cottage, and the wife will cook, the husband will eat, and they're peaceful. They're peaceful. It doesn't matter whether first-class eating, second-class... It doesn't matter. But still, they have got a home, and there they live peacefully. The wife cooks for the husband, and the husband eats, and the child is also taken care. It is not killed. There is peaceful. Peacefulness there is.



But here, the advanced civilization, the mother is killing the child, abortion. You see? Still, it is called advancement. Mother's duty is to take care of the child, motherly affection. Woman is meant for that. And now the problem is the mother doesn't want children. You see? And to avoid children, they are killing. Regularly they are killing. So what is the use of this civilization? Because you are becoming implicated in sinful activities, and therefore you'll have to be punished. You cannot escape the punishment of God as you can escape the punishment of the state. No. You have no right to kill even an ant without any purpose, without any sanction. So they do not know.

Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja says, bharam udvahato vimūḍhān. Prahlāda Mahārāja, great devotee, so he was offered by Nṛsiṁhadeva benediction, "My dear Prahlāda, you have suffered so much for Me from your father's side. He has chastised you in so many ways because you are My devotee. Now your father is killed. That is finished. Now you take whatever benediction you want from Me." Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "My Lord, I have no problem, so why shall I ask You for anything? I have no problem." Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyāḥ: "Everyone has got problem in this material world. They're trying to overcome the problem. But I have no problem." Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ [SB 7.9.43]. "I have no problem because my mind is always absorbed in glorifying Your Lordship. Therefore, I have no problem." Kīrtana. You'll feel immediately refreshed. However burden you may feel, as soon as you perform kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, you'll find immediately refreshed. So one who has got taste for this kīrtana, he has no problem. That is... Prahlāda Mahārāja says. Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ: "Because my heart is always merged into the ocean of Your glorification, I have no problem." This is the devotee. Everyone goes to God to mitigate some problem, that "God, give us our daily bread." That means bread is a problem, and... That is the general tendency. They go to temple, church, to mitigate some problem. And as soon as the problem is finished, they forget God. No more church, no more temple. You see? That is not devotion. Devotion is that "No problem. I am ready to serve You, my Lord." That is life. No problem. We should not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness or saṅkīrtana to solve some problem. No. That is not pure devotion. When you will feel that "There is no problem. I am chanting, glorifying. So I am becoming merged into the ocean of bliss," that is life. That is the symptom.

So that Prahlāda Mahārāja said, that "I have no problem." That is pure devotee. "Then... But you seem to be very unhappy. Why?" "Yes, still, I am unhappy." What is that? Śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] "I am unhappy for these rascals, these rascals. These rascals, they have created a huge mode of civilization for temporary happiness, temporary happiness." That is not happiness. Māyā-sukhāya. Māyā, illusion. Just like you have created these skyscraper buildings. That's nice, very nice. Very good boy. Now, is there any guarantee that you shall be able to live here? Have you made any arrangement? Eh? Where is that arrangement? Just like, if you earn millions of dollars, but to keep that money, you keep in a safe custody, in a bank, so that you're assured that your money is safe and you'll be able to use it. Similarly, you have created this material civilization, very advancement. That is all right. But whether you have made any security arrangement that you'll be able to enjoy them? Is there any arrangement? Eh? This requires little brain. Because at any moment we may be kicked out of the situation. There is no guarantee. At any moment. Suppose with hard labor you create something for living. Everyone wants at old age to live very peacefully, comfortably. There must be some good bank balance, a very nice house. But where is that guarantee? That they do not understand. Therefore they are called abodha-jātaḥ. If after creating so many things for material enjoyment, if you are kicked out... But therefore they do not accept the next birth. Because it is very horrible. Because if they understand that "I have done all these things by sinful activities, these material..., and I'll have to suffer in my next life...," they'll, they'll not do.

But therefore they do not believe next birth or soul. They try to forget it. This kind of forgetfulness means... I have already given several times. The rabbit, when they find some hunter, they close their eyes, yes, as if the hunter has gone away. But that is not the fact. That is his foolishness. Simply by closing the eyes, he's thinking, "Now I am safe." So these materialistic persons, denying the next birth, denying sinful activities, denying God, they're closing their eyes, that "There is no danger. Let us go on doing all this nonsense." But that will not save. That will not save. [break] He's seeing everything. He's seeing everything, not as a policeman but as a friend, that He is recording that "You want to do it? All right, I'll give you this facility. I'll give you facility." Because within the mind you are creating so many ideas for enjoyment, Kṛṣṇa is noting, "Yes, you'll have it. You'll have it. Just wait. Next life, next life, next life." In this way we are going. Ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. We are placing our program... Because His name is anumantā. Without His sanction, you cannot have anything. Just like I am moving this hand. It is by His sanction. As soon as He stops His sanction, immediately paralyzed. And still, we are proud, "I have got my hand. I have got my eyes." What is the use of your eyes? Unless God helps you to see, what is the value of your eyes? Practically you see. Unless there is sunshine, what is the value of your eyes? So but still, are so fool, we are thinking, "Can you show me God?" And what power you have got to see. First of all consider. Then you'll see God. You cannot see even what, ordinary things, what to question of seeing God.

So this is called foolishness. He does not consider that "I am seeing under certain conditions, and if still..., I am so much proud of possessing my eyes." This is called foolishness, abodha-jātaḥ. And In the Upaniṣads it is said that "When God sees, you can see." So your seeing is subordinate to the seeing power of God. Just like yac cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇām. When the God sees by His eyes, the sun, then you can see. As soon as the sun is not there, then where is your power of seeing? So why you are so much proud of seeing? No. That is not possible. In every respect, we are simply dependent on the mercy of God. So why not become directly dependent? That is intelligence. That is intelligence.

Therefore it is said, abodha-jāta. These rascals, who have no sense what is what, to understand, the atheist class of men, abodha-jāta, whatever they are doing, their so-called scientific advancement, material advancement, that is all their defeat, defeat, simply being defeated, simply creating problems. Even those problems are not existing in the society of birds and bees. You'll see. There may be big fire, but the birds are dancing in the street. They have no problem. Because they are living under condition as they have been offered by God. Similarly, if we also live God conscious... Ātma-tattvam. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. Your only business is to inquire about the soul, about the spirit soul. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the Vedānta-sūtra. This human life is meant for only inquiring about the soul. That is the only business. And besides this, whatever you are doing, you are simply being defeated, abodha-jāta, because you are all fools and rascals. And so long we'll make program how to become happy materially, your mind being absorbed in material things, not in the spiritual matter, you'll have to accept another body. This is your problem.

So Kṛṣṇa comes, His avatāra comes, His incarnation, to... Because we are very thickly, intimately, related, we are sons, we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, therefore He... Just like your father is always anxious to see you happy. If you are doing something wrong, he's more anxious than yourself. He knows that you are... A child is going to capture fire. The father, parents says, "No, my dear child, don't touch it. It is harmful." That is the duty, natural. So this, in this material world, we have come here, we are sons of God, part and parcel of God, and doing all nonsense. So Kṛṣṇa is not happy; therefore He comes, avatāra, avatāra. He comes, "My dear child, why you are doing this?" And He advises, sarva-dharmān parityajya: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all this nonsense business. Come to Me. I shall give you protection." But we are so foolish rascal that we are prepared to become servant of the most abominable activities of our senses, but we are not prepared to surrender to Kṛṣṇa and become His servant.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Sudāmā: Any questions?



Devotee (1): Prabhupāda, when we're chanting on the street and the people walk by and hear us chant or we give them prasādam or they give a small donation, to what extent is the benefit they receive? They can go on walking by and hearing us chant.



Prabhupāda: The benefit is... Just like the bank sometimes gives you a box, "Whatever little money you save, put it in this." And when it is filled up, it becomes a big amount. Similarly, these people, abodha-jāta, rascals, if they little appreciate, "Oh, these people are nice," that is one asset. This is called ajñāta-sukṛti, accumulation of the result of pious activities. And when one is fully pious, at that time, he can understand what is God. So we are helping them, by and by, to advance in the matter of understanding God. This is our propaganda.



Bali-mardana: I believe I've heard you said in other lectures that a person who takes prasādam, even a plant or a..., any kind of living entity who takes prasādam or hears the name, that it will come back at least to human form of life. Is that correct?



Prabhupāda: No, if he's devotee, then he'll come. But this taking of prasādam, or hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is advancement for becoming a devotee. But if he takes prasādam not as ordinary prasādam, foodstuff, he believes that "This is remnants of foodstuffs given to God," if he understands this philosophy, then guaranteed. If he takes the prasādam as ordinary food, "All right, these people are distributing, prasā... Let me take it. It is very tasteful," that will give him chance to accept prasādam next, next, next... In this way, one day he'll come to the point that "This prasādam is not ordinary foodstuff." Then he'll... There is guarantee. Because only the devotee can appreciate that "This prasādam is not ordinary foodstuff. It is Kṛṣṇa's remnant of..." Therefore, he understands Kṛṣṇa. That is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, janma-karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. In truth, when he understands, then his life is guaranteed. Why guaranteed? He goes back to home next life. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. If you simply can understand what is Kṛṣṇa and what is your relationship with Kṛṣṇa, that is sufficient to take you back to home, back to Godhead. That is sufficient. It is so nice.



Sudāmā: Any more questions? Śrīla Prabhupāda, you spoke about having a taste for hearing the kīrtana or being engaged in the kīrtana. Now, what is my position if I am chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and I'm living in the association of the devotees, or I'm taking prasāda, but I have no..., I lose a taste or I have no desire, but for lack of having anything else to do, I remain. So what is my position? How...?



Prabhupāda: That is Kṛṣṇa's grace, that you have no anything to do. You have to do it. (Laughter) That's a grace of Kṛṣṇa. Yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ [SB 10.88.8]. Kṛṣṇa has taken away everything. You have no other alternative than to remain here. (laughter) That is Kṛṣṇa's special grace. And those who are thinking that "We can do something else besides Kṛṣṇa," they are foolish. They are lost. Yes. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind upon you that He has placed in a certain circumstances that you cannot go out. That is very good fortune. Yes.



Devotee (2): Prabhupāda, how can one know whether he'll be going back home to Godhead in this life?



Prabhupāda: Yes, believe in Kṛṣṇa. He gives His word. Janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says, "Anyone who understands Me in truth," tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], "he doesn't accept any more material body; he comes to Me." That's it. The guarantee is there. So you try to understand Kṛṣṇa. If you do not understand anything more, if you simply accept it without any hypocrisy, that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He'll protect me. Let me serve His lotus feet as far as possible," this much qualification is sufficient. But if you have got still doubt about Kṛṣṇa, then you try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Be without any doubt that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then your everything is guaranteed. Tattvataḥ. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yo jānāti tattvataḥ. Where is Bhagavad-gītā? Here? Eh? You should keep all these books ready for reference.



janma karma ca me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti kaunteya

[Bg. 4.9]



This very fact. So we are spreading this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement just to make people... Yes? Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ.



Pradyumna: (reads Sanskrit) "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."



Prabhupāda: Purport?



Pradyumna: "The Lord's descent from His transcendental abode is already explained in the sixth verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance of the Personality of Godhead is already liberated from material bondage..."



Prabhupāda: He's already liberated. If one understands this fact, that why God comes, if he is fully aware of the fact, he's already liberated, immediately. Go on.



Pradyumna: "... and therefore he returns to the..."



Prabhupāda: Because without being liberated, one cannot understand God as He is. It is not possible. Because he has no perfect vision. Liberated means perfect knowledge, perfect vision. That is liberation. Yes?



Pradyumna: "Therefore he returns to the kingdom of God immediately after quitting this present material body..."



Prabhupāda: Yes, immediately after giving up this body. The example is given in the śāstras that if, when you walk... Just like the steps, like this. So this step is secure, the another step, when you feel it is secure, then you get up, get up this step. This is our practical experience. Similarly, unless our next birth is fixed up, we do not leave this body. At the time of death, by superior authority, what body I'm going to take next, that has to be decided. Then, when it is decided, if he takes little... Because that is for the most sinful person. And for the devotee, it is already decided. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]- immediately transferred to the spiritual world. Immediately. There is no question of decision; it is already decided. Kṛṣṇa's decision. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. Therefore it is said, "A devotee..." Jīvo vā māro vā: "A devotee, either you live or die, the same thing." Why? "You are living, you are serving Kṛṣṇa. When you die, you go to serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all." Jīvo vā māro vā. Therefore they are called jīvan-mukta. The same thing which he will do after death, he's doing the same thing here. Therefore he is jīvan-mukta, liberated even in this material existence. Jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate. Īhā yasya harer dāsye: "One who is always thinking how to serve Kṛṣṇa," jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate, "he's jīvan-mukta." He's already mukta, liberated. Just like in government service there is civil service or administrative service. As soon as you are, you have passed your examination of the civil service, the civil post is ready, immediately. There is no delay; it is already there. Simply you go and take your seat. So what is that examination? Just try to understand what is Kṛṣṇa. That's all. If you can understand this very fact... So you understand or not understand, if you have firm faith, if you take Kṛṣṇa, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality," then your examination is passed. Just like fire. You understand what is fire or not understand, but if you catch fire, it will act. When you take fire, you do not try to understand what is the chemical composition of fire. Anyone who understands the chemical composition of fire, then takes to fire, that man, and a child who does not know what is the chemical composition, catches the action is the same. If you want to understand Kṛṣṇa through philosophy, science and everything that we have got, that is also the same thing, and if anyone blindly accepts Kṛṣṇa, the same thing. It doesn't matter. Because Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa. Yes?



Devotee (3): Prabhupāda, you said that devotees, after becoming fully pious, have to take another birth in the material world and in somewhere where Kṛṣṇa is performing His pastimes, before going back to Vaikuṇṭha?



Prabhupāda: There is no difference, because you approach Kṛṣṇa. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar..., mām eti. "He comes to Me." Kṛṣṇa, when He's there... Just like Kṛṣṇa was on this planet. To live with Kṛṣṇa and to go to Goloka Vṛndāvana and to live with Kṛṣṇa, there is no difference.



Devotee (3): Is this birth we have now considered in Kṛṣṇa's pastimes? This saṅkīrtana movement is part of Lord Caitanya's pastimes?



Prabhupāda: I do not follow.



Satsvarūpa: Is this life, this present life, is this also being within Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, because Lord Caitanya's saṅkīrtana movement is Kṛṣṇa's pastimes.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Yes. If you actually remain with saṅkīrtana, that means you are with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore He's called jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate. He's liberated even in this body. He's liberated. Because Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name is not different. Absolute. Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. Nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya... [Cc. Madhya 17.133]. If you have understood that Kṛṣṇa's name and Kṛṣṇa are the same thing, that, you are always living with Kṛṣṇa, if you have understood this... Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. Kṛṣṇa is not different. Kṛṣṇa's book, Kṛṣṇa's words, Kṛṣṇa's name, Kṛṣṇa's fame, Kṛṣṇa's glory, Kṛṣṇa's entourage-everything in relationship with Kṛṣṇa-that is Kṛṣṇa. But if you have got that perfect knowledge, then you are living with Kṛṣṇa, always. You are already in the Vaikuṇṭha.



Sudāmā: Śrīla Prabhupāda, then if I have Kṛṣṇa's name and I understand that it is Kṛṣṇa, then can I take it and go to the forest?



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Sudāmā: Can I take Kṛṣṇa's name and go to the forest and be...



Prabhupāda: No, you can go to the forest. That is your interest. But if you try to distribute Kṛṣṇa's name, that is more, I mean, valuable work. Because if you go to the forest, you take interest of yourself. But Kṛṣṇa wants that you take interest for others also. That is greater service. Just like a soldier, he's also patriot, and another man is patriot. But the soldier who goes to fight forward for the state, his service is greater than this man. Because he has to face so many dangers for the country. Therefore during time of war, the government takes care of the soldiers first and the civilians, their eating, their supply is controlled. But the soldier's supply is never controlled because he is giving good, better service to the state. So you can go to the forest for your own interest. That is also good. But better work is to push forward Kṛṣṇa's name. That is better service.



Kṛṣṇa-caitanya: Śrīla Prabhupāda, does that please you more?



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Kṛṣṇa-caitanya: Does that please you more?



Prabhupāda: Yes, that will please Kṛṣṇa. I have already... Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. Those who are in the preaching work, they are very much recognized by Kṛṣṇa. He says, "Nobody is dearer than him, one who is preaching, engaged in the preaching." You see in the Bhagavad-gītā. So those who have stopped preaching work and easy-going imitation, that is not very good. Because how far he's advanced? Because he goes to the forest and he'll think of woman and money, what is the use? By his action, it will be proved. The same way, taking rest, sleeping, and doing everything whimsically. So Kṛṣṇa knows everything. How can you cheat Kṛṣṇa, by so-called forest-going? Because your enemy, your senses have gone with you. So how you can get out by going to the forest? Because your real enemies are your senses. So the enemies, you cannot escape. They'll force you again to these material activities. So what is the use of going to the forest? It is simply show, make show. It has no value. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





740713SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.23

-

Los Angeles, July 13, 1974



Prabhupāda: ...Here mother earth, Dharitrī, "O Earth." Earth is being addressed. The whole world is perturbed because the Kali-yuga has begun. Five thousand years ago, when the Kali-yuga began, so all persons were alarmed: "Now the Kali-yuga is begun. So many catastrophes will come in." [SB 1.16.23]



So one instruction is that the earth is addressed, "amba." Amba means mother. So the earth is also our mother. There are seven kinds of mother: ātma-mātā guroḥ patnī. Real mother, from whose womb we have taken birth, she is called ātma-mātā, first mother. Then second mother, the guroḥ patnī. Guru means teacher or spiritual master. His wife, she's also... Actually, according to strict moral instruction... Why strict? Ordinary. Any woman except his own wife is mother. Any woman. It doesn't matter whether she is elderly or young. No. That is the way. Still in India, any woman by unknown person, he can address any woman "Mother." The first relationship is mother. Now they have introduced "Sister," "Bahinajī." No, that is not Vedic etiquette. No bahinajī. Bahinajī means sister. Mother. Everyone should be addressed. We should learn this. Except one's one wife, all women should be addressed as "Mother." This is civilization. Then there will be no corrupt relation. If you, from the very beginning, you establish your relationship with other women as mother, then there is no question of other relationship.

So here it is instructed. Even the earth is addressed as mother. According to śāstra, Dharitrī is one of the mothers, seven mothers.

ātma-mātā guroḥ patnī

brāhmaṇī rāja-patnikā

dhenur dhātrī tathā pṛthvī

saptaitā mātaraḥ smṛtāḥ



There are seven kinds of mother. Real mother, then a spiritual master or teacher's wife, guroḥ patnī. Brāhmaṇī, the wife of a brāhmaṇa. Ātma-mātā guroḥ patnī brāhmaṇī rāja-patnikā. And the queen, the wife of the king. Dhenu, cow; dhenur dhātrī, maidservant, nurse. Because it was also formerly the practice, rich man, or mother is not unable to suck breast milk. So they used to employ young girls who has also children. Otherwise there is no milk supplied. So that is also mother. As Kṛṣṇa took Pūtanā as mother... Pūtanā came to kill Kṛṣṇa, smearing poison over her breast. And Kṛṣṇa sucked the milk and her life also. But Kṛṣṇa took her as (His) her mother. This is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa did not take the black side. The intention was to kill Kṛṣṇa, Pūtanā came. But who can kill Kṛṣṇa? That is not possible. But Kṛṣṇa thought Himself as obligation, that "I have sucked her breast. So she is My mother. She must be given the position of mother." So Pūtanā, after being killed, she was given the same opportunity as Mother Yaśodā. This is Kṛṣṇa. Bhāva-grāhī-janārdanaḥ. Any way you serve Kṛṣṇa, it will be accepted. Not any way. I mean to say, we should serve Kṛṣṇa according to regulative principle. Still, some way or other, unknowing or knowingly, if you render some service, that is called ajñāta-sukṛti.



Ajñāta means without your knowledge you are advancing in spiritual life. That is called ajñāta-sukṛti. You do not know. But the system is so nice... Just like our this class is going on. These children, they are dancing, they are offering obeisances, they are offering a flower. They do not know what they are doing, but it will not go in vain. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. These things are becoming assets, one after another. Just like if you keep money in the bank, daily you save, it is increasing your bank balance, similarly, these children, although they do not know what is this class, what is Prabhupāda speaking, why we are offering... They are imitating. They are imitating, offering obeisances. We used to do so. Every children, every child does so. So if the mother is a devotee, the child automatically becomes a devotee, without any effort. If the father, mother is devotee... Therefore śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Kṛṣṇa says that those who are yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ, could not fulfill the whole program of devotional service, some way or other fallen down, so they are given chance, another chance. What is that chance? The chance is he is given a human form of life and born in a devotee's house, so that from the very beginning of life he will again be in connection with devotional service. So these children, they are not ordinary children. Formerly, they were also devotees. Somehow or other, could not fulfill the whole program. Now Kṛṣṇa has given the chance to take birth in the womb of a devotee mother so that from the very beginning of life they're learning devotional service. So the mother, father also should be careful, that "They are Vaiṣṇavas, they have come under my care. So that he may not be spoiled. Let him become a perfect Vaiṣṇava, and his life become perfect." This is... This is very nice program.

So mother Dharitrī, Dharitrī is mother. So he's asking whether mother is lamenting because Kṛṣṇa... Bhūri-bharāvatāra-kṛtāvatārasya hareḥ. After the Battle of Kurukṣetra, Kṛṣṇa disappeared from this earth. Kṛṣṇa went back to His abode. So Kṛṣṇa comes here, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. So Kṛṣṇa appeared to kill so many demons. At that time... Whenever there will be demons, Kṛṣṇa will come. At the present moment, now, the world is full of demons. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has come in the form of Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Devotees: Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Prabhupāda: That is Kṛṣṇa avatāra. Kali-yuge nāma-rūpe avatāra. So don't think that Kṛṣṇa, this vibration Kṛṣṇa, is different from that Kṛṣṇa. The same Kṛṣṇa. The same Kṛṣṇa. If you say that "Why has not come to kill the demons?" that is His great sympathy, mercy, that you are already killed. You see? What another killing? So we are already dead. Therefore we are so fallen that it does not require any more killing. Mercifulness. You see? The demons... Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, merciful. Pāpī tāpī jata chilo hari-nāme uddhārilo. All the demons, full of sinful activities, they are to be delivered by this weapon, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, killing is going on.



So it is now sympathy. Therefore when Jagāi-Mādhāi insulted Nityānanda, immediately Caitanya Mahāprabhu came and wanted to kill them. Nityānanda Prabhu reminded, "Sir, You have promised in this, Your incarnation, will not kill." So then He was satisfied and delivered the demons. Delivered the demons. Nityānanda Prabhu is therefore so kind. Nityānanda Prabhu is guru. He's so kind that in spite of being injured by Jagāi-Mādhāi, He delivered them. He requested Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām. There was two sections. One section, sādhu, and one section, demon. That was the idea. Even when Kṛṣṇa appeared, there were two sections. Now everyone is demon. Then if the killing program is taken, then (Hindi) thagavate gham oja.(?) then everything will be finished. Therefore there is no killing program by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It is killing program-it is killing the sinful activities. Pāpī tāpī jata chilo hari-nāme uddhārilo. Simply by chanting. He'll not be killed, but his activities, sinful activities, will be killed. This is the program.

So the mother earth was lamenting, "Now Kṛṣṇa has gone. Who will give us protection?" But Kṛṣṇa gives protection. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca... [Bg. 4.8]. Two, two different duties. To give protection to the sādhus, to the devotees, and to kill the demons. So... Another word is used. Antarhitasya smaratī visṛṣṭā karmāṇi nirvāṇa-vilambitāni. Nirvāṇa-karma. This is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Try to understand seriously. We are here in this life, human form of life. We should not be lazy. Laziness is not required. Karmāṇi. We should be active. What for? Now, nirvāṇa. Nirvāṇa means finishing this material life. That is called nirvāṇa. The Buddha philosophy, they take it nirvāṇa. Their philosophy is nirvāṇa, means to stop the feelings of pains and pleasure. So their philosophy is that the pains and pleasure... Not only their philosophy. We also know. Bhagavad-gītā also says. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. The, the worldly pains and pleasure-what is due to? It is due to this material body. Mātrā-sparśāḥ. Mātrā means the skin. Because we have got this skin, in winter, the water is there, we feel pain, pinching. And because it is summer, the same water-pleasing. So the condition of the skin, according to the season, is changing. Therefore we are feeling pains and pleasure. Otherwise there is no pain, pleasure. Just try to understand. Because we are covered by the skin, therefore we are feeling pains and pleasure. If you become uncovered, free from the skinly covering, then there is no pains and pleasure.

So that is our main business, how to get out of this material body of skins and bones. That is real business. But these rascals, they do not know what is real business. They want to maintain the skin and bone by another skin and bone. That is their program. So it is foolish civilization. They do not what is civilization, what is the aim of life, what we should do. Nothing, no program. Simply just like animals, and kill animals and eat and be merry. And to digest meat, you drink also. One after another. As soon as there is drinking, then there is illicit sex. And so many things complicated. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā warns, yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. You must work. You should not be idle. But yajñārthe, for Kṛṣṇa. Then you'll not be implicated. Otherwise, you'll be implicated. By the grace of māyā, you'll be so implicated that you have got this human form of life, and after giving up this body, you'll have to accept, according to your karma, one of the 8,400,000 species of life; maybe it may be a tree, it may be a cat, it may be a dog, or it may be something lower grade.

Because in this age our activities are all sinful, lower grade. Therefore you cannot expect higher-grade life. That is not possible. Higher grade life you can get. You can go in the higher planetary systems. You can get long duration of life, better comforts, better nice body. There are arrangement. Svargaloka. Bhūr bhuva... Oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur vareṇyaṁ bhargo devasya dhīmahi... This is gāyatrī. There are three lokas: bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ. So svaḥ, heavenly, they've no some information, there is heavenly planet. Actually there is. There are... Svargaloka is not so very comfortable. Above the Svargaloka there is Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka, Satyaloka, Brahmaloka, like that, seven lokas. So who will go there? Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. If you are situated in the modes of goodness, then you can be promoted to the higher planetary systems. And madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ, and if you are in the modes of passion, then you'll remain within this bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ, three worlds. And jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ, and if you are simply in darkness, you do not know how to enjoy spiritual life or material life, just like cats and dogs, then you are degraded. You take the body of trees, plants, lower animals, insects, worms of the stool, and so many things. So one should know that.

So nirvāṇa. Actually, there is no benefit. Even if I go to the highest planetary system, with very, very long duration of life and material comforts, that is not actual benefit. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] "My dear Arjuna, even if you are promoted to the Brahmaloka, the highest planetary system, still, it is not safe, because the death is there. And if you come to My place, no, there is no more..." That is called nirvāṇa. Our business is to finish this material existence and go back to home, back to... That is real business.

So here the Dharmarāja is lamenting, "On account of absence of Kṛṣṇa, our real business, nirvāṇa, is being delayed. Therefore, are you lamenting, mother?" So Kṛṣṇa is so kind that although He's not present at the present moment, still, in the form of His holy name, He's present. You can take still advantage of Kṛṣṇa's name by chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. You can take. Don't think that when you chant "Kṛṣṇa," this name Kṛṣṇa is different from the Kṛṣṇa person. No. They are the same. Nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ, pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto 'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.133]. This is the shastric injunction. Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. Nāma, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa, they're not different. Abhinna. Abhinna means not separate. The same. So take advantage of this life, and take advantage of this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and make your life successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



740120SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.24

-

Hawaii, January 20, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



idaṁ mamācakṣva tavādhimūlaṁ

vasundhare yena vikarśitāsi

kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā

surārcitaṁ kiṁ hṛtam amba saubhagam

[SB 1.16.24]



Translation: "Mother, you are the reservoir of all riches. Please inform me of the root cause of your tribulations, by which you have been reduced to such a weak state. I think that the powerful influence of time, which conquers the most powerful, might have forcibly taken away all your fortune, which was adored even by the demigods."



Prabhupāda: Kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā. Time is very powerful. Another place in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā.



tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



So in due course of time, everything happens. That is the nature's law. When I was also a child, I was looking very beautiful, but kālena, in due course of time, I'm now old man, a ugly man. Nobody likes. (laughter) So this is the influence of time, influence of time. So influence of time will act. You cannot check it. Influence of time, that is nature's law. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14]. That is māyā's strength. How you can check? It is not in your power.



So this is another question by Dharmarāja to mother earth, "Whether you are now in tribulation by the influence of time?" Surārcitaṁ kiṁ hṛtam amba saubhagam. So we should remember saubhagam, opulence, can be taken away, in due course of time. You cannot check it. Suppose in America you are all fortunate. You have got very nice roads, very nice cars, very nice skyscraper building, government, food, everything very nice. But in due course of time everything can be taken away. You cannot check it. Śāstra says therefore, tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Everything will be taken away, or ultimately, destruction. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. You can find out, somebody, the verse. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham. In due course of time, death will come, and it will take everything, what you possess. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham. That death is Kṛṣṇa.

Pradyumna:



mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham

udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām

kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca nārīṇāṁ

smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā

[Bg. 10.34]



"I am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things yet to be. Among women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory, intelligence, faithfulness and patience."



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa is acting everywhere by His energy. This kāla, this time, is another form of Kṛṣṇa. Just like Kṛṣṇa has got various forms, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Advaita, one, without a second. Acyuta, does not fall. That is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and ourself. We are part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is acyuta, He does not fall down. We fall down. This is the difference. The example is... Just like the fire, big fire, and the sparks, they are also fire. The quality of big fire and the small sparks of fire, they're the same. Therefore qualitatively, we are one with Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa has got propensities, we have got also propensities. Kṛṣṇa has got creative power, we have also got creative power. In this way, compare anything. In minute quantity... Kṛṣṇa has got independence, full independence; we have got independence, but not full independence. But we have got independence. So that is the difference. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Kṛṣṇa has got various forms, but His real form is Kṛṣṇa. God has got many forms, but the original form is that, playing on flute, curved in three places with barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam, with a feather on the head. These are Vedic description of Kṛṣṇa. It is not an artistic paint, but it is taken from the Vedic literature, what is the original form of Kṛṣṇa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. That is original form. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28].



Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta-rūpam, ananta, unlimited, unlimited. It is described in the śāstras. How unlimited? Just like in a big river you sit down, or on the ocean, if you count the waves, is it possible? There is no possibility. But there are waves always, twenty-four hours going on, going on. But if you want to count them, it is not possible. That is described. Just like the waves of river or... Not satiated. You'll find in the Pacific Ocean in your front, the waves are constantly coming. It is never satiated. So Kṛṣṇa's incarnations are also like that, incessantly coming, one after another, one... Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. So ananta-rūpa, how many rūpa, how many forms we have seen Kṛṣṇa's? No. That is not possible.

So the conclusion is all these forms, ete, all these, ca aṁśa-kalāḥ... Aṁśa means plenary portion, not personally. Aṁśa... And kalā means portion of the portion. Just like first of all, Kṛṣṇa. Then His next expansion is Balarāma. His next expansion is Saṅkarṣaṇa. Next, Aniruddha, Pradyumna. Saṅkarṣaṇa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna. In this way, next expansion Nārāyaṇa. Then, from Nārāyaṇa, another quadruple expansion: Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Saṅkarṣaṇa... Then Mahā-Viṣṇu, the origin of this material creation. Yaḥ kāraṇārṇava-jale bhajati sma yoga-nidrām ananta-jagad-aṇḍa-saroma-kūpaḥ [Bs. 5.47]. Yaḥ kāraṇārṇava-jale bhajati sma yoga-nidrām anantam. That is Mahā-Viṣṇu. Yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48]. So from His breathing nostril, ananta, unlimited number of potential universes, are coming, and-exhaling, inhaling-and unlimited going within. This is Mahā-Viṣṇu. This Mahā-Viṣṇu is also plenary portion of Kṛṣṇa. Yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48]. So many things are described in the Brahma-saṁhitā. But still, He is acyuta, anādi, He has no cause. He is causeless. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam: [Bs. 5.1] He is the cause of everyone, but He has no cause. Anādi, anantam. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyam purāṇa-puruṣam [Bs. 5.33]. He's the origin person, original person. Purāṇa, very old, must be very old because everything... Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. From Him, everything has come. Therefore Purāṇa, Purāṇa means old. Nūtana and Purāṇa. Nūtana means "just very recently," and Purāṇa means very old.

So we are also old. In the Bhagavad-gītā you find this verse, nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ purāṇo na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Do you remember, any one of you, this verse from the Bhagavad-gītā? Eh? But you don't read. So I am writing all these books simply for selling, not for reading. This is not good. And if somebody asks you, "You are so much eager to sell your books. Do you read your books?" Then what you will say? "No, sir, we don't read. We sell only. Our Guru Mahārāja writes, and we sell." That is not good business. You must read. Why I am writing so many books? Not a single moment waste. If you want to become successful in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, don't lose even a single moment. That should be the first determination. Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19], Rūpa Gosvāmī says. Forget sleeping, eating, mating. This is all material necessities. If you increase these things, then you cannot make any progress in spiritual life.

Therefore we say, "No illicit sex, no intoxication." You are already intoxicated. Why you are increasing intoxication? This māyā means intoxication. Piśācī pāile yena mati-cchanna... Just like a person, when he's ghostly haunted, he calls his father by ill names, but he cannot recognize even his father. So all of us, we are already under the clutches of māyā. That is the position of intoxication. And again intoxication? So what will be our condition? Therefore it is prohibited. First of all, whatever intoxication you have already got, just try to cure it. Don't increase it. So everything... The physical necessities means we have already got it, but it is meant for decreasing, not increasing. Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā. We have got general tendency, loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā. Everything is there in the śāstra. Nityā hi jantoḥ. Jantu means living entities. So, it is eternally existing, loke vyavāya, sex intercourse, āmiṣa, eating non-fruital things. Āmiṣa means "which is not fruits and vegetables." Meat, fish, eggs, they are called āmiṣa. And they are called nirāmiṣa. Nirāmiṣa means fruits, vegetables, milks, food grains, sugar. These are nirāmiṣa. And eggs, fish, meat and so many other things, they are called āmiṣa. So āmiṣa. Āmiṣa means these things. Sevā, eating. And vyavāya. Vyavāya means sex life. Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya, intoxication. It is not that Vedic civilization did not know how to eat meat and how to drink liquor. It is all known. But they are prohibited, "Don't eat." It is not that then they were unknown, now it is discovered by scientific advancement. Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi, nityāsti, asti, it is there. It is not that because one is not educated now to use sex life... Nobody requires education. It is automatical. But people are now very much advanced in understanding sex life. So many books, Freud philosophy, this philosophy. And after all, this is already there. What is the need of philosophy? Without your rascal philosophy, everyone knows how to use sex life. But they are thinking this is advancement. Nityā hi. It is already there. Who was speaking yesterday? Jayatīrtha. That his niece, seven years old, she is also dating. So this is already there.

So to increase it no credit. To decrease it is credit. That is credit. Nityā hi jantoḥ. It is already there. Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānām. Bhūtānām means "of all living entities." Amongst the ants, they are very intoxicant. Therefore they find out sugar. The all kinds of liquor preparation is made from sugar. You know that? Sugar is fermented with acid and then distilled. It becomes liquor. And the ants are very much fond of sugar. You keep up one piece of sugar candy. Then the news will be immediately spread, and all the ant class will go there: "Here it is, sugar, yes. Gold rush." (laughter) You see? So every living entity has got a tendency for certain class of thing, especially sex and eating nonvegetarian things. If you eat vegetarian fruits and flowers and grains, you'll not eat more than you require. That is nature. You'll eat only what is needed by yourself. You cannot eat any more. It is very good. If you don't eat... Atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ [NoI 2]. Atyāhāra, eating more than needed, is against spiritual life. Atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ. Everything is there. Rūpa Gosvāmī has said. Atyāhāra means eating more than you require, or eating, enjoying more than. We require, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. We require little, little everything... [break] ...for spiritually advancing. They remain without dress. Even in the severest type of cold, they remain without dress, sitting, only smearing the body with some ashes. They'll take bath in the morning and cover the body with ashes, not very thick. But he'll sit down whole day and night and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. No business. No endeavor for food. If food comes, by God's grace, they will eat; otherwise no, they'll not go anywhere. Completely dependent: "If God gives, then I shall eat. Otherwise we shall not endeavor." This is our first endeavor, what to eat, where to live, where to sleep, where to have sex life. This is our all endeavor. They stop all this endeavor. That is spiritual life. Stop everything. That is called... And I am going in a secluded place and thinking, "How many women I have hunted." What is this nonsense? Eh? And showing, "I have become very much advanced. I am leader." And my leading is I'm thinking of woman. That's all. And money.

This is not spiritual life. This is all cheating. Dhohka-bhaje(?) they are called, dhohka-bhaje,(?) cheaters. Don't be cheaters. Kṛṣṇa knows whether you are cheater or you are sincere. If you are sincere, then He will give you intelligence how you will make progress. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānām... Find out this verse.

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



To whom, He gives direct instruction? Satata-yuktānām: one who is twenty-four hours busy in His service. Twenty-four hours, satata. Satata means, read it.



Pradyumna:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me."



Prabhupāda:. Yes. So Kṛṣṇa is within you. He knows whether you are cheater and whether you are sincere. So therefore He says, "Those who are sincere and twenty-four hours engaged in My service, I give them intelligence." What kind of intelligence? "To... As he may come back to Me, that kind of intelligence." Because that is our aim, back to home, back to Godhead.



So Kṛṣṇa is prepared to help you. Paramātmā. Sarvas... In another place it is said, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Read Bhagavad-gītā thoroughly and be sincere and make your life successful. Don't be cheater. Read, and follow, and Kṛṣṇa will help you, this life. Don't expect another life to prepare. "It is guaranteed human life?" somebody's asking. Even if it guaranteed, why should you take the chance of another life? Finish this business within this life. Take help from Kṛṣṇa, take help from books, take from your spiritual master. Why another life? Another life... Suppose you get another human life. Is it guaranteed? You may fall down again. So my Guru Mahārāja used to say that "Finish all business in this life." Na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum. Finish this business of birth, death, old age and disease in this life. You can do that. This is our main business, not to make arrangement for eating, sleeping, mating and defending under different garb, under different pretext. That is not our business. Our main business is...

Therefore... Kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā. There it is said, kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā. Kāla, time, is very powerful. Time... In time everything can be done. In time you can become very happy, and in time you can become very distressed, very much distressed, unhappy. Time can give you. And time is also Kṛṣṇa, kāla-rūpeṇa. When... You'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā that, in the Eleventh Chapter... I've just now forget that..., that "Who are you?" Kāla. The virāḍ-rūpa, the universal form seeing, Arjuna said, "Who are You, Sir?" So He said that "I am in the kāla-rūpa, in the form of time, now. I have come to kill the all, all of you." So therefore our business should be that this life should be utilized only for complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No other business. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's cult. And it is not very difficult. Not at all difficult. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. But it is difficult. It is very difficult. It is to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra twenty-four hours. Those who are not accustomed, they'll become mad simply by chanting. It's difficult. You cannot imitate Haridāsa Ṭhākura, that "Now I shall go in a secluded place and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." It is not possible, sir. It requires great advancement of spiritual life when one can concentrate in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. It is not so easy.

Therefore, for neophytes, we must have many engagements. In the neophyte stage, if you try to imitate the advanced stage, then it will be simply ludicrous. In the neophyte stage we must be always engaged. Kṛṣṇa has got different venues of rendering service. You can serve Kṛṣṇa in so many ways. Karmaṇā manasā vācā etāvaj janma-sāphalyaṁ dehinām iha dehiṣu. Karmaṇā manasā vācā śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā. Karmaṇā manasā, we have got three venues: by working, karmaṇā; by thinking, manasā; karmaṇā manasā vācā, and by speaking. We can do things. Karmaṇā manasā vācā. So this tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa means... There are four daṇḍas. One daṇḍa is the, what is called, symbol of his person. And the other three daṇḍas, they are symbol of his body, mind, and speeches. This daṇḍa means, perhaps you know, do not know. You try to under... So karmaṇā, this daṇḍa, means "I have taken now vow to engage myself, even whatever assets I have got." So I have got my assets. I can work with my body, I can work with my mind, and I can work by speaking. So tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa means one who has devoted his life, means his activities, his body and his speeches. That is tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa. Anyone who has devoted his mind, his body and his speeches for the service of the Lord, he is sannyāsī. Sannyāsī does not mean simply changing the dress and thinking otherwise. No. Sannyāsī, anyone, it does not matter whether the dress is changed or not, if one is fully engaged by his body, mind and words, sa sannyāsī.

Anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ, sa sannyāsī [Bg. 6.1], Kṛṣṇa says. Who is sannyāsī? Anāśritaḥ karma-phalam. "I shall speak for Kṛṣṇa." Then what profit you'll get? "No matter what is profit, I shall speak for Kṛṣṇa. That's all." Sa sannyāsī, Kṛṣṇa says. "This is my duty, kāryam." Kāryam means duty. "It is my duty to speak for Kṛṣṇa only. That's all. I am not going to speak anything." He's a sannyāsī. Anāśritaḥ karma... Now, if you engage some lawyer to speak for you in the court, "Immediately bring me two thousand dollars." He'll charge. But a sannyāsī, he'll speak twenty-four hours for Kṛṣṇa, no expectation of profit. That is sannyāsī. Twenty-four hours engaging the body for Kṛṣṇa's work-he's a sannyāsī. Twenty-four hours thinking of Kṛṣṇa-he's a sannyāsī. This is sannyāsī. No other business. Anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma... Everyone is working for his personal benefit, "How much money I shall get? How much name and fame and reputation I shall get?" For his personal profit. And that is material. That is material. As soon as you work for your personal benefit, that is material. And as soon as you work for Kṛṣṇa's benefit, that is spiritual. That's all. This is the distinction between material and spiritual. Everything in relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very scientific, authorized. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa. We have got so many literature. Don't waste a single moment. Kālena. And Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, the moral instructor... He's not spiritual instructor, but moral instructor. But he has said that āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi na labhyaḥ svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ. One moment of your life, if it is wasted without any profit, just imagine how much loss you have suffered. Because you cannot get back one moment of your life again even if you are prepared to pay millions of dollars. That you cannot get back. Nineteen seventy-four, 19th January, passed-you cannot get it back again. If you, any rich man comes forward, "Please get me back again 1974, 19th January," "No, sir, that is not possible." Any price you offer, it is not possible.

So just imagine, if we waste our time, how much loss we are suffering. We calculate loss and gain. So don't waste time. Kāla, kāla is very... Yoga system means to save time. The whole process, mechanical process, of yoga, mystic power, means to save time. We have got a limited duration of life. Suppose one is destined to live for... Utmost they will live, anyone, but nobody goes to live for hundred years-say, seventy, eighty, sixty or something like that. Gradually it is reducing, and it will reduce twenty to thirty years. That will be duration of life. Because people are becoming more and more sinful. So that is fixed up. A body is given to us by the superior power, and the duration of life is also fixed up. Even the greatest scientist, he cannot increase a moment's time for his life. That is not possible. A moment's life. Professor Einstein was a great scientist, but he could not find out any means that instead of living for, say, eighty years, he could live eighty years, one day. No, that is not possible. That is not possible. Your destiny, duration of life-fixed up. And how it is fixed up? The machine is breathing. Machine is breathing. Just like the clock goes on, tick-tick, tick-tick, tick-tick. As soon as the tick-tick stops, then whole things is lost. Similarly, our breathing is going on, tick-tick, tick-tick, tick-tick, a fixed time. Just like you wind your clock, so that winding will help, tick-tick, for a certain duration of time, say, twenty-four hours. Similarly, there is winding in our life, a spring. That "tick-tick" means this breathing. So if you... Breathing exercise means if you can stop breathing, then you increase your life. That is called samādhi. No more breathing. That is Vedic, I mean to say, yogic success. Stop breathing. There are yogis, perfect... not these gymnastic-wala, no. Real yogis. They can remain without breathing for days together. That means the days he does not breathe, so much time saved: he increases his life. Suppose daily if he stops breathing for three hours, that means daily he saves three hours time. So in hundred years about..., so many, so much time. So in this way, the yogi can live for three hundred years, four hundred years, six hundred years. Still there are yogis. This is called yogic success.

So kāla, to control... You cannot control time. Just like if you have got one hundred dollars, if you deposit in a bank, you will get some interest, but you cannot make without any endeavor two hundred dollars. No, that is not possible. But if you don't spend it, then the hundred dollars remains. Similarly, your duration of life is there, and it is being wasted by breathing. If you can control the breathing process, then your life can be increased. This is yogic... But after all, we are under the full control of time. Kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā. That is explained here. Kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā. Very, very strong-there is no power. Your so-called scientific power... You cannot struggle against the influence of time. So save time. Save time.

Another process is, save time, if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then the time is not lost. Time is not lost. Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, read book, Kṛṣṇa book. Any moment, any time you spend for thinking of Kṛṣṇa, working for Kṛṣṇa, chanting for Kṛṣṇa, eating for Kṛṣṇa, dancing for Kṛṣṇa, that time is saved. That time is saved. Therefore it is recommended, harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam, kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva... [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. Otherwise, by yoga process, it is not... How many men can actually practice yoga? It is all farce. This is possible. Even a child can take part, Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. [break]

Sudāmā: ... questions. (microphone makes noises)



Prabhupāda: (commenting on mike) Purchase something better. Instead of diverting your attention always, pay little more. In Bengali it is said, sastarthin abastra:(?) "If you purchase something cheap, it will always give you trouble." Better spend once, costly things, nice things. That is...



Sudāmā: Any questions?



Prabhupāda: Yes?



Devotee (1): Was Lord Jesus in pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness?



Prabhupāda: These are old questions, always asked. What is that, huh? What is that question?



Satsvarūpa: Was Lord Jesus in pure Kṛṣṇa consciousness?



Prabhupāda: Yes. He also taught about God. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means God consciousness. So why Jesus? Anyone speaks... But one must know. There are degrees. Just like a person... Somebody knows to some extent, other knows to some extent, other knows to some extent, other knows to some extent. Or somebody understands to some extent. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness means complete understanding of Kṛṣṇa. Just like there are steps; if you want to go to the 104th floor, there are so many steps. So everyone is going, aiming, to that 104th, but one has covered ten steps, one has covered twenty, another hundred, like that. The aim is the same, but you cannot say that one who has already covered one hundred steps, he is as good as one who has covered two steps. There is that difference. Here is a person who has covered only two steps; here is another person who has covered fifty steps; here is another person who has covered hundred steps. Suppose you have to fulfill five hundred steps. So proportionately, that is the position. But the steps are already there. So any religious system-it doesn't matter Hindu religion or Christian religion or Muhammadan religion-it is the question of how the followers are covering the steps. They are going on the same staircase, but it is the question of...



So ultimate success is... That is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje: [SB 1.2.6] "The highest perfection is that when you understand God and you are in love with God." That is success. You are in love in God. It doesn't matter how we have learned to love God, either Christian religion or Hindu religion or Muhammadan, but if you have got that success, that you have learned how to love God, then your life is successful. Then there are different stages of loving platform, and when you love Kṛṣṇa as Rādhārāṇī did... That is not possible, but that is the aim, and that is the highest perfection. But the beginning is love, how you are in love with God. Śānta, dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, mādhurya. So unless you come to that... If you love these material things, then you should know that you are not in love with God. If you are in love with God, then you'll forget material love. That is the test. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. Bhakti, love of Godhead, the symptom is that he's no more in love with material things. That is the test. You cannot... Just like you cannot love two persons. That is divided. One love concentrated, that is perfect love. Similarly, another example is given that we are all hankering after love. Because we do not find whom to love, therefore we place our love even cats and dogs. We love a dog. Anyone who has no other object to love, no children, no family, no wife-all right, keep a cat, keep a dog. But love is there.

So that love is deserved for Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So the more we learn how to love the Supreme Lord, that is perfection of life. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmaḥ. And what kind of love? Ahaituky apratihatā: that love is not motivated, that "I want this thing; therefore I shall love." Here in this material world the so-called love, lust, is motivated. "I'll get so much sense gratification; therefore I love a boy or a girl." That is not love; that is lust. Love means without any motive. Without any motive. Ahaitukī. And that, that love cannot be checked by any material impediments. Ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati. If you can reach that love of Godhead, then you'll feel, "Oh, I am so fortunate." Otherwise we remain unfortunate. So love is there everywhere. Even in cats' and dogs' love there is love. But the perfection is when you actually find the person to love and you actually do it, that is perfection.

Bali-mardana: Prabhupāda, you stated that on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra all the warriors who were dying in the presence of Kṛṣṇa, they all gained liberation. So I'm wondering... Each one of us has within our heart also the representative of Kṛṣṇa. So when we die, why is not everyone liberated?



Prabhupāda: But you have no sense of Kṛṣṇa. You have no sense of Kṛṣṇa. Or actually you do not die. That is another thing. This death means in the... That is described in the Bhāgavatam. Those who die before Kṛṣṇa, they attain their original position, svarūpa. So that is real success. Otherwise, there is no death. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. It is not death; when our body is destroyed, that does not mean we are dead. You are spirit soul, I am spirit soul, every one of us, but we have no death. That is another illusion. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. This so-called death, it is not death. Dhīra, one who knows, one who is sober, he knows that "This man or this boy or this father is dying... He's not dying. Dehāntara-prāptiḥ: he is just changing another body. He's changing an..." So actually we have no death. The change of body. So we are accepting this change of body as death. That is another illusion. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. One who is sober, he is not bewildered. He knows that... Suppose we are sitting here. We are sitting here, and after a few minutes we shall go away. That does not mean we are dead. We are in this apartment; we go to another apartment. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Similarly, nobody dies. It is change of body, from this body to another body. So we have no death. This is illusion. So what is your question?



Bali-mardana: Simply that we have Kṛṣṇa within our heart. So why...



Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇa why within heart? Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. He is within the atom. Antar bahiḥ. Kuntī prayed... You have... I do not remember, but Kuntī's prayer, that "Kṛṣṇa, You are within and without present, but nobody can see You." This is Kṛṣṇa's position. Kṛṣṇa is within yourself, and Kṛṣṇa is without. But we do not see Kṛṣṇa. The example is, naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā. Naṭa, a dramatic player, is dancing on the stage, and his son or relative seeing, he cannot understand that who is dancing. He's dancing before him, but because he's dressed in such a way that he cannot understand, "Oh, he's my brother" or "father" or..., "dancing." No. Therefore this example has been given, naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, but because naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā, we cannot understand. This is our position. That requires knowledge. That requires knowledge. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, not only within. He's everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So Kṛṣṇa can be seen only by person who has developed love for Kṛṣṇa; otherwise, Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, everyone is seeing, but he cannot see. That is the difficulty.



Bali-mardana: So all these warriors on the battlefield, they were all Kṛṣṇa conscious?



Prabhupāda: Huh?



Bali-mardana: So all these warriors on the battlefield, they were all Kṛṣṇa conscious? Is that correct?



Prabhupāda: Yes. At least for the time being, they knew that Kṛṣṇa has come. Suppose a prominent man comes in a big meeting. Is not everyone conscious of that person?



Bali-mardana: Jaya.



Devotee (2): Śrīla Prabhupāda, you state that spirit soul has form.



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Devotee (2): Otherwise, how is the material body grown to accommodate the spirit soul? Just like a shirt has no form, but when it's put on the body, it takes the shapes of the body. Does that mean that the spirit soul has the shape of the body that is accommodating it?



Prabhupāda: Yes. You have got body, shape, very minute shape. That we cannot see, we cannot measure. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, anumeyam, or... What is that? You cannot measure. What is that word used? Aprameyam. Aprameyam. You cannot measure. But it has a form. How, what is the length and breadth of that form, that is not in your power. In your power, but not materially. That is... If you have got spiritual power, then you can measure it. And that measurement is also given in the śāstra. What is that? One ten-thousandth part of the tip of the hair. Hair is a very small point. And divide it into ten thousand parts. That one part is the measure, magnitude of the soul.



keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya

śatadhā kalpitasya ca

jīva-bhāgaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ

sa cānantyāya kalpate

[Cc. Madhya 19.140]



Everything is there. But you have no eyes to see, how to see one ten-thousandth portion of the top of the hair. You cannot see even the original top of the hair. Everything is there. We must have eyes. So Kṛṣṇa is also there. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. You were saying that Kṛṣṇa is within the heart, but who is seeing? Is it seen by the yogis, bhakti-yogīs? Because he has got love for Kṛṣṇa. A bhakta is always seeing, "Kṛṣṇa is with me."



Devotee (2): Does that mean that the spirit soul in my body is shaped like this body?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Spirit soul, he has got hands and legs and everything. That is body. Form means hands and legs, not without form. The same example. Because I have got my form, therefore my dress... This body is described as dress. The dress has got two hands, just like your coat has got two hands; actually, coat, the cloth has no hands, legs. That is impossible. But because you have got your hands, your coat has assumed the hands. So this material dress... These hands and legs are there because originally we are spirit soul, we have got hands and legs. This is the proof that we are not formless. With form. Because this body has been described as dress, outward dress, different dress. Just like we are, somebody white, somebody yellow, somebody black, somebody... This is dress. But actually, we spirit soul, we are one. It is by dress we are fighting. "You are Englishman," "I am German," "I am this," "I am Indian," "I am that," "I am man," "I am woman." So many fighting on account of this dress. So when you become dressless, that is the spiritual platform. When you become dressless. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. When we are free from all this designation dress. We are now covered by this designation dress. "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am Englishman," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am..." So many, we have created dress. Just like innumerable quantity or quality of dresses, similarly, these are all dresses. So the spiritual platform means sarvopādhi-vinir..., when we become free from all this designation and fixed up in the understanding that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa," that is our real position. Yes?



Devotee (3): If Kṛṣṇa's name, fame, form and paraphernalia, everything is equal, then is it not true that the devotee who worships the Lord in the temple, or sings, you know, authorized songs in the Vaiṣṇava songbook, is not that the same, equal level as chanting the mahā-mantra?



Prabhupāda: Hm?



Devotee (3): Is chanting Vaiṣṇava songs on an equal level with mahā-mantra?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Yes, that is also... But first of all understand what is the mahā-mantra. He Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, "O the energy of Kṛṣṇa, please accept me." This is the prayer. This is addressing, He Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, "Harā, please, now I am engaged in this material service; kindly accept me in Your service." This is meaning of Hare Kṛṣṇa. So a relationship, requesting something. So all these songs are like that, requesting relationship. Therefore they are the same. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. All right. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





740714SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.24

-

Los Angeles, July 14, 1974



Nitāi: "Mother, are you the reservoir of all... Mother, you are the reservoir of all riches. Please inform me of the root cause of your tribulations by which you have been reduced to such a weak state. I think that the powerful influence of time, which conquers the most powerful, might have forcibly taken away all your fortune, which was adored even by the demigods."



Prabhupāda:



idaṁ hi mamācakṣva tavādhi-mūlaṁ

vasundhare yena vikarśitāsi

kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā

surārcitaṁ kiṁ hṛtam amba saubhagam

[SB 1.16.24]



So kālena, kālena means "by the time." In the Bhagavad-gītā there is, sa kāleneha yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa. So time is very powerful. Time is eternal, and it is very powerful. So the inquiry is, "Vasundhare, the reservoir of all riches, whether you have been plundered or taken away of all your fortunes in due course of time?" Vasundharā, this planet... There are innumerable planets. This is one of them. And it is referred here that surārcitam. Surārcitam. Sura means the demigods, and arcitam means worshiped. So the demigods, they live in higher planetary system. Their standard of life is far, far better, thousands and thousands times better. Therefore when this planet is more opulent, even the demigods, they eulogize, surārcitaṁ saubhagam. That kind of opulence is certainly very great fortune. So all these inquiries are being made because Kṛṣṇa left this planet. "When Kṛṣṇa was present, so the opulence of this planet was so great that even the demigods in higher planetary systems, they were also envious. So that is now... Because Kṛṣṇa is not there, so that opulence is now taken away. So whether you are so much sorry for this purpose?"



So this planet or any planet, they are all full with opulence. Pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇam adaḥ [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. By... Anything created by God is complete. Several times I have explained. Just like in this planet we require water. Water is required for cleansing, for cultivating... So many things water is, profuse water is required. So Kṛṣṇa has provided this planet-three-fourths part of the planet is full with water. But you cannot utilize it unless Kṛṣṇa touches. There is scarcity of water. You require so much water. Suppose in the desert you can pump water from the sea, but that will not be effective. It must be managed by Kṛṣṇa. The water must be evaporated by the machine, sunshine, and they'll be turned into clouds. And when that water is poured, then it will benefit.

So you are always dependent on Kṛṣṇa and His mercy. You are thinking that "We shall adjust these material things and become happy." That is foolishness. That is not possible. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. The prakṛti is there. All the riches are there. Everything is there on the ground. Just like we are getting so many things from this ground. The trees, the plants, the foodstuffs, the minerals, so many things. There is everything, complete. You'll see in your garden there are different types of flowers, color, scent, flavor. But wherefrom it is coming? It is coming from the earth. Can you make any scent from the earth? But the scent is coming from the earth. The rose flavor, wherefrom it is coming? It is there. Anyone can understand. But you cannot extract that. Kṛṣṇa requires His hand. When Kṛṣṇa is there in the form of seed... Kṛṣṇa says, bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām: [Bg 7.10] "I am the seed of all living beings." The seed. That... Just like there is sex. Unless the seed is there, there is no child. Similarly, unless the seed is there, there is no plantation. The banyan tree is there because the seed is there. And the rose tree is there because the seed is there. And Kṛṣṇa claims, bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām. And Kṛṣṇa's potencies are there in the seed so that different types of seeds producing different types of flowers, fruits, colors, flavor. This is Kṛṣṇa's supervision. Mayādhyakṣeṇa [Bg. 9.10].

So ultimately, time and earth and everyone is abiding by the Lord, by the orders of the Lord.

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



Budhāḥ, those who are not rascals. Budha means intelligent. Budha. Budha means intelligent. So those who are intelligent, they know that everything is supplied by Kṛṣṇa. So why not depend on Kṛṣṇa only? Why so many other attempts? Therefore Kṛṣṇa says,



vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām

[Bg. 2.41]



Vyavasāyī means one who knows business particularly. Vyavasāya. Or one who knows confidently, "It is... This is the cause, this is the effect." So those who know that Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything, so they are fixed up in Kṛṣṇa. Vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha. One. Just depend on Kṛṣṇa. One who does not this, they depend on so many things. Buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām.



So if we want to be Kṛṣṇa conscious, we shall fix up our mind on Kṛṣṇa, and... How to become fixed up, that art will be given to you by the spiritual master. Therefore Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says in connection with the explanation of this verse, vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ, so he says vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ means to take the words of the spiritual master as life and soul. That is vyavasāya... That is called vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ. And Viśvanātha Cakravartī says that "Whatever I am ordered by the spiritual master, that is my life and soul. I don't care for liberation. My only business is to serve my spiritual master." And in the song you have just sung, ye prasāde... What is that? Ye prasāde...?

Rāmeśvara: Pūre sarva...



Prabhupāda: Pūre sarva āśā. You do not know the meaning. Ye prasāde means "By his mercy, all our desires are fulfilled." Ye prasāde pūre sarva āśā...



So, so this is our process, to depend on Kṛṣṇa. Depend does not mean I shall remain idle. Depend means to work according to the direction of the śāstra. Sādhu-śāstra-guru-vākya, tinete kariyā aikya. Depend does not mean, "Now let me sleep, and Kṛṣṇa will do everything. Depend on Kṛṣṇa." No, not like that. Kṛṣṇa never advised Arjuna that "You sleep on this chariot. (laughter) I'll..." Hare Kṛṣṇa. He never said that. He said, "You must have to fight." Yudhyasva mām anusmara [Bg. 8.7]. "Fighting you have to do. But you always think of Me." This is the success. Not that depend on Kṛṣṇa means, "I have not to, nothing to do."

So everything is there. Here it is said that surārcitaṁ kiṁ hṛtam amba saubhagam. All opulences are there. I have already explained. Anything fortune... There are mines. There are petrol. There are water. Everything is there. But as soon as we forget Kṛṣṇa, then the time will take away everything. Yes. It will not allow. Time will not allow to enjoy. Then there will be strife, there will be misunderstanding. Just like the petrol is there in, within this earth, but because we do not know how to use them, therefore there is scarcity of petrol. Petrol is there. We do not know how to use Kṛṣṇa's property. We are trying to use everything as my own. But factually it is not. Factually it is everything Kṛṣṇa's. So if we are Kṛṣṇa conscious, every one of us, there is no scarcity, no want. Because the things are there already. There is no question of scarcity. But because we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, there is scarcity. It is very clear. We have forgotten that this petrol belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Then it is all right. This land belongs to Kṛṣṇa. But the Arabians are thinking, "This land belongs to us." Therefore there is difficulty.

So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so important. If people simply learn this, that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa... Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Sarvam means "everything." Not that "This much is mine, this much is Kṛṣṇa's." No. Sarvam. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat, tena tyaktena bhuñjīthāḥ... Simply we shall use as much He has allotted for us. Then there is peace and prosperity, without any difficulty. Otherwise, you go on adjusting your material possessions; the time will take away everything. When you die by the..., in due course of time, then whatever possession we have got, all finished. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham: "I am death." Kṛṣṇa is everything. So death is also Kṛṣṇa. Just like here is a picture of Hiraṇyakaśipu. Such a great demon, so proud. He was thinking that "I am the proprietor of everything." He was chastising his son, doing everything, whatever he liked. But when Nṛsiṁhadeva came, within a second, everything finished. Everything finished. But Prahlāda remained the same. Prahlāda is not finished. Hiraṇyakaśipu is finished. So those who are trying to be very, very big by material possessions, they'll be all finished. But if you remain in the position of Prahlāda, you'll never be finished.

Thank you very much. (end)



740121SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.25

-

Hawaii, January 21, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



bhavān hi veda tat sarvaṁ

yan māṁ dharmānupṛcchasi

caturbhir vartase yena

pādair loka-sukhāvahaiḥ

[SB 1.16.25]



Translation: "The earthly deity in the form of a cow thus replied to the personality of religious principles in the form of a bull: O Dharma, whatever you have inquired from me shall be known to you. I shall try to reply to all those questions. Once you too were maintained by your four legs and increased happiness all over the universe by the mercy of the Lord."



Prabhupāda: Bhavān hi veda tat sarvaṁ yan māṁ dharmānupṛcchasi. So, Dharmarāja, or Yamarāja, he is one of the twelve authorized persons for maintaining properly the human civilization. The principle is dharma. Dharma means not a religious sentiment. Dharma means occupational duty. Everyone has got some occupational duty. So dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. That occupational duty is assigned by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthāḥ [Īśo mantra 1]. Actually, the dharma principle, as we learn from Bhagavad-gītā... Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Don't create, manufacture, your principle of religion, concocted. That is the difficulty. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. We have several times explained this, that dharma means-dharma, as it is translated in English, "religion"-religion means to obey the laws of God. That is religion, not a sentimental system of religious system we manufacture. That kind of dharma will not help us. Therefore, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the beginning it is said, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] "Cheating type of religious system is kicked out." That is Bhāgavata-dharma. No cheating. In the name of cheating and dharma, religious principle, that will not help the human civilization.



The real dharma... The real dharma is stated by God Himself. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. You haven't got to learn from anywhere else but from God Himself. So that is explained very nicely in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām... [Bg. 18.66]. To surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that is religion. Not only surrender, but to act as He desires, or you become a lover of God. This is first-class religion. We have several times explained. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. That type of religion is first-class which teaches you how to become a lover of God. If you become lover, then your life is successful. Then you'll do everything for God. Otherwise, you'll simply question, "Why shall I do that? Why shall I do that? Why shall I...?" That means there is no love. That is training. Just like a novice is being trained up, and he has no love, so he'll question that "Why shall I do it? Why shall I do it? Why shall I do? What benefit I shall get?" So many questions will be there. But when there is love, there is no question. So therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā, after teaching so many things, yoga, jñāna, karma and so many other things, at last, Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-guhyatamam: "Now I am speaking to you the most confidential instruction." What is that? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja... [Bg. 18.66]. This is the most confidential.

So generally, a human being accepts four principles, namely dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Dharma means religious principle; artha means economic principle, how to develop economic principle; dharma, kāma, how to satisfy our senses; and mokṣa, and ultimately, salvation. But this is material principles. We have to surpass this material principle, then come to the spiritual platform. That is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... Sarva-dharmān [Bg. 18.66]. This is also dharma. So just like people are engaged formally. Their temple, church, is sometimes, simply formality. Real, their real business is how to satisfy their senses. "If for satisfying my senses I'll have to pose myself as a religious person, so let me do that." That is their religion. But that is not religion. Real religion is no sense satisfaction, simply to satisfy the Supreme Lord. That is real religion. Therefore (s)he says, bhavān hi veda tat sarvam.

So as somebody, anything, they require four legs... Just like this platform, it has got four legs. Animal stands on four legs. Anything, it requires four pillars. So to remain steadily on the platform of dharma, these four legs required: dharma, artha, kāma... If I simply remain engaged in religious principles and nobody is engaged where to get food... Because food also is required. So therefore not only religious principle, there must be economic development attempt also. But not one-man show. We should divide our society in such a way that somebody, some group of men is engaged in studying the dharma principle and spreading it. Just like we have taken the principle, generally, to spread what is meant by real dharma. That is the business of the brāhmaṇa. And similarly, some group of men should be kṣatriya for ruling over. Unless there is discipline, ruling, everything will be chaos. The government must be there. The principle of directors must be there. So dharma, artha, kāma. And we must live peacefully. Our senses should not disturb us. Because we have got senses, they want satisfaction. So we must give food them also, senses. Dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa. But ultimate goal is how to get out of this material existence. This is four principles: dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa. And mokṣa, by the impersonalists, their mokṣa and real mokṣa... Real mokṣa... Mokṣa means liberation. Liberation means to get out of this material existence.

People do not understand what is mokṣa, what is economic development, what is religious principle. There is no education. So unless there is sufficient education on these principles-dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]-you cannot have peaceful life in human society. That is not... That is animal society. Dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. If there is no principles of life, that is animal society. Unfortunately, at the present moment, the education is simply for sense gratification. That is animalistic education. Therefore, in spite of advancement of so many things, people are not happy. People are not happy. So here it is said, caturbhir vartase yena pādair loka-sukhāvahaiḥ. Sukhāvahaiḥ. Sukha means happiness. If you want to increase happiness... Everyone wants to become happy. That is the highest principle. Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. The whole struggle is going on to minimize our miseries and to increase our happiness. That is our attempt. Everyone is working for that. Ātyantika-duḥkha, nivṛtti. Duḥkha means unhappiness, and ātyantika means ultimate. So people do not understand that what is that ultimate happiness. Ultimate happiness is there. No, there is no duḥkha, there is no unhappiness. That is ultimate happiness. If you study whatever happiness we are trying to establish, there is unhappiness also. It is not unmixed. It is mixed. The economic development... Just like modern age, if you, if any man wants to become rich man, he has to first of all accept unhappiness, to work very hard, day and night. Then he can get some money. Then, engaging that money for increasing further money, increasing further money... Then one day he may be millionaire. So that millionaire, to become, that is also not undisturbed happiness. "How to keep the money?" "How to invest it?"

So here, in the material world, as we are engaged, unalloyed happiness is not possible. But if you actually want unalloyed happiness, then you have to be advanced in spiritual consciousness, unalloyed. Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. Ātyantika means ultimate, and duḥkha means unhappiness. Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. Nivṛtti means finish. So people do not see what is that ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti, what is that ultimate disappearance of unhappiness. That they do not know. So many things they do not know. Therefore it requires education. Education means knowledge, to get knowledge. And the Vedic direction is that if you want really knowledge, then tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12] "One has to go to the guru, or the spiritual master." Gurum eva abhigacchet. One must go. There is no alternative. Nobody can say that "Without going to the guru we can become happy." That is not possible, according to Vedic principle. Even Caitanya Mahāprabhu, although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He accepted guru. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality, He accepted guru. So that is our Vedic principle. The beginning of Bhagavad-gītā it is said, evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Imaṁ rājarṣi. Rājarṣi means great saintly kings. They also accepted a predecessor guru.

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



Everything is there.



So if we actually want to be happy, then we should not live like animals, without any restriction, without any... Even in your state, just to keep proper management of the state, there are so many laws. Even you... As soon as you go on the street, you see there is state law immediately, "Keep to the right." Discipline must be there. That is dharma, discipline, to abide by the state laws. There must be some discipline. Similarly, to make yourself advanced in spiritual life, you must have to observe the discipline. Without discipline, it is not possible. Ādau gurvāśrayam. Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī says in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu that discipline means, one who observes discipline, he is called disciple. Everyone knows it. Disciple means one who observes discipline. If one does not observe discipline, then he is not a disciple. And one who is not a disciple, his life is chaotic. He cannot be happy. Therefore Vedas say that "You must accept a bona fide guru and become disciplined under his instruction." Then you'll know the higher system of knowledge, the necessity of life, and thus you become happy.

So here it is said that caturbhir yena pādair loka-sukhāvahaiḥ. Without discipline, without proper understanding of the four principles of life, dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90], nobody can become happy. Therefore, it is said there that "You know..."

bhavān hi veda tat sarvaṁ

yan māṁ dharmānupṛcchasi

caturbhir vartase yena

pādair loka-sukhāvahaiḥ



Then next? [break]



Devotees: (chanting synonyms to texts 26-30)



Prabhupāda: These things are all mentioned, how the human society can be peaceful and progressive. These are the qualifications. Not like animallike jumping all day and night. Here in Hawaii we see that children, children and elderly persons also, the whole day and night, simply jumping in the sea. Someone is swimming, somebody is doing something else, somebody is swimming. How they're wasting time. But they have taken, "This is civilization. This is civilization." Human life is so important. So many things are to be learned, neither in the school, college, educational institution, society, nothing of the sort. Just like a dog is also jumping, a man is also jumping. This is going on. But that is not civilization. Real civilization means these things are to be acquired in real life, personal life, then that is civilization. Now, these are mentioned one after another. Read.



Pradyumna: (chants synonyms)



Prabhupāda: Now, truthfulness is a, nowadays, is a matter of dream only. There is no truthfulness. Everyone is... Beginning from the president and down to the ordinary man in the street, nobody is truthful. Now the president in your country is being questioned so many ways because he has proved himself not truthful. So this is a forgotten story, truthfulness. That is brahminical qualification. All these qualifications are mentioned. It is not possible to acquire all the qualities by one man. That is not possible. Just like we divide some... If there is something to be done, we divide the task, "Mr. You, you do this. And you, you do this. You do this." Similarly, all these qualities must be divided amongst the whole population. Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā we have got the direction from the Supreme Lord, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. One man cannot be... Suppose a businessman. A businessman, he cannot become strictly truthful. That is not possible. A politician, he cannot become actually truthful. Then the whole business will be spoiled. Everyone... Suppose you go to a store. The storekeeper says, "Oh, you are my dear friend. I will not take any profit from you. I will give you at cost price. You take." So you believe, But actually, how it is possible to give at cost price? How he'll maintain the business establishment? I know that he's speaking untruth, still, I accept, "Oh, he is very truthful." So there are so many things.



So first thing is truth. Therefore... Then truthfulness has to be rejected? No. Another class, the brāhmaṇa class, he must be truthful. The idea must be there. Just like in the university, educational department, there is law department. It is not that the whole population of the state becomes lawyers. No. A section of the people may be lawyers. Another section may be other, engineer, medical man. So all these qualifications must remain there. Just like educational system: "Here is law class. Here is botany class. Here is chemist class." Whatever you are prepared to accept, you can accept. But these qualities must be there. The... Not that because it is impossible to become truthful, therefore truthfulness should be rejected altogether. No. One section must be there. That is the qualification of a brāhmaṇa, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam. But these qualities must be there in the society, some way or other. And they should cooperate. That is the perfection of society. Go on.

Pradyumna: (chants synonyms)



Prabhupāda: Dayā. One must be merciful. Dayā means... When a man is suffering a fellow man, another fellow man must feel for it. That is called dayā. There are two things: dayā and sevā. Sevā means to give service to the superior, and dayā means to give service to the inferior. Both of them are service. Dayā, I mean to say... A man is suffering. He is in helpless condition. Just like in hospital, those who are patients, who are diseased, they go to the hospital There is also sevā. The nurse is serving. The doctor is serving. But that is not sevā. That is called dayā. He is not obliged, but out of his compassion, he's giving service to the patient. That is called dayā. And sevā means superior. Just like spiritual master. Sevayā. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Because the Vedic injunction is that "You must go to a spiritual master." Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Abhigacchet means "must." There is no alternative. If you're actually interested in transcendental knowledge, tad-vijñānam... Tad-vijñānam means transcendental knowledge. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. And the human life is meant for tad-vijñānam, to understand.



So tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet. So there, how to learn from guru, that is also stated. Tad viddhi: try to learn from him... Tad viddhi praṇipātena. First of all surrender yourself. You cannot go to any person for learning anything where there is no sense of surrender. I accept a guru, but in my mind I remain independent, "Oh, why shall I abide by the orders of guru?" That means there is no surrender. There is no surrender. It is false. It is just to satisfy some motive, but that will not help. If you have got any duplicity in your mind, then you'll never be successful in any field of activities. So the process is... Tad viddhi praṇipātena [Bg. 4.34]. Must be surrendered. Praṇipāta means prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa nipāta. And therefore, unless you find somebody where you can fully surrender, don't accept guru. That is cheating. Unless you are fully confident that "I am surrendering to this person. He is... Actually he is superior to me. He can give proper knowledge..."

So therefore the process is before accepting a guru, one must hear him at least for one year. And when he's convinced that "Here is actually a guru who can teach me," then you accept him, guru. Don't accept whimsically. This system now should stop that somebody's coming for three days-"Prabhupāda, initiate him." Why? First of all see whether he's fit for becoming a disciple; then recommend. Otherwise, don't recommend. Because the chief recommendation is creating havoc. One is not fit for becoming a student, disciple, and he's accepting discipleship, and after three days he's going away. This should not be allowed. Therefore, in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta..., er, Hari-bhakti-vilāsa by Sanātana Gosvāmī it is directed that the spiritual master and the disciple must meet together at least for one year so that the disciple may also understand that "Here is a person whom I can accept as my guru," and the guru also can see that "Here is a person who is fit for becoming my disciple." Then the business is nice. Because the business is tad viddhi praṇipātena [Bg. 4.34], one must be prepared to surrender. So unless that character is there, surrendering, how he can become a disciple? It is not possible.

So these are very difficult things, but because it is the age of Kali, kālena balīyasā, as we studied yesterday, that kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā: time is very hard time. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that it is very difficult time, kalau. It is not Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's version; it is the Vedic version. Kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva. Simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. This will clarify your heart. Then you can understand who is guru, where to surrender, where to take lesson. In this way we can make... Haphazardly, if we accept, then there will be failure.

So satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā. To accept guru, there is also service. And to give service to an inferior person who is suffering, that is also service. The one service is called dayā, and the other service is called sevā. So if you want to realize God, then the other service, sevā, not dayā. You cannot show your mercy to God. God is full. There is no need of your showing mercy. That sevā. Two kinds of service. One is called dayā, and another is called sevā. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. If you want to know what is God, then the other service, sevā. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau. And that service begins from the tongue. Now, generally, when we think of service, we think of our hand and legs, that "By..., I can render service with my hands, with my legs." No. The science of understanding God-the service begins with the tongue. Just see. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. You cannot understand what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa, His name, His activities, nāmādi... Nāmādi means name, form, qualities, activities, pastimes, entourage, so many things, ādi. Therefore... Just like we are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, but we cannot understand what is the meaning of Hare Kṛṣṇa. We cannot understand. Nāmādi. Na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ. Indriyaiḥ means the senses. There are so many people are hearing this sound vibration, but why they're not becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious? Because there is no sevā, there is no service. Therefore it is said, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. But how it will be perceived by the indriyas? Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau. By service. And wherefrom the service begins? It begins jihvādau, beginning with the tongue, beginning with the tongue. This is the service.

So it is a great science, how by tongue... Actually, our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to teach people how to engage the tongue in the service of the Lord. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are requesting everyone, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." That is beginning with tongue. "And take prasādam and go home." That's all. Philosophy later on. Philosophy later on. Because, unless one has got clear brain, unless has actually the senses, purified, one cannot take the lesson of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Just like this is philosophy. One cannot understand the lessons which are given in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā... Therefore in the beginning we do not ask anybody, outsider, that "Read Bhagavad-gītā or..." No. "Please come, chant with us Hare Kṛṣṇa." That is required. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and you will feel. You'll feel. Because this method will cleanse your heart. The more you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, the more you become fit to understand the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the process. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Brs. 1.2.234].

So anyone who will stop chanting, he will be a victim of māyā. Always remember it. Therefore we insist, "Please do not forget to chant at least sixteen rounds." That is minimum. The maximum is 300,000. (laughter) As Haridāsa Ṭhākura used to do, three hundred..., not impractical. But you, we cannot do that. Even we cannot complete sixteen rounds. We are so unfortunate. But that does not mean because we are unfortunate, we shall give it up. Try, try, try your best. Then life will become perfect.

So satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntis tyāgaḥ santoṣa ārjavam. These are the qualities. Now, these qualities, we have to explain one after another, it will take time. So three qualities: satyam, to become truthful... They say, "This truthful is a qualification of ass." Some big politician some years ago, he visited India. You know. He is Mr. Lloyd George, British politician. So he was asked by somebody that "Why you are not truthful?" So he answered that "Truthfulness is the qualification of an ass." He replied like this. Truthfulness, especially in politics, he said, that "In politics, truthfulness is the qualification of an ass." So here the first thing is recommended, satyam, truthfulness. Satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi [SB 1.1.1]. And the biggest politician says, "This is the qualification of an ass." Just see how much opportunity we have got to make spiritual progress. The first beginning is satyam, and our leaders says, "This is the qualification of an ass." So just see our position.

Thank you very much. (devotees offer obeisances) Questions? We are dealing with satyam, the qualification of an ass. This is difficulty. Anyway...

Pradyumna: There's a question here.



Prabhupāda: Yes?



Bali-mardana: Prabhupāda, you were speaking of the quality dayā, mercifulness, and you were saying that actually we could not apply this to the Supreme Lord. But I'm thinking perhaps that the cowherd boys, sometimes were they merciful to Kṛṣṇa by not being too rough with Him?



Prabhupāda: They were equal with Kṛṣṇa, therefore they could show mercy. You are not equal with...



Bali-mardana: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Cowherds boy, they were equally on the same level. Although not same level, but they were given the opportunity to speak, to stand, to talk, to eat on the same level with Kṛṣṇa. Now our position is different. Any other questions?



Devotee (1): Prabhupāda? I was wondering about... You were saying before, I heard, that before you start to learn, you must realize that you're not this body and you're spirit soul. Is realization different from knowing that you're spirit soul?



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Bali-mardana: He said what is realization of the spirit soul?



Prabhupāda: The spirit soul?



Bali-mardana: How does one realize, how does one know that...



Devotee (1): That, that you are...



Satsvarūpa: Between theoretically knowing that you are not this body and realizing.



Prabhupāda: Aḥ. Realizing means you can... It is very simple thing, that a living man and a dead man. So you can realize. There was soul so he was living. Now the soul is not there, he's dead. Is there any difficulty? What is the difficulty? Why this man is dead? They may explain, these rascals, in so many ways, but actual, any simple man can understand that there was something, either you call it soul or something else, that is now missing. That soul has now gone. So one minute before, the body was so important, and now, after one minute, the passing of the soul, it is useless. Throw it away. Is it very difficult to understand? That is realization. If you don't realize... Just like a man, sleeping, but he is not sleeping. He's awakened. But a man is calling, "Mr. such-and-such, wake up, wake up." But he's as if sleeping. So people who do not want to realize, there is no realization. Otherwise, it is very simple, very simple. One minute, one can understand, there was something. And then you come to the guru, and guru teaches śāstra. From śāstra, immediately you can confirm. If you are puzzled that what is that thing that is missing so that this living body is now dead body... This is the general impression. Now, just to get it confirmed, you come to guru. Guru will say, "Yes, it is a fact. The soul was there, and now it has gone." So how guru says? Not guru is manufacturing. Guru says on the strength of śāstra. Therefore sādhu-guru-śāstra, three things must be there. Guru must be speaking on the strength of Vedic knowledge, not manufacturing. He's a rascal. Guru cannot become by manufacturing nonsense ideas. He's not guru. He's a rascal. Whatever guru will speak must be evidenced by the śāstra. That is guru. So you go to guru. So guru will say that "Yes, you're right. The soul was there." How it is right? "No, in śāstra." "What is that śāstra?" "In Bhagavad-gītā it is said, dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā: [Bg. 2.13] asmin dehe, this body, there is the proprietor of this body." That is soul. I love this body because I live in this body. I do not love your body or another's body, but I love my body. Why? Because I live in this body. This is proprietorship. I take care of my apartment because I live in that apartment. I'm not going to take care of your apartment. (laughter) These are common sense. And śāstra confirms it, asmin dehe, dehī. Dehī means the proprietor. So in this way you can understand what is the soul. This is realization of the existence of soul. Is it very difficult?



Devotee (1): No.



Prabhupāda: Everything is given. Is that clear to everyone?



Devotees: Jaya. Yes.



Prabhupāda: That's all? Any other questions? Hm. Thank you. Go on. Chant. (end)





740123SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.26-30

-

Hawaii, January 23, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntis

tyāgaḥ santoṣa ārjavam

śamo damas tapaḥ sāmyaṁ

titikṣoparatiḥ śrutam



jñānaṁ viraktir aiśvaryaṁ

śauryaṁ tejo balaṁ smṛtiḥ

svātantryaṁ kauśalaṁ kāntir

dhairyaṁ mārdavam eva ca



prāgalbhyaṁ praśrayaḥ śīlaṁ

saha ojo balaṁ bhagaḥ

gāmbhīryaṁ sthairyam āstikyaṁ

kīrtir māno 'nahaṅkṛtiḥ



ete cānye ca bhagavan

nityā yatra mahā-guṇāḥ

prārthyā mahattvam icchadbhir

na viyanti sma karhicit



tenāhaṁ guṇa-pātreṇa

śrī-nivāsena sāmpratam

śocāmi rahitaṁ lokaṁ

pāpmanā kalinekṣitam

[SB 1.16.26]



Prabhupāda: So Dharitrī, the earthly planet, was lamenting that "Due to the contamination done by the Kali, I am thinking I am lost of all these good qualities." So śaucam, satyam, truthfulness. We must remember always that we are part and parcel of God. So we have all the good qualities of God; that is our nature. Just like the drop of the ocean water, it has got all the qualities of the ocean. There is no doubt about it. Therefore, even if we take a little drop of ocean water, because the ocean water is salty, we taste the water salty. The salt is there also, but in minute quantity. The ocean has got millions and trillions of tons of salt, and here, in the drop of the water, there is a grain of salt. But salt is there. Another example: just like a little portion of gold. So that is also gold; it is not iron. So naturally, in our original position we have got all the good qualities of God. Now, due to the material contamination, the godly qualities are now covered. The godly qualities are there, but it is covered. That covering is possible due to our very minuteness, very small quantity. Therefore we are fallible, but Kṛṣṇa is not fallible.



Another example: big fire and the spark. The spark is also fire, but it has got the potency to become extinguished. Suppose a spark falls down from the original fire, down. It is extinguished. But the big fire does not extinguish. Therefore the big fire, or Kṛṣṇa, is infallible. His name is Acyuta, infallible. The Māyāvāda philosopher says that "We are in māyā, and as soon as the māyā is taken away, we are God." So we are not God, but we manifest our godly qualities when māyā is taken away. So long we are covered by māyā, our godly qualities are not manifest, but we are not God. Or you are God, but not that God, that big God, but you are a particle of. You can say, "I am God," but you are not that original, chief God. That you are not. This is our philosophy. And that is very genuine. How can I be God? If I am God, then why I have lost my godly qualities? Or why my godly qualities are now covered? This is very common sense. The godly qualities are there. Just like a small particle of the spark, it is carbon. When it comes out of the fire, then it is extinguished. But if you put again to the fire, it is carbon, again bright, brightened. Similarly, we are part and parcel of God, but if we fall down from the association of God, then we become..., appearing like material. But we are not material. It appears that extinguished. This is simultaneously... Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. We are simultaneously one and different. As part and parcel in quality, we are one; but in quantity God is great, we are small particle.

So originally, we have got all these qualities:

satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntis

tyāgaḥ santoṣa ārjavam

śamo damas tapaḥ sāmyaṁ

titikṣoparatiḥ śrutam



Everything is there. But due to material contamination, especially in this age, Kali-yuga... The Kali-yuga is very strong. Time is very strong, that even in contact, coming in contact with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are falling. They are falling. That is due to Kali-yuga. Therefore Mother Dharitrī is... Śocāmi rahitaṁ lokaṁ pāpmanā kalinekṣitam: "Now the Kali-yuga has come. I'm thinking that... I'm very much disturbed that people are losing their original qualities." These qualities are not to be acquired. These qualities are there, but it is covered. Just like a sharpened knife. The cutting power is there, but when it is covered by dirt, it does not cut.



So this is due to our material contamination. Therefore we have to revive it. That sharpness, we have to revive. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. If one is actually Kṛṣṇa conscious, then these qualities will be visible in his person. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. That is the test. If one is actually advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you'll not find any fault in him. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā. If one has got unflinching faith and devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead... Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇaiḥ, all the good qualities. These are the good qualities, mentioned here: satyaṁ śaucam, śamo damaḥ santoṣa ārjavam, sāmyam, so many, twenty-six good qualities of Vaiṣṇava. These good qualities will be manifest. Then we understand, "Oh, here is actually a pure devotee." A pure devotee cannot be contaminated, just like God cannot be contaminated. But we are part and parcel, a small God. We can say, "God, I am God," but if you have got sense, you will say that "I am not the great God, but I am small God." That is sense. Because you have got the God qualities, you are not the Supreme. That is not possible. Supreme is Supreme. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). That is the Vedic injunction, that He is the chief of the eternals. We are all eternal. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. We are not lost or dead on account of our annihilation of this body. That is not possible. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. As God is eternal, we are also eternal. As God is śāśvata, we are also śāśvata, but small, acintya-bhedābheda. This is our philosophy.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to revive the original consciousness. If one is actually in Kṛṣṇa, he'll be truthful. Truthfulness. These are the qualities. Cleanliness, always clean, taking thrice bath. Cloth clean, mind clean, body clean, activities clean, desire clean, thinking clean-everything clean. No contamination. This is the test. "I am doing all nasty things, and I am advertising 'I am advanced devotee.' " What rascal you are? You are doing all nonsense and you are advanced? But they have no shame even, to call themselves... Shameless. Shameless, even not gentlemen. Cheating, and still, he is advertising, "I am advanced." But a person who is actually in Kṛṣṇa consciousness or actual... Sādhu-śāstra-guru-vākya, tinete koriyā aikya. We have to...

Just like if you go to the chemical laboratory, you are testing the characteristic. In the book there is characteristic, even an ordinary chemical. Now, they say... Take, for example, salt. It is called? Chemical name is sodium chloride. Eh? Sodium chloride. So in the book you'll find sodium chloride, and the characteristics, "It is like this. It is like this. It is like this." The color, the taste, the composition, so many things are there. Similarly... How we are testing the purity of sodium chloride? From the books. Similarly, here is the characteristic of pure devotee. Characteristics. You test whether he's truthful. "He's not truthful, sir." Then he's not pure devotee. He's doing something... He promised before his spiritual master, before the Deity, before the fire, "No illicit sex," but he's having illicit sex. So how he is advanced? How he's advanced? He's not even truthful, the first qualification. He's unclean. Truthfulness. Śaucam, means very clean. Very clean means... Just... We utter this mantra,

apavitraḥ pavitro vā

sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā

yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ

sa bāhyābhyantara-śuciḥ



Śuci, śaucam, śuci.



So the devotee must be clean, inside and outside, both. Outside cleaning by taking bath, washing the body with oil or soap or soda, and inside, inside, materially, there will be no unclean things, stool, unnecessary stool. That means one must evacuate every morning and evening. If we eat more, then we have to evacuate twice. But if we eat less, then once evacuation is sufficient. It is said, yogi, bhogī, and rogī. Yogi means spiritually advanced, and bhogī means materialist, and rogī means diseased. It is a common saying. A yogi evacuates only once. That is yogi. And bhogī, because he eats more, so he evacuates twice. And one who evacuates more than twice, he's rogī, diseased. Yogi, bhogī, rogī. So everything has got routine work. śaucam. So you'll feel healthy. If you have evacuated nicely, you have washed inside and outside, taken your bath, then you'll feel always refreshed. And unless you feel refreshed, you cannot very nicely chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra or serve Kṛṣṇa. Therefore cleanliness is required. Apavitraḥ pavitro vā. But... Apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā. If one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and follows the rules and regulations, then automatically he becomes clean, inside and outside. Automatically. Apavitraḥ pavitro vā. What for we are accepting initiation? In any condition, in any condition we shall be purified by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], if we chant really.

There are three stages of chanting. One chanting is with offense, beginning. There are ten kinds of offenses. We have described many times. If we chant with offense, that is the, that is one stage. If we chant offenseless, that is one stage. And if we chant pure... Offenseless is not yet pure. You're trying to make offenseless, but not yet offenseless. But when there is pure chanting, that is success. Nāma, nāmābhāsa, and śuddha-nāma. So our aim is... This was discussed. You'll find in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, discussion between Haridāsa Ṭhākura and a brāhmaṇa. So by chanting, we can come to the highest stage of perfection. In the beginning there may be offenses, but if we try to avoid the offenses, then it is nāmābhāsa. Nāmābhāsa means not actually pure name, but almost pure. Nāmābhāsa, and śuddha-nāma. When one chants śuddha-nāma, name, holy name of God, then he is on the platform of loving platform with Kṛṣṇa. That is the perfectional stage. And in nāmābhāsa stage, not in pure, marginal, between pure and offensive, that is mukti. You become mukta, liberated from material bondage. And if we chant offensively, then we remain in the material world. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said, nāmākāra bahira haya nāma nāhi haya(?). It is mechanical, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa," but still it is not Hare Kṛṣṇa. Nāmākāra, nāma bahira haya, nāmākāra, nāma nāhi haya.

So we must be purely chanting. But we should not be disappointed. Even impure... Therefore we must have fixed chanting process. Because we are not in the pure stage. Therefore, by force... Just like a boy in the school. We had this training in our childhood school. Our teacher would ask me, "You write ten pages, handwriting." So that means practicing ten pages, my handwriting will be set up. So even if we do not follow sixteen rounds, where is the question of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa? So don't be artificial; don't be, I mean to say, a showbottle. Be real thing. And that is wanted. If you want real benefit of spiritual life, don't be showbottle. Do you know showbottle? The medical shop, a big bottle. It is full of water only. And color is red or blue or something like. But the real medicine does not require... (aside:) No, not now. Real medicine does not require a showbottle. A small... If one can chant purified offenseless, once kṛṣṇa-nāma, he is free from all material bondage. Once only. Eka kṛṣṇa nāme yata pāpa haya, pāpī haya tata pāpa kari baro nāhi(?).

So śaucam. śaucam means inward cleanliness and outward cleanliness. śaucam. Inside, we should be pure, purely thinking, no contamination. We should not think anyone as my enemy. "Everyone is friend. I am... I am not pure; therefore I am thinking somebody as my enemy." There are so many symptoms. So śaucam: one should be clean, inside and outside. Satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā. That dayā I already explained. Dayā means to become compassionate to the fallen, one who has fallen, one who is in distress. So actually, the whole population at the present moment, they're fallen. Kṛṣṇa says,

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

[Bg. 4.8]



So at the present moment in the Kali, Kali-yuga, they are, practically they're all demons. All demons. So if Kṛṣṇa... Of course, sometimes it will come that Kṛṣṇa has to come here simply to kill the demons. That is Kalki avatāra. That is described by Jayadeva Gosvāmī. What is that? Keśava dhṛta-kalki-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. Kalau, dhūmaketum iva kim api karālam, mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālam. Mleccha, the mleccha, this word, yavana, these... There are words in Vedic language, mleccha, yavana. Yavana means meat-eaters. Yavana. It does not mean only Europeans are yavana, and Americans, not, Indians are not yavana. No. Anyone who eats meat, he's a yavana. Yavana means meat-eater. And mleccha means unclean. One who does not follow Vedic principles, he's called mleccha. Just like... As the Muhammadans say, kafir. One who does not follow Muslim religion, they are called kafir. That is religious point of view. And the Christians say "heathens." One who does not follow Christian religion, they are called heathens. Is it not? Similarly, anyone who does not follow Vedic principle, he's called mleccha. So time will come when nobody will follow Vedic principles of life. Therefore, mleccha.



So mleccha-nivaha, when all the people will become mlecchas, nobody following the Vedic principles, mleccha-nivaha-nidhane, at that time there is no more preaching, simply killing. Nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālam. In this age a very fearful, not feature, but action is very fearful. Mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālaṁ dhūmaketum iva. Just like now they are apprehending the appearance of a comet. So Kṛṣṇa will appear just like a comet. Dhūmaketum iva, dhūmaketum iva, dhūmaketum iva. Kalayasi karavālam. So that is the end of Kali-yuga, that people will be so mlecchācāra, unclean habits, they, dull... Now they have already become, already become. They have no brain. Even big, big, so-called... [break]

...mahā-vadānya, very munificent incarnation. Or magnanimous. Mahā-vadānyāvatāra. Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema... He is giving kṛṣṇa-prema, love of Kṛṣṇa. You... One cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. It is so difficult.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



To understand Kṛṣṇa is not easy job. But Kṛṣṇa in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu is so compassionate, not only He's giving Himself, Kṛṣṇa, but He's giving kṛṣṇa-prema, love of Kṛṣṇa. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's avatāra. Dayā. Mahā-vadānyāvatāra. So whatever Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is going forward, it is due to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's magnanimous compassion for the poor people suffering in this Kali-yuga. Otherwise, to become Kṛṣṇa conscious is not very easy job, is not easy job. So those who are getting the chance of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they should not lose the opportunity. It will be suicidal. Don't fall down. It is very easy. Simply chanting by Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, not always, twenty-four hours, although Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends, kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31], always chant. That is the principle. But we cannot do that because we are so much overwhelmed by the influence of Kali. So at least sixteen rounds. Don't miss this. Don't miss this. What is the difficulty, sixteen rounds? At most it will take two hours. You have got twenty-four hours. You want to sleep; all right, sleep, ten hours sleep. That is not recommended. Don't sleep more than six hours. But they want to sleep. They want to sleep twenty-four hours. That is their desire in Kali-yuga. But, no. Then you'll be wasting time. Minimize eating, sleeping, mating and defending. When it is nil, that is perfection.



Because these are bodily necessities. Eating, sleeping, mating, defending that is bodily necessities. But I am not this body. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāram... [Bg. 2.13]. So that realization takes time. But when we are actually advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we must know our duty. Sleeping not more than six hours. Utmost eight hours. Utmost, those who cannot control. But not ten hours, twelve hours, fifteen hours, no. Then what is the use of...? Somebody went to see one advanced devotee, and at nine o'clock he was sleeping. And he's advanced devotee. Eh? Is not that? So what is...? What kind of devotee he is? Devotee must rise early in the morning, by four o'clock. By five o'clock, he must finish his bathing and other things. Then he takes to chanting and so many... Twenty-four hours' business must be there. So sleeping is not good. The Gosvāmīs used to sleep only two hours. I also write at night book, and I also sleep, not more then three hours. But I take sometimes little, sleep more. Not like... I don't imitate the Gosvāmīs. That try to avoid. And avoid sleeping means if we eat less, then we'll avoid. Eating, sleeping. After eating, there is sleeping. So if we eat more, then more sleeping. If we eat less, then less sleeping. Eating, sleeping, mating. And mating should be avoided. That is a great stricture. Sex life should be minimized as far as possible. Therefore we have got this restriction, "No illicit sex." Sex life, we don't say... That you cannot do, nobody can do. Therefore sex life means married life, a little concession. A license, "All right, you take this license." But not illicit sex. Then you'll never be able.

So eating, sleeping, mating and defending. And defending, we are defending in so many ways, but still, war is there, and the onslaught of material nature... Your country is defending so nicely, but now the petrol is taken away. You cannot defend. Similarly, everything can be taken away at any moment. So depend on Kṛṣṇa for defending, defenses. Avaśya rakṣibe kṛṣṇa. This is called surrender. Surrender, means... Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me," sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. Let us believe this, that "Kṛṣṇa is asking to surrender. Let me surrender. He must protect me in danger." That is called surrender. "Now, I am surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, but for my defense I'm making another arrangement." Then I have no faith in Kṛṣṇa. If I believe in Kṛṣṇa, then we must believe that Kṛṣṇa will... Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. Believe. Satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntiḥ. Kṣānti means toleration? What is that? Hm? See kṣānti.

Pradyumna: (reads) "Self-control even if there is cause of anger."



Prabhupāda: Yes, tolerate, yes. Kṣānti. We should not be intolerant. Even somebody has done some wrong unto me, tapasvī. Kṣamā-rūpa-tapasvinām. Tapasvī, those who are advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, undergoing tapasya, austerities, their first qualification is to forgive the offender. This is the qualification. Tapasvinām. Kṣamā-rūpa-tapasvinām. Then tyāga. Tyāga means to give your energy for Kṛṣṇa. Everyone is giving energy for his sense gratification. When we give our energy, Kṛṣṇa... Parārthe prajñā utsṛjet(?). This is Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. Sannimitte varaṁ tyāgo vinas emiyate sati. Sannmivitte varamṁ tyāgaḥ(?). Tyāga means to give in charity for others' benefit. That is called tyāga. So what is the best tyāga? When you give up everything... [break]



...such thing. You do your best, but depend, the result, on Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. If somebody comes to attack you, you must also attack. You first attack. But you should not think that "I am so powerful. I can gain victory over you." Depend on Kṛṣṇa, do your best. Yudhyasva mām anusmara [Bg. 8.7]. This is our policy. When there is question of fight, we have to fight. Just like in Bombay, we fought, but the result, we depended on Kṛṣṇa. We have come out victorious. There was no hope of getting that land. It was regular fight. The whole Bombay city became agitated. Yes, in Bombay. But we are victorious, because we depended on Kṛṣṇa. I thought... Simply I prayed to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Lord, You are seated there on that place. If You are removed, then it will be suicidal. You must remain there." My only prayer was that "I don't care for this land, but You are seated there, I cannot tolerate this insult that You will be removed from there." So Kṛṣṇa saved our face. He's still remaining there.

So we should be like that. We should fight to our best, but depend the result on Kṛṣṇa. Don't try to take the credit for yourself. That is wanted.

Devotee (1): So, Śrīla Prabhupāda, should devotees in ISKCON, should a certain section of devotees in ISKCON be trained as kṣatriyas? Should they be specially trained?



Prabhupāda: Well, a devotee is neither kṣatriya, neither brāhmaṇa; he's servant of Kṛṣṇa. That's all. These brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, they are on the material platform. On the spiritual platform, there is no such distinction. Spiritual platform, the master and the servant. You remain a servant. If you have to act as kṣatriya, act like that. If you act as a brāhmaṇa, act like that. If you... That is our superficial... A devotee's always servant of God. Whatever service is required, as a brāhmaṇa, as a kṣatriya, as a vaiśya, it doesn't matter. We are ready. It does not mean that because we are fighting, we become kṣatriya. No. Sa guṇān... These are the divisions of the three qualities. But a devotee's above... [break] ...all these things. Kṛṣṇa's devotees are above all these things. You have to become a pure devotee, not a kṣatriya, not a brāhmaṇa, not an all... That is not required. All right.



Devotee (2): You said that one mistake of the neophyte devotee is to think that he is suffering under some condition, some distress, and that it is due to the circumstances under which the distress occurred. And my question is, Can the change of one's service, can changing the type of service one's performing, can that help him to achieve the desired perfection in relationship with the spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa?



Prabhupāda: So what is the real proposal? I do not follow. Why don't you say frankly? This is... Why in a (laughs) jugglery way? State what is the fact?



Devotee (2): Well, like, if one is in a big temple, he's a cook in a big temple.



Prabhupāda: Yes. In a big temple, the cooker and the man who is worshiping the Deity, and the man who is sweeping over, they're all one. There is no distinction. There is no such material dis... In the material world, if somebody's doing nice job, he is greater, and if somebody's not nice job, he's smaller. In spiritual world, there is no such distinction.



Devotee (2): So one is like that, in a comfortable situation...



Prabhupāda: Comfortable situation is also sense gratification. Any situation, we shall have to serve Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not that "If it is comfortable to me, I shall do it." That is sense gratification. That is sense gratification. That is not spiritual; that is material. "Comfortable or uncomfortable, it doesn't matter. If Kṛṣṇa wants it, I must do it." That is wanted. That is wanted. As soon as I discriminate "This is comfortable, this is uncomfortable," that is material.



Devotee (3): Prabhupāda, how can we know what type of service Kṛṣṇa...



Prabhupāda: Therefore you have got spiritual master. Why he is there? Therefore you have to accept spiritual master who will give you direction. You cannot do it. If you manufacture your own..., then go to hell. Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau, tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ [ŚU 6.23]. Kṛṣṇa is there; guru is there. Why should you manufacture your own way? If you are sincere, Kṛṣṇa will dictate from within. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. Find out this verse. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam.



Pradyumna: 10.10



Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇa is ready to give you instruction. The spiritual master is ready. Why should you do at your whims, and do something wrong and go to hell? Yes?



Bali-mardana:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me."



Prabhupāda: That's all. Kṛṣṇa is within you. He'll give you. As soon as you become a pure devotee, all dictation will come from within. And besides that, Kṛṣṇa is helping, inside and outside. Outside is spiritual master; inside Kṛṣṇa Himself. Where is the difficulty? Simply you have to become sincere. That's all. Everything is there. But if we become cheaters, we do, say something before Kṛṣṇa, before the spiritual master, before fire, and do something else, then there is no question of dictation from Kṛṣṇa. You do your sat-san(?). Sva-karmaṇā, by your own work, you suffer or enjoy. There is no enjoyment, simply suffering. That's all. Material world, there is no question of enjoyment. Simply we concoct, "This is enjoyment." This is not enjoyment. It is suffering.



Devotee (4): Śrīla Prabhupāda, you spoke about the three stages of chanting? And you were speaking about the middle stage, the clearing stage? Is that... I didn't quite understand how that was explained. Is that like we're trying not to be offensive. It's offensive, but we're trying...



Prabhupāda: No, you do not try to be offensive, but because your past habit, you become offensive. Therefore ten kinds of offenses should be avoided. That we speak and give in list when initiation. There should be... Ten kinds of offenses should be avoided. Guror avajñā śruti-śāstra-nindanam, sāmyaṁ śubha-kriyā api pramādaḥ, nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. These are things. The most offensive is that "Kṛṣṇa... By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, I become sinless. So in the morning let me do, or in the, at night, let me do all sinful activities; in the morning I shall chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and it will, everything will be nullified." This is the greatest offense. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. "Because I am chanting, therefore I can do anything sinful. It will be counteracted." This is the greatest rascaldom, sinful activities. Yes. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. Pāpa-buddhiḥ. Nāma... By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra we become immediately sinless. That's a fact. But why shall we commit again? Just like the Christian people, they go to the church, confession: "Sir, I did this, all these sinful activities last week." "All right, pay me something." Again, from Monday, beginning sinful activities; come on Sunday. These are not allowed. You can be excused, but don't do again. If you continue to do it, that is not very... Then you have to suffer. Once or twice, you may be excused. But if you continue to do that, you must be punished. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. (indistinct question by devotee) Yes, everything under the direction of the spiritual master. Why you are asking? (indistinct) You do not know these things? Why do you ask this question? It must be, according to the direction of the spiritual master. Why do you ask that question? Therefore, ādau gurvāśrayam. Whatever... [break] (end)





740128SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.35

-

Hawaii, January 28, 1974



Devotee: (leads chanting, etc.)



kā vā saheta virahaṁ puruṣottamasya

premāvaloka-rucira-smita-valgu-jalpaiḥ

sthairyaṁ samānam aharan madhu-māninīnāṁ

romotsavo mama yad-aṅghri-viṭaṅkitāyāḥ

[SB 1.16.35]



Translation: "Who can, therefore, tolerate the pangs of separation from that Supreme Personality of Godhead? He could conquer the gravity and passionate wrath of His sweethearts like Satyabhāmā and others by His sweet smile of love, pleasing glance and hearty appeals. When he traversed my (the earth's) surface, I would be immersed in the dust of His lotus feet and thus would be sumptuously covered with grass, which appeared like hairs standing on me out of pleasure."



Prabhupāda: Kā vā saheta virahaṁ puruṣottamasya. Puruṣottama. Puruṣa and prakṛti, there are two words. Prakṛti means "enjoyed" or "the energy," and puruṣa means "the enjoyer" and, or "the powerful." So we are prakṛti, we living entities, we are prakṛti. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: prakṛteḥ hi me parām vidhi, apareyam itas tu prakṛti me...



Devotee: Prakṛtiṁ vidhi me parām.



Prabhupāda: Prakṛtiṁ vidhi me parām. So, puruṣāṁ śāśvatam, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person enjoyer, puruṣa. Puruṣa has got different features: personal expansion, personal feature, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Expansion feature also two kinds: svāṁśa, vibhinnāṁśa, His personal expansion and separated expansion. We are all separated expansion, vibhinnāṁśa, a small particle. Just like the sun, we are. The sunshine means combination of, what is called, sparking, sparking molecules, very small. The sunshine means they are not homogenous; they are small particles of shining, part and parcel of the sun. Similarly, we living entities, we are like that-a small particle, part and parcel of God. So we are also brightening, shining. We are not dull. But on account of our combination with the material nature, we have been covered. Therefore our shining quality is now stopped. Shining quality is now stopped. That is our forgetfulness about our relationship with the Supreme puruṣa, puruṣottama, uttama puruṣa. Uttama, madhyama, and adhyama. There are three grades of puruṣa. We are the lowest grade, adhyama. So, because we are adhyama puruṣa, therefore there is chance of our brightness being sometimes covered. But we can again revive our brightness and shine with the Supreme Person. As the sun and the sunshine, they are together shining, there is light, similarly, when we are again posted in our own constitutional position, and Kṛṣṇa is like the sun and we are shining particles, then our life is successful. That is wanted.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes, the puruṣottama, to take us back. "Why you are now covered, your shining is stopped? You are morose. You are suffering threefold miserable condition of material existence. Why you are rotting here?" Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa comes Himself. He is within everyone's heart. He's instructing. He is ready to instruct, but He'll only instruct to such persons who have engaged themselves in devotional service. Kṛṣṇa is there, just like the master is there and many workers are there also. The master speaks to the important persons, not to the ordinary person. Similarly, the master is there in everyone's heart.

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati

brahmāyan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



Whatever we are getting for our sense enjoyment, that is with the sanction, sanction of the puruṣa, the Supreme Person. The paramātmā feature is madhyama puruṣa. He is purusottama. Puruṣottama is the Supreme Person, and the Supreme Person by His expansion as the Supersoul is present in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61]. He's guiding, as friend. He's guiding as friend, but He speaks directly with the living entity as soon as we are purified by devotional service. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. That if..., that qualification we have to attain, then Kṛṣṇa, puruṣottama, will speak from within, just like He spoke from within of Brahma: tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1].



We have to become qualified to talk with the Supreme Person, and He will give us advice. He's giving us advice. He's ready to give us advice from within and from without-from within as Supersoul and from without as the spiritual master. Therefore it is said, guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Both things are required-guru and Kṛṣṇa. If we are sincere, if we actually want Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is within your heart. He will help you in meeting the spiritual master, His representative. And by the instruction of the spiritual master, you will develop more and more your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, your original position. This is called devotional service, or bhakti-latā. Bhakti-latā-bīja. Just like one small creeper, first of all to sow the seed and water it, then gradually it spouts and gradually, I mean to say, grows. Similarly, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and His representative, guru, spiritual master, you get the seed of bhakti-latā, devotional service, and if you sow it in the heart, mālī haya sei bīja kare āropaṇa. Just like if you take a seed, nice seed, and if you sow it, and pour water little, little, then it will grow and it will become a big tree or big creeper and give you the fruits. You'll enjoy it. Similarly, the bhakti-latā-bīja is given by the spiritual master in cooperation with Kṛṣṇa. That is initiation. This initiation arrangement means sowing the seed of devotional service. Now, if you get, if you think that after getting initiation, "I have become perfect. Now again, whatever nonsense I was doing, I shall go on doing it," then it will be useless. It will be useless. Suppose if you get a seed. If you don't take proper care, water it nicely, then it will not grow; it will be stunned there. You have to take, mālī haya sei bīja kar āropaṇa śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana [Cc. Madhya 19.152].

So this initiation means by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa though His agent, the spiritual master, you are getting the seed of bhakti-latā. So you have to take care of yourself by the instruction. Not that, "Now I have got a spiritual master and I have got the initiation, my business is finished. Let me do all nonsense." No. This initiation process, we take promise from you that no illicit sex, no meat eating, no gambling, no intoxication-before the fire. The fire ceremony means, fire is also representation of yajña-puruṣa, and through fire, the yajña-puruṣa eats, puruṣottama. So there is fire, there is spiritual master, there is śāstra, there is Kṛṣṇa, before-they are all witness. Just like before the high-court judge you promise, "Yes I'll speak... Whatever I'll speak in this court, it is all truth." So this promise the judge knows, and he gives his judgment on that. Similarly, these promises must be kept; otherwise it will be useless. That is your business, the same thing, guru-kṛṣṇa..., that by the mercy of guru, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, you get the thing. Now to use the thing properly, that will depend on you. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. I can give you very nice thing, but you keep it locked up in your treasury and never use it, then what will you do? Mālī haya sei bīja kare āropaṇa. You have to sow it and pour water and see that it is nicely growing. This..., that is very nicely described in rupa-śikṣā, mālī hay sei bīja kare āropaṇa. So don't think that after the official ceremony of initiation your business and my business is finished. No. The business begins. It is not the finishing; it is the beginning. So if you don't go farther, ādau guru-āśrayaḥ... The beginning is to take shelter of guru. That is the beginning. And, adau guru-āśrayaḥ, then the student must be very inquisitive, sad-dharma-pṛcchā. Sādhu-mārga-anugamanam. You'll find all these things, instruction, in The Nectar of Devotion. They are there.

So today some of you are going to be initiated. This is the beginning of your spiritual life. But if you don't take care for farther development, then that is up to you. You may fall down. Because māyā is very strong. Māyā will place so many impediments. She does not like that so easily you go back to home, back to Godhead. That is māyā's business. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī [Bg. 7.14]. Just like police. Police business is to see the criminal that is actually, he is in his original consciousness to become law-abiding citizen. Otherwise police will go on punishing him. That is police affair. Similarly, this māyā is the police agent. Her business is to chastise you. Every moment this is going on. Ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa brahmite kona bhāgyavān jīva.

So this material life means within the jurisdiction of māyā, and she's always punishing us. Anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli gela ataeva māyā tare (indistinct). Because we have tried to forget Kṛṣṇa, that is not good for us. That is also explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,

ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād

ātma-prabhavam īśvaram

avajānanti na bhajanty

sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ patanty adhaḥ



I'll give you practical example. Just like this finger is part and parcel of my body, your body, but if it becomes diseased, then it cannot act as my finger. It becomes a source of pains only. Then sometime doctor advises, physician, or the surgeon, that "Unless you cut off this finger, the whole hand will be faulty," and you have to cut off to save the other fingers. Similarly, we are all part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. When we become disobedient or diseased... To become disobedient to God means that is diseased condition, because we have to become obedient to somebody, even if our so-called disobedient state, don't care for God. All right don't care for God, but care for somebody else. That is obligatory. You cannot say that "I am..., I don't care for anybody." That is not possible. If you don't care God, then you have to care for somebody else. If you don't care for the state law, then you have to take care of the police department. You cannot say that "I am independent." That is not possible. So, our position is forgetting God. We have been kicked out constantly by māyā. The māyā has given us the senses, and the senses are dictating us, "Do this, do that, do this, do that," and we become servant of our senses.



So two things are there. You are servant by constitution. Don't think that you are master. But when you forget or give up the service of the Lord, then you become servant of your senses, or māyā. This is your position. So when you voluntarily again give up this service of the senses and surrender to the master of the senses, Hṛṣīkeśa... Kṛṣṇa's another name is Hṛṣīkeśa. Hṛṣīka-īśa. Hṛṣīka means senses. Senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me 'cyuta [Bg. 1.21]. Acyuta and hṛṣīkeśa, (indistinct), that is one word, hṛṣīkeśa. So Hṛṣīkeśa is the master of senses, Kṛṣṇa. So when in our present condition we have forgotten our master of senses but we have taken senses as our master, this is our position. We have forgotten the master of the senses, but we have accepted the senses as our master. So this is, this has to be purified: not to become the servant of the senses, but to become servant of the master of the senses. Then you also become master of the senses. That purificatory process is called devotional service, or bhakti. That is described in Nārada Pañcarātra: sarvopādhi vinirmuktaṁ tat paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170].

Now, how we have become the servant of our senses? On account of so many designation: "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian," "I am this," "I am that"-so many designation. So if you... Designation means to become servant of the senses. Designation means to become the servant. So we have to forget our designation. From this initiation point of view, everyone should consider that "I am no more American," "I am no more Indian," "I am no more this or that"-"No, I am Hindu; he is Christian"-"I am servant of Kṛṣṇa." Then you become designationless-"I am servant of Kṛṣṇa, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya Kṛṣṇa dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]." Then you become designationless, and immediately purified. Sarvopādhi vinirmuktaṁ tat paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Nirmalam means spotless. When the spotless, you become spotless, then hṛṣīkena... You have got your senses, then your senses are engaged in the servant of the master of the senses. That is called bhakti. Hṛṣīkena hṛṣīkeśa sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170].

So these things are all very elaborately, nicely explained in our books. So those who are going to be initiated, they should take it as a vow, not to fall down again. Catch Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet very tightly and you'll not fall down. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. So be determined. Don't make it a farce, that "Today I am initiated and tomorrow I again I give up everything and again grow my hair and then go to hell." No. Don't do that. If you want to be serious, then the path is clear for going back to home.

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



As soon as you engage yourself in devotional service you become purified of all material contamination. Sa guṇan samatītyaitān. We are being troubled by the three modes of material nature, but if we stick to our devotional service... It is not very difficult to follow the four regulative principles. No illicit sex. There is no question of stopping sex, but no illicit sex. Unfortunately, they're so unfortunate that although they have got their wife, they go to another girl, and although the girl has one husband, he goes, she goes to another man. So unfortunate. These things should be stopped if you'll want to be serious; otherwise make a farce and do whatever you like. I cannot give you protection. That is not possible.



So you must have to follow these rules and regulation if you are serious. Then take initiation. Otherwise don't make farce, don't make farce. That is my request. One has to be very determined, bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ. This word is used in the Bhāgavata: dṛḍha-vratāḥ, strong determination: "Yes, in this life I shall go back to home, back to Godhead." This is determination. And what is the difficulty? No difficulty. Chants Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. You are taking the beads, sixteen rounds. You can be finished, utmost two hours or three hours. So you have got twenty-four hours. If you want to sleep, of course, twenty-tlree lours, that is another thing. You have to minimize your sleeping. If you cannot finish sixteen rounds, then you must not sleep on that day, you must not eat. Why don't you forget to eat, forget? Why do you forget chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa? This is negligence, aparādha, offense. Rather, you should forget your sleeping and eating, and must finish sixteen rounds. This is called determination. This is called determined. So you are welcome to take initiation, but if you are neglectful, if you want to make it a farce, that is your business. I cannot give you any protection.

Thank you very much.

Devotee: Questions, Prabhupāda?



Prabhupāda: Hm?



Devotee: Any questions?



Prabhupāda: No questions now. (end)





740130SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.36

-

Tokyo, January 30, 1974



Prabhupāda: So there are others coming? Eh? Where is Sañjaya? Class, not always everyone attends?



Devotee (1): It's usually everyone.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee (1): Everyone.



Devotee (2): Gopāla Swami is the only one.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee (2): Just Gopāla Swami is not here.



Prabhupāda: Not here? Why? Where he is?



Devotee (2): He's straightening your room.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee (2): He's cleaning your room.



Prabhupāda: And our paṇḍitajī swami? Where is he?



Devotee (3): Probably with him.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee (3): I don't know where he is.



Prabhupāda: Call him.



Devotee (3): You were on verse 36, Chapter Sixteen.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tayor evaṁ kathayatoḥ

pṛthivī-dharmayos tadā

parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ

prāptaḥ prācīṁ sarasvatīm

[SB 1.16.36]



Translation: "While the earth and the personality of religion were thus engaged in conversation, the saintly king Mahārāja Parīkṣit reached the shore of the Sarasvatī River, which flowed towards the east."



Prabhupāda: So we are discussing the conversation between mother earth and Dharmarāja. The subject matter was that the earthly planet was very much morose on account of arrival of Kali-yuga. (baby fussing) (aside:) It will be disturbing.



Devotee (4): Disturbance? (mother and baby leave)



Prabhupāda: So we have discussed the symptoms of Kali-yuga, this age called Kali-yuga. As there are seasonal changes, similarly, in the duration of this material existence, there are seasonal changes. That everyone has got experience. There is summer, there is winter, there is fall, there is spring. So generally the seasonal changes are accepted as Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga and Kali-yuga. Just like in each year we have got different seasons, changes, similarly, each millennium there are so many changes of Kali-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, Satya-yuga.



So Satya-yuga means the age of truthfulness. Satya means truthfulness. And Kali-yuga means the age of disagreement, the age of disagreement. So at the present moment we are in the Kali-yuga. Everyone disagrees with the other. Even the so-called disciple also disagrees with the spiritual master. This is the influence of Kali-yuga. One becomes disciple of a spiritual master, then he whimsically disagrees. So why, if you disagree, why should you accept somebody as spiritual master? That is not very good. That is the way of not being successful. We are chanting every day that yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. By satisfying the spiritual master, one can satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yasya prasādāt, "by the satisfaction of the spiritual master." Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam **. One of the symptom is this, that spiritual master is so bona fide. Before accepting somebody as spiritual master you must know about his bona fides. That time is allowed. It is said in the śāstra that if you like to accept somebody as spiritual master, you should associate with him at least for one year, see how things are going. If you follow of course others, that is also good. But personally, it is advised that you just remain with the proposed spiritual master for at least one year, so that the spiritual master is also given chance to study you, whether you are acceptable. This is the process.

But when one leaves a spiritual master, the spiritual master, there may be some reason. That reason is also given in the śāstra, gurur api avaliptasya kāryākāryam ajānataḥ(?). Kārya akārya. If the spiritual master does not know what is actually to be done, what is actually not to be done, and he acts against the rules and regulations of the śāstra, then such spiritual master may be given up. But so long you do not find the spiritual master is doing against the principles of śāstra or guru, then if you give up the company of spiritual master, that is not good for you. That is your downfall. First of all, you must take sufficient time to study the movements of a spiritual master. Spiritual master is one-the spiritual master. Because there may be many spiritual master, but if their business is one-to satisfy Kṛṣṇa-although they're many, they're one. Although they're many, they are still one. The principle is one: to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Such is the position of spiritual master, that yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ: ** if you try to please your spiritual master, then God, Kṛṣṇa, becomes pleased. That is natural.

So in the Kali-yuga why there should be... In Kali-yuga even with the spiritual master there is disagreement. That is due to influence of Kali. That is my point. So this influence of Kali-yuga has been discussed in so many pages in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Last it was discussed that the good qualification of Kali, of human being... Human being, I am speaking, because amongst the living entities, human being is considered to be the highest. So the mother earth was lamenting that people have lost their good qualification. They cannot be lost, but it is, by the influence of Kali-yuga, it is now covered. Satyam, śaucam, dayā, that twenty-six nice qualifications. We have discussed all these things. Here (reads):

satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntis

tyāgaḥ santoṣa ārjavam

śamo damas tapaḥ sāmyaṁ

titikṣoparatiḥ śrutam



jñānaṁ viraktir aiśvaryaṁ

śauryaṁ tejo balaṁ smṛtiḥ

svātantryaṁ kauśalaṁ kāntir

dhairyaṁ mārdavam eva ca



So, on account of this Kali-yuga, the good qualification of human society will be lost. Thinking this future of the present age, Mother Earth was lamenting and talking with Dharmarāja. At that time Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, er, Mahārāja Parīkṣit arrived on that spot. This is the verse.



Tayor evaṁ kathayatoḥ: while the Dharmarāja and the earthly planet was talking between themselves, pṛthivī... Pṛthivī. Tayor evaṁ kathayatoḥ, pṛthivī, the earthly planet and dharmayos tadā. Tadā: "that time," parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ. Parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ. There were many rājarṣis. Rājarṣi means although they're occupying the royal position... Rāja. Rāja and prajā. Rāja means king or the ruler. Here is also regulative principle. Why a king is accepted? Why a governor is accepted? Why a president is...? Even in this day of democracy-we have abolished the system of monarchy-but still, they select somebody to become a monarch, a king, or to occupy the post of the king. That is called president. Why? Because unless there is one head, or on the head of the government, who can actually control... Control means whether citizens are following, executing the rules and regulation, the law of the state. Therefore a certain man, qualified man, who is, who enjoys the confidence of the people, he is accepted as the king. This is the position. So such president, king, or the executive head, must be a saintly person. Therefore here it is said, parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ. Rājarṣi means those who are on the top of the government, he must be ṛṣi, saintly person. Just like this, our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, the head of the institution must be a saintly person. Otherwise how he can become a controller? Controller there must be. That what is the qualification of the controller? He must be a saintly person. He must know what is the principle of life, what is the value of life, why one should be controlled by somebody else. These things are required to become qualified.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit, parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ. In those days all the kings were like saintly person. They are not ordinary person. Why saintly person required? Because saintly person means he knows what is actually good and what is not good. The actually good of human life is that he's engaged in developing devotional service. That is actually good. In another place of this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated, sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. Paro dharmaḥ. Para means superior, transcendental, or which is para and apara. Para and apara. These words are used. Para means greater and apara means lower, and para means superior and apara means inferior. Here it is spoken, "There are many types of religious systems, but they are apara, not very good, inferior, inferior type." Religion cannot be inferior, but it is sometimes made into inferiority because without such kind inferior type of religion, the inferior class of men will not accept it, will not accept it.

Just like in religious system, in any religious system, the killing of animal there is. In every religious system, there is. But why there is this killing of a living entity? It is not good. But why in the religious system there is permission for killing animal? So that is explained. The explanation is, that a person who is a staunch meat-eater, he cannot give up meat-eating, so... At the same time he wants to be religious. This is the position. For such person it is enjoined, just like in Vedic system, "All right, if you want to eat meat, at the same time you want to become religious, then you worship Goddess Kālī. You cannot worship Viṣṇu." Because he's a meat-eater he cannot approach pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān. The Supreme Personality is the supreme pure. So this meat-eater is impure. He cannot approach the pure. That is not possible. Therefore he is advised to approach some agent of the pure, some śakti, or just like Goddess Kālī. Goddess Kālī is the śakti or the agent, potency. She has got also business: to cut the heads of the demons. You have seen the Goddess Kālī's picture, muṇḍa-mālā. She's garlanded with the heads of the demons. Have you seen? Any one of you?

Devotee (3): I have seen kālī-pūjā.



Prabhupāda: Yes. But her business is to cut off the heads of the demons. She is carrying one head in this hand, and in this hand she's carrying a chopper, and her business is to cut the heads of the demons. But she's also the agent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How she's agent? Because God has got two business: paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. Duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ, māyayāpahṛta-jñānā āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. For them the goddess Kālī is engaged to cut their heads, kill them. That is also Kṛṣṇa's agent. Vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, they have to be finished. But, by finishing them, they are also elevated. Finishing means finishing their sinful activities, finishing their sinful activ... Just like... It is very easy to understand. Just like a person who has committed murder, the state law is, "Finish him, otherwise he will commit another murder." If he's encouraged... Therefore, by finishing him, there are two purposes. One purpose is served that because he has done something very grievous sinful activity, by sacrificing his own life, he becomes relieved from the sinful reaction. That is the law in the Manu-saṁhitā. I have not manufactured. The murderer is condemned to death just to save him from many following resultant actions of sinful activities. If in this life, he gives his life, "Life for life," then he's safe. In the next life, he takes his birth clean, not suffering any more on account of the sinful activities. This is the statement in Manu-saṁhitā. Another instruction is that if this murderer is killed, then he will be saved from committing again murder.



So the vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, when a demon is killed then he's saved, the people are saved, and everything is good. But people cannot understand that "Why God is killing the demons and giving protection to the devotees?" God is equal to everyone. Kṛṣṇa says, samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29]. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am equal to everyone." If God is not equal to everyone, then how He can be God? He is God who is equal. Na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ. So when God is killing somebody, and God is patting something, somebody, that does not mean He has got two equal behavior for two persons. No. His behavior is the same: affection. But to kill this demon means to stop him from further sinful activities and get him..., give him release from the sinful activities he has done. Therefore it is His mercy. But one has to study very carefully. Because God is absolute, there is no difference between His activities with the demon and giving protection to a devotee. He is giving protection to the demon also, by killing him. But one cannot understand.

So in this Kali-yuga, rājarṣi, this rājarṣi... Rājarṣi, he's saintly person. Now, we'll find this Parīkṣit Mahārāja, as soon as he'll find this one demon is trying to kill another cow, he immediately took his sword. If he's a ṛṣi, one may inquire that "If he's a saintly person, how is that he's going to kill another person?" So killing is not always bad. But it is not to be judged by you. It is to be judged by the same saintly person: when killing is required, when not killing is required. So that is the qualification of the kṣatriya. Kṣatriya means one who gives protection. Just like when there is attack in a country, the king or the president gives protection to the citizens by killing the enemies. So his business is to give protection to the citizens. So it may be sometimes by killing others, he gives protection. We have discussed many times the violence and nonviolence. Non... These are contradictory terms, but when these two contradictory things are found in saintly persons, we must know they are all the same, absolute. And what to speak of when these actions are found in Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the absolute nature. Absolute, to understand the absolute nature means two plus two equal two, one plus one equal to one, and one minus one equal to one. This is absolute understanding. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya. One is complete number, pūrṇam. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya. And if you take away complete one, still it is one. This is absolute understanding. It is not that one has been taken away from one; therefore it has become zero. No. That is material. That is relative.

So parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ prāptaḥ prācīṁ sarasvatīm. In India, all the rivers, they're coming from the Himalaya, western side, and flowing toward the eastern side, going to the Bay of Bengal. So prācīm, flowing to the eastern side, Sarasvatī... This is also one of the famous rivers. There are many rivers in India. Especially there is sacred rivers-Ganges, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Godāvarī, Kāverī, Kṛṣṇā, Narmadā, like that. Each river is considered very sacred. So it is understood that Parīkṣit Mahārāja met the Dharmarāja and the earthly planet, talking together on the bank of the river Sarasvatī.

That's all right. Thank you very much. (devotees pay obeisances) Any questions?

Devotee (1): Is Dharmarāja King Yudhiṣṭhira?



Prabhupāda: That King Yudhiṣṭhira is the son of Dharmarāja. He is the son. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was begotten by Dharmarāja.



Devotee (1): Vidura was also the...



Prabhupāda: No, Vidura was begotten by Vyāsadeva.



Devotee (1): He was also Dharmarāja?



Prabhupāda: No, he was not Dharmarāja. Oh, yes, yes, you are right. He was Dharmarāja.



Devotee (1): Yamarāja.



Prabhupāda: Yamarāja, yes. By the cursing of some great ṛṣi, he became a śūdra. Yes. I thought that you were asking whether Vidura was begotten by Dharmarāja. No. He's Dharmarāja. Any question? What is the name of that boy?



Devotee (1): Sañjaya.



Prabhupāda: Dhanañjaya?



Devotee (1): Sañjaya.



Prabhupāda: Sañjaya?



Devotee (1): Yes.



Prabhupāda: Who has given you this name?



Sañjaya: You have, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Sañjaya uvāca. (laughter) Sañjaya...



Sañjaya: Having heard your wondrous dialogue, Śrīla Prabhupāda, my hair is standing on end.



Prabhupāda: What is that?



Sañjaya: Having heard your holy dialogue, Śrīla Prabhupāda, my hair is standing on end, like Sañjaya says in the Gītā.



Prabhupāda: What is that special...? Which portion?



Sañjaya: This is the last ślokas of Bhagavad-gītā, when the...



Devotee (1): He's relating the conversation to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the final conclusion of Bhagavad-gītā, saying, "After hearing this holy dialogue, my hair is standing on end."



Prabhupāda: Oh.



Devotee (1): In Bhagavad-gītā.



Prabhupāda: Ha, ha. You want to know about something, about that verse?



Sañjaya: No, I just stated that...



Prabhupāda: Oh.



Sañjaya: ...after hearing your lecture, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Every instruction is like that. We should follow the instruction, and if you cannot understand, then consult the spiritual master. Not to give up this association of the spiritual master and interpret in your own way. That is rascaldom. Don't do that. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā,



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



If there is any doubt in understanding the Vedic literature, then you try to understand from the person who knows it, tattva-darśī, who has seen actually the truth. Upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ. One who has actually seen the truth. And, how to approach him? Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena. By surrendering, by giving service, and questioning. Question must be preceded and followed by..., preceded by surrender, and followed by service. In the middle, there may be question. Therefore, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **, we have to please the spiritual master by service and surrender, and then it will be very nice position. If the spiritual master sees that the disciple is a surrendered soul, and he's rendering service to his best capacity, then the answer will be very liberal and convincing, and he will be very glad to answer the question, if it is supported by these two things: surrender, and paripraśnena, and sevayā. Tad viddhi praṇipātena [Bg. 4.34]. The first beginning is praṇipāta. And what is this, that I give up the company of my spiritual master and I invent my own ways of life and own interpretation? That will not help. That will not...



Devotee (3): The war on the battlefield of Kurukṣetra, that lasted for a period of eighteen days?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Devotee (3): And that happened five thousand years ago when Kṛṣṇa was on earth. Is that happening now in some other material universe, the same battle?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Devotee (3): Can we enter into that, or see that?



Prabhupāda: Yes, if you go there.



Devotee (3): We have to... We leave the universe. But then we are associating directly with Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna?



Prabhupāda: Yes. You can associate with Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna every twenty-four hours, by reading Bhagavad-gītā. Why you require to go there? It is already here. You see. You read the Bhagavad-gītā, and you are immediately in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. His is instructing. That was the instruction. Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted. You know that story? Illiterate brāhmaṇa was reading Bhagavad-gītā. So he did not know; he was not literary. But because his spiritual master..., he has so staunch faith in the spiritual master... Just see. His spiritual master said that "You read, daily, eighteen chapters of Bhagavad-gītā." Spiritual master knew that he was illiterate, but still he asked him, "You read, eighteen chapters, there will be..." So what can he do? The spiritual master has ordered. So he was simply making a show of reading, "uh-uh-uḥ," like this. So this other friends were criticizing, "Oh, Mr. Such-and-such, how you are reading Bhagavad-gītā?" He knows that this man... His friend is criticizing him, so he did not answer. But when Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked him, "My dear brāhmaṇa, what you are reading?" He knew that this gentleman, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, was really inquisitive, so he explained the whole thing, that "I am trying to read Bhagavad-gītā, but I am illiterate. My Guru Mahārāja ordered me to read; therefore I am reading. But actually I cannot read." So frankly he admits. This is staunch faith in spiritual master. He knew, his spiritual master knew that he is illiterate, and he knew also that "I cannot read Bhagavad-gītā." But still he was trying to read because his spiritual master has said. This is called staunch. Yasya prasādāt. "He has said. I have to satisfy him. I am incompetent-I cannot read-but he has said, therefore I must do it." This is called yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **.



So practical example... Just like this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and I have simply be (indistinct) human being, "What can I do?" But I tried my best, because my spiritual master said that "You go and try to preach in English." So I tried my best, that's all. I have no qualification. So this is very nice point, yasya prasādāt. We have to try our best to... I may not be able to do that, but that endeavor will be appreciated by Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master. That is required. I may be most incompetent. Everyone is incompetent. Who can satisfy Kṛṣṇa, this unlimited? But simply what Kṛṣṇa says, if we do, that will satisfy Him. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. The guidance is, the spiritual master, he orders that man-manāḥ, "Always think of Me," bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, "just become My devotee, worship Me, and offer your obeisances unto Me." And here is the Deity. So that is our business. Think of always, "Here is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, here is Jagannātha, here is Lord Caitanya." What is the difficulty? In the temple we get direct contact, and if I go out from the temple and lie down on the station, is that very good, do you think? (laughter) Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. So will it help me to think of Him twenty-four hours by going to the railway station or in the temple? This is common sense. Any sensible man can understand that "Here is Kṛṣṇa, here is Rādhārāṇī, worship is going on, the devotees are offering prasādam, always they are constantly engaged-that is man-manā bhaktaḥ." Or "I give up the association of the devotees and temple and go to hell, that will help me?" This is common sense thing. I manufacture my own way by the advice of some, another rascal. This will not be good. This, this is very good, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. "Always think of Me." Here is the chance. As soon as I see... As I advance in my spiritual life, I'll see, "Here is Kṛṣṇa." It is not the doll Kṛṣṇa. Doll Kṛṣṇa is for the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī. But one who is advanced, he sees Kṛṣṇa. Just like you have read the story of, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, two brāhmaṇas went to Vṛndāvana. So the devotee is seeing, "Here is Kṛṣṇa." When the older brāhmaṇa said that "I promise," the younger said, "Sir, you are talking before Kṛṣṇa. If you regret from this promise, it will be great offense." Because he was seeing Kṛṣṇa. And when he was asked, "Who was your witness?" he said, "Kṛṣṇa is witness." And his eldest son took the opportunity, "All right, if your Kṛṣṇa comes and gives witness, then my sister will be married with you." Because he is atheist. He was thinking, "Kṛṣṇa is not coming. Kṛṣṇa is not coming. It is made of marble statue, how Kṛṣṇa will come?" So he thought that "I have given him some chance which he will never be fulfilled." But to fulfill the words of the devotee, Kṛṣṇa came. Therefore He is called Sākṣi-Gopāla, witness Gopāla. So we must have faith. We must have faith and discharge duties according to the śāstra, guru, sādhu, then our spiritual life is guaranteed. If we manufacture something out of whims, that will not help us. This is the point.

Devotee (3): Śrīla Prabhupāda, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it's stated that the Supersoul is measured from the end of the thumb to the end of the ring finger, how does this change take place in the different sizes of species of living entities in this material creation?



Prabhupāda: He can become the smaller than the smallest, the higher than..., the bigger than the biggest. That is Kṛṣṇa's power. (devotees pay obeisances) So, you can go? (end)





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 2.1: Lectures



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1

--

New York, April 10, 1969

690410SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1

-

New York, April 10, 1969



Prabhupāda: Feeling all right?



Devotees: Jaya!



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. Mantra?



Pradyumna: Oṁ namo bhaga...



Prabhupāda: Not this. First of all Īśopaniṣad. Yes. Īśopaniṣad. (devotees and Prabhupāda chant together Invocation and first two mantras of Īśopaniṣad [Īśo mantra 1, Īśo mantra 2] That's all. That's all. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now oṁ namo bhagavate, chant.



Devotees: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.



Prabhupāda: Yes? (Prabhupāda leads devotees in chanting SB 2.1.1-5)



Prabhupāda: Again from the beginning, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. (devotees chant ślokas in unison. Prabhupāda corrects them in third verse) So Gargamuni, you can read where you left yesterday.



Gargamuni: Page one. "Similarly, in the Second Canto, the post-creation cosmic manifestation is described. The different planetary systems are described in the Second Canto as different parts of the universal body of the Lord. For this reason, the Second Canto can be called "The Cosmic Manifestation." There are ten chapters in the Second Canto, and in these ten chapters the purpose of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the different symptoms of this purpose are narrated. In the first chapter the glories of chanting are described and the process of meditation on the universal form of the Lord by the neophyte devotees is hinted. In the first verse Śukadeva Gosvāmī replies to the questions of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who asked him about one's duty at the point of his death. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was glad to receive Śukadeva Gosvāmī and he was proud of being a descendant of Arjuna, the intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa. Personally, he was very humble and meek, but he expressed his gladness that Lord Kṛṣṇa was very kind to the sons of Pāṇḍu, or his grandfathers, especially his own grandfather Arjuna. And because Lord Kṛṣṇa is always pleased with His family, therefore at the verge of Mahārāja Parīkṣit's death, Śukadeva Gosvāmī was sent to help him in the process of self-realization."



Prabhupāda: This is confirming the statement of Caitanya-caritāmṛta, that guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Two things required, Guru and Kṛṣṇa, to advance in the spiritual realization or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So here it is, Kṛṣṇa is pleased in the family of the Pāṇḍavas. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going to die. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was grandson of Arjuna, and he was also a devotee. So therefore by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, a bona fide spiritual master is sent to Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Guru-Kṛṣṇa. When one is sincere, then Kṛṣṇa is sitting within everyone. As soon as He sees that "Here is a sincere soul. He's seeking after Me," so He manifests Himself out externally as spiritual master. The spiritual master is therefore representative of Kṛṣṇa. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Two things. Without being representative of Kṛṣṇa, nobody can become spiritual master. Kṛṣṇa-śakti vinā nahe tāra pravartana. Without being empowered by Kṛṣṇa, nobody can preach, nobody can become a spiritual master.



So here Śukadeva Gosvāmī sent by Kṛṣṇa on the verge of his death. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. This opportunity is obtained by a very fortunate person. Because the living entities are wandering within this universe, packed up, from one planet to another, from one species life to another species of life. In this way, he is wandering. He is not fixed up. Today I am American or Indian, tomorrow or next birth, I do not know what is going to happen to me. But this body for good will be finished. I'll never get this body. I'll get another body. Maybe a demigod's body or a tree's body or a plant's body or animal's body-I must get another body. So the living entity is wandering in this way, vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni. Just like we change our dress from one dress to another, similarly we are changing different positions by the influence of māyā. Māyā is forcing me. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi [Bg. 3.27]. As soon as I am desiring something, immediately my body is formed. Immediately a particular type of body begins to form, and as soon as I am mature to change, my next body I get according to my desire. Therefore we should always desire Kṛṣṇa. Then from this life, the Kṛṣṇa-approaching body or the spiritual body will be formed. The more you become sincere servant of Kṛṣṇa, the more your body becomes Kṛṣṇized, electrified. Therefore advanced Kṛṣṇa conscious person is considered to have a spiritual body. The same example, as I have given several times: just like iron rod. You put into the fire, it becomes warmer, warmer. The more it is connected with fire, it becomes warm, warm, warm. And at last it becomes red hot, so that at that time, if that iron is touched to any other thing, it burns. It does not act as iron; it acts as fire. Similarly, by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, continuous chanting, you will make your body spiritualized. At that time, wherever you go, wherever you touch, he'll be spiritualized. Similarly, the iron... Without being spiritualized, without being red hot, if you touch, it will not act.

So every one of us, those who have come to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, expected to preach in the future and to become a spiritual master also in the future. But first of all you must spiritualize yourself; otherwise it is useless. So kṛṣṇa-śakti vinā nahe. Without... Just like without being red hot, you cannot burn any other thing. Similarly, without being fully spiritualized, you cannot make others spiritualized. Therefore we have to follow the paramparā system. The disciplic succession, as we get the knowledge, as we get the power, as we get the instruction, so we have to follow. That will help me to spiritualize myself. And when you are spiritualized... You'll have to wait for that time. Then, wherever you will preach, the result will be there.

So by the grace of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Śukadeva Gosvāmī has reached Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Therefore at the verge of Mahārāja Parīkṣit's death, Śukadeva Gosvāmī was sent to help him in the process of self-realization. Without spiritual master's help, nobody can become self-realized. Our Vaiṣṇava philosophy does not allow that you shall become self-realized by your own endeavor. Just like other schools, they think, Buddha school, that by meditation... I do not know whether in Buddha school the spiritual master is accepted. But our Vaiṣṇava school, without acceptance of spiritual master, there is no possibility of self-realization. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Then, (reading) "Mahārāja Parīkṣit was a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa from his childhood, so he had natural affection for Kṛṣṇa, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī could understand his devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he welcomed the question about his duty because the king hinted that worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate function of every living entity. Śukadeva Gosvāmī welcomed this suggestion and said, 'Because you have raised the question about Kṛṣṇa, your question is most glorious.' " The next śloka is varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1]. Śukadeva Gosvāmī welcomed the praśna, the question about Kṛṣṇa, and that we shall discuss next day.

Thank you very much. (end)



700701SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1

-

Los Angeles, July 1, 1970



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. So we have got new book, The First Step in God-Realization. Yes. Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Devotees: Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Prabhupāda: First, Invocation. (devotees repeating each word) Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Oṁ namo vāsudeva. Text one. (devotees repeating)



śrī-śuka uvāca

varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



Now you recite independently. Oṁ namo bhagavate.



Devotees: (recite oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya and the verse.)



Prabhupāda: Very good. All right. Again.



(devotees repeat)

Prabhupāda: This last line, it is śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ.



Devotees: Śrotavyādiṣu...



Prabhupāda: Diṣu, short. Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ.



Devotees: Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ.



Prabhupāda: So these Bhāgavata verses, if it is chanted with little tune, then it is very nice. The tune should be like this: (repeats verse with tune) Like that.



Devotees: Jaya. (laughing)



Prabhupāda: Yes. Try to hear and... (chanting with tune:) varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1].



Devotees: Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa.



Devotees: Kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa.



Prabhupāda: Ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsām.



Devotees: Ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsām.



Prabhupāda: Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ.



Devotees: Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ.



(verse is repeated three more times)

Prabhupāda: Now chant independently.



Devotees: (recite oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya and the verse.)



Prabhupāda: Again. (devotees repeat) Very good. So read the translation. Yes.



Gargamuni: First with the Invocation?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Gargamuni: Translation: "O my Lord, the all-pervading Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You."



Prabhupāda: Purport. Go on.



Gargamuni: Purport. "Vāsudevāya means to Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva. As by chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, one can achieve all the good results of charity, austerity, and penances, so by the chanting of this mantra, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, it is to be understood that the author or the speaker or any one of the readers of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam offer respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, the reservoir of all pleasure. In the First Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the principles of creation are described, and as such the First Canto can be called 'Creation.' "



Prabhupāda: So this om means addressing the Lord. In the all the Vedic mantras they are addressing. Our this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, mahā-mantra, that is also addressing. Hare, Hare, addressing the energy of the Lord, Harā. The energy is Harā, Rādhā, Sītā. So when a female is addressed, it is like that: Hare, Late, Sīte, Rādhe. So Hare means addressing first, first of all the energy. The impersonalists, they do not know this, this addressing first of all Kṛṣṇa's energy. We Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, we don't worship Kṛṣṇa alone, ekala-vāsudeva. No. We must worship Kṛṣṇa along with His energy. Just like Kṛṣṇārjuna, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. Arjuna is also energy, living entity, and Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, His internal energy, and marginal energy. So Kṛṣṇa means with His energy. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. This bhagavate means full of energies. I have several times explained bhagavān. Bhaga means opulence, and vān means one who possesses. Bhagavān. That is the meaning of word bhagavān. So when this bhagavān word is addressed, it is addressed as bhagavate. The word is bhagavat, bhagavat-śabda. Of course, these are grammatical arrangement. Vat, this affix, is there when it is meant... Sanskrit, every word, every syllable, has got meaning. That is Sanskrit language. It is not like that "beauty but, (?) beauty put." No. If you say "beauty but," then you must say "peauty put." But in English, "beauty but, peauty put." So in Sanskrit language, you cannot do like that. If you have to follow the rules, then the same rule will go on. So bhagavate address, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Vāsudevāya. This is the form of, fourth form of, śabda, sound vibration, fourth form. Just like kṛṣṇāya. When I offer something, kṛṣṇāya, viṣṇave. Similarly, bhagavate, vāsudevāya.



So the beginning is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam means Kṛṣṇa. It cannot be otherwise. This is kṛṣṇa-kathā. The Bhagavad-gītā is also kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kathā means words. So Kṛṣṇa words spoken by Kṛṣṇa, that is Bhagavad-gītā. And words spoken about Kṛṣṇa, that is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Or about Kṛṣṇa's devotees, that is bhāgavata. So bhāgavata, there are two kinds of bhāgavata. One, this book Bhāgavata and another, the person bhāgavata, the devotee. He is also bhāgavata. Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends that bhāgavata para giya bhāgavata sthāne(?): "You should go and read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the bhāgavata, person bhāgavata." Otherwise you will misunderstand. Bhāgavata para giya bhāgavata sthāne. One big poet, he composed some songs when Caitanya Mahāprabhu was at Purī. And many people used to come and see Him. Because in those days there were many scholars and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was also a very great scholar, so they used to compose and come to see Him, and they would get some applause. But before seeing Him, the rule was that it must be passed through his secretary, Svarūpa Dāmodara. Svarūpa Dāmodara was Lord Caitanya's personal secretary, so unless something is passed through Svarūpa Dāmodara, nobody can directly approach Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So one learned scholar, he composed some poetries and he wanted the poetries to be heard by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But Svarūpa Dāmodara, he knew that "This man is mundane. What he will write?" So he was avoiding him: "All right, we shall see later on." But when he insisted... And one of his uncle, he was amongst the associates of Lord Caitanya, so he also requested Svarūpa Dāmodara that "This boy has come so long. If you kindly hear..." So because he requested, a Vaiṣṇava, so Svarūpa Dāmodara agreed to hear, but he pointed out his all faults, and he chastised him that "You don't write poetry in this way. You first of all read Bhāgavata from the bhāgavata. Then try to write." So that you will find in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. He advised that "Go and read Bhāgavatam from bhāgavatam. Then try to write."

Recently one gentleman from India... He is a man of very good position, ICS, the old ICS, British ICS, Indian Civil Service. They are the topmost service. So he sent me one translation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So perhaps you know. Gargamuni knows. So I rejected it, that "No, this cannot be published. There are so many anomalies." And so his daughter is here in Los Angeles. So she came with her husband and took back. So we do not publish anything which is not approved by the ācāryas. We are not like ordinary press, that anything and anything will come and we shall publish. No. That is not our business. It must be approved, as we are presenting Bhagavad-gītā as it is, no mental concoction. We don't allow any mental concoction. It must be approved by the ācārya, disciplic succession. Then it is nice.

So the next verse... All right. This much today. We shall discuss tomorrow. Again. Thank you. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Chant. (end)



731104SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1

-

Delhi, November 4, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śrī-śuka uvāca

varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



Translation: "Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial to all kinds of people. To hear the answer to this question is the prime subject matter for hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists."



Prabhupāda: So Śukadeva Gosvāmī arrived at the point of death of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy that he would die within seven days, bitten by a snake. Just imagine how the brahminical culture was so powerful that even a boy born in a brāhmaṇa family... He was only ten or twelve years old... When he heard that his father was insulted by Mahārāja Parīkṣit by garlanding him with a dead snake... His playmates informed him that "Your father has been insulted in this way." So he retaliated that "Within seven days this snake will bite the king and he will die."



So when it was fixed up... Mahārāja Parīkṣit was also very powerful. He could retaliate the brāhmaṇa's cursing, but he did not do it. He accepted, "Yes." Therefore Lord Śiva said, nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati: [SB 6.17.28] "When one is devotee of Nārāyaṇa, he is not afraid of anything." Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati. He was cursed that "Within the seven days you'll die." So he was not afraid. "That's all right." So he prepared himself, and many learned scholar, saintly person, kings, even demigods, all approached because he was the emperor of the world, and he was going to die. So many big, big stalwart people... Even Vyāsadeva, he was present there. And Parīkṣit Mahārāja said, "Now what is my duty? You are all big men, present here. I am going to die. Now what is my duty?"

This is very important question, that... We are working very hard in this material world, but we are not preparing ourself for death, which is a "must" fact. Everyone must die. The modern civilization, they are afraid of death, but they do not know how to counteract death. This is the modern civilization. But there is process. In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa informs us that our real problem of life is death-birth, death, old age and disease. Birth is the beginning and then, one who has taken birth, he must die. Yāvat, yāvaj jananaṁ tāvan maraṇam. But if one does not take birth, then he does not die. This is the actual problem. Why we have to take birth? People do not know even that there is again life after death. And Bhagavad-gītā's first instruction is tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ.

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ...

[Bg. 2.13]



As we are changing our body in this life from childhood to boyhood, boyhood to youthhood, then old man, then we give up this body, Kṛṣṇa says that similarly, as I was a child, now I have got a different body, similarly, when I give up this body, I'll get another body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ.



The people do not even know that there is dehāntara-prāptiḥ, again we have to accept another body. They do not care for it. And there are so many varieties of body. Just like if we are sitting here, so many ladies and gentlemen, each one of us has got a different type of body. Nobody's body is similar exactly to the other body. This is a fact. We can see. So why we have got different types of body? That we do not try to understand. Not only human body, but there are other bodies also. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. We have got bodies in the water, we have got bodies on the land, the tree life, the plant life, the insect life, the birds' life, the beast life, the human form of life... Amongst the human beings there are different varieties-some American, some Indians, some others. So why they are different bodies? What is that science? Why there are different types of bodies?

The different type of body is due to our different karma and different mentality. That we do not know. But Parīkṣit Mahārāja, although he is king... Nowadays the king and president, they are sure that "I am Prime Minister" and "I am President. My position is secure," because he is prime minister. This is the difficulty. The big, big men, they think that "My position is secure," "I am prime minister," "I am Rahis," "I am Birla," "I am big man, so my position is secure." But Parīkṣit Mahārāja did not think like that. Although he was the emperor, most powerful king, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he did not think that "I am secure. Because I am emperor of the world, I am secure." No. He immediately become alert: "Oh, I will have to die within seven days. So I must prepare." This is the problem. We do not know whether we are going to die within seven seconds, because there is no guarantee, whereas Parīkṣit Mahārāja had at least seven days' guarantee that he will die after seven days. But so far we are concerned, we can go on the street. There may be any accident. I can die immediately. There are, so many deaths are taking place. The death is sure, and when it will take place, that nobody knows.

Therefore we should take lesson from Mahārāja Parīkṣit that what we are going to prepare for our next life. That is human life. Otherwise it is animal life. The cats and dog, they do not know "What is my next life." They think that... They do not know anything. So if a human being does not know, "What I am preparing for the next life?" he is no better than cats and dogs. That is the statement of the śāstra. It is not my statement.

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Go-kharaḥ. Go means cows and khara means ass. So anyone who has got this concept that "I am this body," "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya," "I am black," "I am white," "I am fat," "I am thin," "I am this," "I am that," this is ātma-buddhi, dehātma-buddhi. Yasyātma-buddhi... One should know that "I am not this body." That is real knowledge. That is real knowledge. But nobody knows that. Everyone thinking. The fighting is going on all over the world. Just like Israel and the, what other the party?



Devotee: Arabs.



Prabhupāda: (laughs) They are thinking that they are this body, and they are fighting. And everywhere it is going on: "I am this body." Cats and dogs are fighting. So actually, we are not this body. That is knowledge. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā begins when Arjuna was thinking in terms of his body that he was declining to fight in terms of body. "Kṛṣṇa, they are my family members, my brothers, my grandfather, my nephews. How can I kill them?" So therefore Kṛṣṇa, when Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa as his spiritual master... Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam: [Bg. 2.7] "Kṛṣṇa, now we are talking like friends, but that will not make a solution, because friendly talking useless waste of time. Let us talk seriously. So I accept You as my spiritual master." Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam. "Now you teach me."



So this is the process of taking lessons. Just like Mahārāja Parīkṣit also trying to take lesson from the learned saintly persons there. At last it was settled that "Whatever Śukadeva Gosvāmī will say, that will be accepted. That will be accepted." So therefore Śukadeva, after being questioned by Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Śukadeva Gosvāmī is answering, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1]. He inquired. Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired. He was a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa from the very beginning. Because Pāṇḍava family, they were all Kṛṣṇa's devotee, so Parīkṣit Mahārāja also was a devotee from his childhood. He was worshiping the Deity of Kṛṣṇa. That was his plaything. Just like Mirabai had kṛṣṇa-mūrti. So those who are born devotees, their inclination is to... That is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Devotees, from the childhood, they get chance of worshiping Kṛṣṇa or to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So he inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, "Whether I shall now fully devote myself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" And therefore the answer was from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1]. "Yes, it is very nice, glorious. You are thinking of Kṛṣṇa." Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ. Then?

Pradyumna: Kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa.



Prabhupāda: And loka-hitam: "My dear king, this praśna, this question, is not only good for you, but it is good for the whole world." Loka-hitam. Loka-hitam. So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is like that. It is not a whim that "I went to the Western countries because I love Kṛṣṇa, so I wanted to preach it." No. Loka-hitam. As soon as Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement was started in the Western countries, immediately they took it. Took it. Because it is loka-hitam. It is actually beneficial. All these young boys and girls from America and Europe, why they are seriously taken? I have not bribed them, neither I have any money to pay them. But they have taken because it is loka-hitam. because it is loka-hitam. And what is the next word?



Pradyumna: Sammataḥ, ātmavit-sammataḥ.



Prabhupāda: Ātmavit-sammataḥ. Ātmavit means self-realized souls. Tattvavit or ātmavit.



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



Ātmavit, self-realized person, transcendentalist, they are not interested with these material affairs. Ātmavit.



So there are three kinds of ātmavit or tattvavit. Some of them are brahmavit, some of them are paramātmavit, and some of them are bhagavadvit. Those who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth through knowledge, by dint of their own knowledge, that is called brahmavit. They can approach up to the impersonal Brahman. And those who are yogis, trying to understand the Absolute Truth by meditation-dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]-they are paramātmavit. And those who are devotees, they are bhagavadvit, or bhāgavata. They are called bhāgavata. So there are three classes of transcen..., vit, but everyone accepts this. ātmavit-sammataḥ. We should accept something which is agreed by the ātmavit, not ordinary person. Now it has become a fashion that you manufacture any way of thinking of self-realization, that is accepted. No. Whether it is accepted by ātmavit? Whether it is accepted by the Vedic culture? Then it is true. Otherwise you cannot manufacture. Therefore all over the world there are so many religious principles because they have been manufactured by some men. Actually, religion cannot be manufactured. Religion is, according to Vedic culture, dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma, it should be given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just like law is given by the state, government. You cannot manufacture law. That is not possible. If you manufacture some law that "I have manufactured this law," that "I will follow this law, my law," that will not help you. You must follow the law given by the government. Similarly, religion means the religion which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And the ātmavit, those who are actually self-realized, they accept that religion, not any manufactured religion.

Therefore from the Bhāgavata we can understand that dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] cheating type of religious system is kicked out from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Projjhita, swept off. We don't find that... Paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ vāstavaṁ vastu vedyam atra. This Bhāgavata system is meant for the paramo nirmatsarāṇām. Matsaratā. Matsaratā. It is explained by Śrīdhara Svāmī. Para utkarṣa asahanam.(?) When a man cannot tolerate his friend or other man is rising more than him, he becomes envious. This is the material world. Even my brother becomes greater than me, I becomes envious. Either in richness or any way, competition. So... But this Bhāgavata-dharma is different thing. Paramo nirmatsarāṇām. A devotee is never envious of another devotee. If one friend or Godbrother or brother increases in devotion, the other devotee, he is not envious. He simply thanks him, "Oh, my brother," "my sister," or "my father," like that, "he has advanced in so much devotion. I could not do. So how I can follow him?" This is Vaikuṇṭha conclusion. Just like in the material world, everyone is envious. If I become richer than you, then you become envious, that "Oh, how this man has become richer? We are in the same business." So this is material. There is no appreciation.

But in the Vaikuṇṭha world there is comparative devotional service. Just like Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs. They are on the same status, but the gopīs know that "Rādhārāṇī is the better worshiper than us." Therefore their only business is how to take Rādhārāṇī and join with Kṛṣṇa. This is Vaikuṇṭha understanding. They are not envious that "Kṛṣṇa loves Rādhārāṇī so much," and they are envious. No, no, not at all. They want it that "Kṛṣṇa loves Rādhārāṇī so much, and Rādhārāṇī loves..." They simply try to join Them. And they are happy, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī is now joined together." That is their happiness. This is Vaikuṇṭha appreciation. Here in the material world, suppose there are competition. "Oh, this girl has got such a nice lover. Then let us break it." This is material. But Vaikuṇṭha, there is everything. Everything, varieties. But that variety is concentrated on Kṛṣṇa. That is called ātma-sammataḥ. Ātmavit-sammataḥ. Ātmavit, self-realized, those who are actually on the transcendental spiritual platform. That must be approved.

So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is approved. It is not a manufactured thing, whimsical thing. It is approved. Just like Arjuna said to Kṛṣṇa that,

paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

[Bg. 10.12]



Kṛṣṇa, You are the Parabrahman, Parabrahman. Not that Kṛṣṇa may say... Or anyone can say, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are friends. Therefore Arjuna has eulogized his friend, 'Parabrahman.' " No. Kṛṣṇa..., Arjuna said, "It is not that simply because I am appreciating you... You are appreciated, you are approved by Devala, Asita, Vyāsa and Nārada." That is called ātmavit-sammataḥ. Ātmavit. Vyāsadeva, Nārada, Devala, Asita, all the great sages, they accept. Similarly, at the present moment we have got four ācāryas-even take five ācārya-Śaṅkarācārya, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, they all approve, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Even Śaṅkarācārya, he is this impersonalist, still, he has commented on his Bhagavad-gītā, sa bhagavān svayaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ: "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." So Kṛṣṇa is approved. And because Parīkṣit Mahārāja wanted to talk about Kṛṣṇa, the whole Bhāgavata is full of kṛṣṇa-kathā. That is the beginning. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī said, ātmavit-sammataḥ. And what is the next one?



Pradyumna: Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ.



Prabhupāda: Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. Now we have got to hear so many things. Now what we are doing in this world, in big Delhi city? In the morning we get a bunch of paper to hear about so many advertisements, so many political struggle, and so many things, all useless waste of time. But in our country it is how many pages newspaper nowadays? But in the Western countries, oh, such huge, a big bag. You see? So many, you see? So there are so many things to hear. They are nonsense. Therefore we say śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. This is the... Now, if there had been some political meeting, oh, many hundreds of people would have come to hear. But because we are talking of Kṛṣṇa, nobody is here. Although it is the śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ, it is the supreme subject matter to hear. This is the position. This is the position of the material world. They have lost interest even to hear about the transcendental life, what is this life, what is next life, how we can improve, how, where we are going. Nothing. Simply like cats and dogs they are working hard. Therefore śāstra says, nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. Viḍ-bhujām. Viḍ-bhujāṁ ye. Viḍ-bhujām. Viḍ-bhujām means the hogs, the pigs who are eating stool. They are also working very hard for finding out the stool, "Where there is stool? Where there is stool? Where there is stool?"



So Ṛṣabhadeva warned, "My dear sons, this life, this human form of life, is not meant for working so hard simply for eating, sleeping, mating and defending." Then what it is meant for? Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. "My dear boys, just try to become austere. Just tapasya." Tapasya means voluntarily accepting some difficulties. Not difficulties. Just like in our Society we say, "No illicit sex life, no intoxication, no meat-eating, no gambling." But in the Western countries, these things are daily affair. But they have given up. But they have not..., have died. All these boys and girls who have taken up Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they have given up. No illicit sex life, no meat-eating, no intoxication. They do not drink even tea, coffee. They do not smoke even cigarette. This is tapasya, little tapasya. [break]

Everything is there. But we have become so unfortunate, led by rascal and fools leaders, that we are missing the opportunity of this human form of life where we can solve all the problems of life, and the indications are there, here in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission is yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission, that āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission, that "I give you order. You, every one of you become a spiritual master." "Oh, I have no qualification. How can I become spiritual master? It requires high knowledge, Sanskrit understanding." "No, you don't require anything. Simply you speak kṛṣṇa-upadeśa." What is kṛṣṇa-upadeśa? Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. You simply go door to door and say, "Please surrender to Kṛṣṇa." Then you are spiritual master. I have done this. What I have done? I have gone to your country to say this thing, that "Here is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You surrender; you become perfect." That is being done.

So it is not very difficult to become spiritual master. Simply you have to become very serious and sincere to the service of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "Oh, it is very nice." Loka-hitam: "It will be beneficial to the whole human society."

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



740316SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1

-

Vṛndāvana, March 16, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.) Translation: "Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial to all kinds of people. To hear the answer to this question is the prime subject matter of hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists."



Prabhupāda:



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. The... Here in this material world we are busy in questioning and answering, or hearing. Question, hearing, and answering. This is the whole world. Even in the material field. You go to the market, you inquire, "What is the price of this thing?" and you hear the description of the thing and the price of the thing. So the praśnaḥ, the question was made by Mahārāja Parīkṣit just at the point of his death, "What I have to do now?" This is very intelligent. Only intelligent man can understand what is the value of this question, "What I have to do now?" Because intelligent person knows that "I am going to leave this body."



I am speaking... Parīkṣit Mahārāja is talking with Śukadeva Gosvāmī at the point of death. He was given notice that "Within seven days you'll be bitten by a snake and you'll die." This was a curse by a brāhmaṇa boy. So he was ready. He was not afraid. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati [SB 6.17.28]. He could retaliate. He was a great devotee. He could counteract the cursing of the brāhmaṇa boy, but he did not do so. Because he was cursed, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam came. He was perplexed what to do, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī appeared there, and everyone accepted the verdict of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, "Mahārāja, you are a great devotee. So I shall quote from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and you hear only. That's all. You have nothing to do. Simply you hear."

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



These are the nine different processes of devotional service. So generally, we are expected to execute all the nine different processes. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam about Viṣṇu, not for any other demigods. No, Viṣṇu. The Māyāvādīs, they take it that "We can hear of any demigod, of anyone," because they are Nirākāravādī. So "You can imagine anyone and hear about him." But śāstra does not say. Śāstra does not say that you can hear about anybody. No. Śāstra says, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, about Viṣṇu.



harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



This is the śāstra's injunction, that if you have to chant, if you have not to chant, means you must chant. Kalau nāsty eva gatir anyathā. You cannot avoid it. If you actually want relief from this conditional life, duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15], then you must... This is the only means. Kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā. Karma-jñāna-yoga, there are different processes of self-realization, karma-jñāna-yoga, but it is stressed, nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva, not karma, not jñāna, not yoga. Simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is required. That is the preaching of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, this, this verse of Agni Purāṇa:



harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



So this is the bhakti process, chanting and hearing. So chanting, hearing, or questioning and answering, the same thing. So when Parīkṣit Mahārāja was perplexed what to do at the time of death, so many great sages and saintly persons, brāhmaṇas, they came there. Because the king is going to die. So not only of this planet, from other planets also, many, many exalted persons came. Somebody prescribed something, somebody prescribed something. So he was perplexed. Fortunately, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī arrived there, and he advised, "Mahārāja, you simply hear harer nāma, the name, the form, the quality, the pastimes. About Kṛṣṇa, you simply hear." That was the... Therefore... And Parīkṣit Mahārāja was a devotee from the very beginning of his life. He's a grandson of Arjuna and Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. Naturally, he was kṛṣṇa-bhakta. He, Kṛṣṇa was his grandmother's brother also. There was family relation. And he studied thoroughly... Although, when he was born, he did not see Kṛṣṇa, but still, he knew that Kṛṣṇa saved the whole Pāṇḍava family.



Kṛṣṇa, when brahmāstra was released by Aśvatthāmā to kill the Mahārāja Parīkṣit while he was within the womb of his mother, Kṛṣṇa personally saved him. Because... He wanted because in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, everyone died, of the Kuru dynasty. Only the son, this Abhimanyu's son, Kṛṣṇa, uh, Arjuna's grandson, was within the womb of his mother. Therefore he was not killed in the battlefield. Still, Aśvatthāmā, the son of Droṇācārya wanted to kill him, and he released brahmāstra, and it was going to kill the child. At that time his mother, Uttarā, approached Kṛṣṇa, that "I am feeling that my womb will be..., abortion there may be." So Kṛṣṇa saved. This is the history. So after his birth, because he saw Kṛṣṇa within the womb, so after his birth, as soon as he came out of the womb of his mother, he was looking here and there, "Where is that personality?" Therefore his name is Parīkṣit. Parīkṣit means he was examining, "Who is that? Who is that man?"

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was so fortunate, so fortunate. From the very beginning of his life, he saw Kṛṣṇa. Just like this child. These are fortunate children. Yoginām... That... Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. This child who was dancing before me, he's not ordinary child. Otherwise how he could dance symmetrically? He had his practice in his previous life, and he has got the chance to get Vaiṣṇava father and mother, and from the very beginning of his life, he is chanting, dancing. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was like that. So to get the chance of having good father, śucīnāṁ... Śucīnām means brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava, especially brāhmaṇa. And śrīmatām. Śrīmatām means very rich. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given his comment: śucīnām means highly cultured brāhmaṇa, and śrīmatām means highly rich vaiśya. So to take birth in this family, cultured family, rich family, is not ordinary thing. It is not ordinary thing. It is the result of pious activities, pious activities. The pious activities means you get your birth in a very good, aristocratic family, rich family or brāhmaṇa family. That is the result of pious activities. You become very beautiful. You become very learned. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. Four things. Janma means birth. Aiśvarya means riches, wealth. Aiśvarya. Janma aiśvarya and śruta. Śruta means education. To become learned man, to become very educated, that is also a result of pious activities. To take birth in rich family, that is also result of pious activities. To become very beautiful, that is also result of pious activities. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhir edhamāna-madaḥ pumān. Unfortunately... When we get these opportunities, very nice family or nice nation, beautiful body, education, we should consider that it is due to our past pious activities. Therefore they should be utilized for Kṛṣṇa. Because pious activities means to approach Kṛṣṇa. Those who are impious, sinful, they cannot approach Kṛṣṇa. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Those who are narādhamāḥ, lowest of the mankind, always engaged in sinful activities, and rascals, may be very educated-māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ, their educational value has been taken away by māyā... As, just like nowadays it has become. The more one is educated, the more one is atheist. We have received one report just now, Bombay. They are... That singing, Hare Kṛṣṇa singing, nuisance, they say. You see. How degraded human being has become: "Hare Kṛṣṇa singing is nuisance. And cinema singing is very good." Just see. They have become simply rascals, dogs and hogs. Simply.

So we should be very much careful of our next birth. Because... Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. This is the verdict of Kṛṣṇa. At the time of death, whatever thought is there, you get next birth a similar body. The mind, mind creates the body, gross body. As we have got this gross body, so within this gross body there is the subtle body: mind, intelligence and ego. These rascals, they do not know that when the gross body is annihilated, it does not mean that the soul is finished. No. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This is the verdict. Don't think because the gross body is now finished, therefore the person is finished. No. The person is there within the subtle body. And the subtle body will carry him. Just like the fragrance is carried by the air. You cannot see what is this fragrance, but you can smell. A very good smell, wherefrom it came? That is subtle carrying. Similarly, the soul is carried after annihilation of this body, gross body, material... Mind, intelligence, ego-that is also material, but subtle. You cannot see. Everyone knows that I have got mind. I have got soul, but you cannot see. Neither I can see. But there is. But one who does not know what is soul, what is subtle body, they become perplexed. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, dhīras tatra na muhyati. Dhīra, those who are sober, one who knows how things are going on, dhīras tatra na muhyati.

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



So one has to become dhīra. These, nowadays, the modern civilization is a rascaldom. Everyone is adhīra. He does not know... In the Western countries, big, big, professors, they do not know how the soul is existing, how the transmigration of the soul is taking place, how the body is changed, what is the purpose of life, what is the perfection of... Nothing they... Simply like cats and dogs. Work very hard like an ass and enjoy like cats and dogs, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhir narāṇām. This life is most degraded life, that at the present moment we see that people are suffering because they have simply become animals, all over the world. Simply taking care of this body. But here Parīkṣit Mahārāja, now he knows that "Taking part of the body is now finished; I have to take care of the soul." Therefore he wanted to ask from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, "Now what I have to do? Shall I fully think of Kṛṣṇa?" Because he was a Kṛṣṇa devotee. Naturally, he was thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. A devotee, he always thinks of Kṛṣṇa. That is devotee.



So we have to practice: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. This is the chance, this is the chance for remembering Kṛṣṇa. Satataṁ smartavyaṁ viṣṇum. Viṣṇu, Lord Kṛṣṇa or Lord Viṣṇu, has to be remembered always. Here... The śloka is there: tasmād bhārata sarvātmā.

tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



Icchatā abhayam. Abhayam means fearlessness. One should be... Abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ. There are three necessities, four necessities of conditioned life: eating, sleeping, mating and fearing. So one has to become abhayam, no more fear. How? When you take shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati [SB 6.17.28]. If you take shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then... Therefore Parīkṣit Mahā..., er, Śukadeva Gosvāmī: icchatā abhayam. Those who are actually willing to become fearless, hero, they must always... Satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. Always chanting and hearing about Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for that purpose, to become abhayam, no more fear. Why one should fear? Kṛṣṇa assures, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31].



So if we take shelter of the supreme abhayam, Kṛṣṇa... Therefore one Vaiṣṇava kavi has sung, bhaja huṅ re mana śrī-nanda-nandana, abhaya-caraṇāravinda re. Abhaya-caraṇa. Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet is to become free from fearfulness. Bhaja huṅ re mana śrī-nanda-nandana. Particularly śrī-nanda-nandana. Nanda-nandana means that Kṛṣṇa has got many forms: Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, then Viṣṇu, Mahā-Viṣṇu. Ananta, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. But His real form is in Vṛndāvana, the son of Nanda Mahārāja. Therefore he is advising, bhaja huṅ re mana śrī-nanda-nandana. Kṛṣṇa... There are Māyāvādī philosophers, they say that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme, has no name. Yes. For the persons with poor fund of knowledge, they may not find out Kṛṣṇa's name. But in the śāstra we have got thousands of name. Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma. But what are those names? Name means His behavior with His devotees. Just like "Nanda-nandana." Kṛṣṇa is the father of everyone-ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]-everyone. So how He has got a father? Oh, that is His mercy. He accepts one devotee as His father. And when He's addressed in relationship with His devotee... Nanda Mahārāja wanted Kṛṣṇa as his son. Kṛṣṇa agreed, "Yes, I shall become your son." So everyone, if you want Kṛṣṇa as your son... Not to become God, but to become the father of God. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they want to become God. But we Vaiṣṇavas, we want to become the father of God. This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Father of God means he controls God. He's not controlled by God. So a devotee can get such position. Everyone is being controlled by God, but a devotee is so exalted that Kṛṣṇa says that "I wish to be controlled by you." This is Kṛṣṇa's position. Therefore the Vaiṣṇava kavi advises, bhaja huṅ re mana śrī-nanda-nandana, abhaya-caraṇāravinda re. Durlabha mānava, durlabha mānava-janama sat-saṅge taraha e.

Now we have got this human form of body, durlabha, very, very rare. This human form of body is obtained after many millions of years. Not very easily. Because we had to come through the evolutionary process, 8,400,0000 species of life. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. Therefore this human form of life should not be wasted. Here is the solution of all the problems of life. Don't neglect it. Therefore it is advised, durlabha mānava-janama sat-saṅge taraha e bhava-sindhu re. E bhava-sindhu. This is the ocean, this is the ocean of nescience, ignorance. What is that? Bhava. Bhava-sindhu means take birth again and again. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. This is very botheration. And there is no guarantee what kind of... Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja... He's also devotee. He's going to Vaikuṇṭha. There was no doubt about it. Still, for our lesson, he inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī that "What is my duty now, now I am going to die?" This is intelligence.

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja had a notice of death for seven days, but we do not know what is the notice. We can die immediately. So how much for us it is necessary to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Parīkṣit Mahārāja had some time. This Bhāgavata-saptāha is imitated under Parīkṣit Mahārāja's... Parīkṣit Mahārāja had only seven days' time, so he might have listened to the Bhāgavata lesson for seven days. But for us, it is not that we observe a Bhāgavata-saptāha and finish our business. No. Our business is nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

[SB 1.2.18]



Nityam. Not that for seven days. Seven days is meant for Parīkṣit Mahārāja because he had no more time. His seven days was sufficient nityam. So we should not imitate that, that "I'll hear seven days." That is also a formality. Actually to understand one verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it requires at least seven months. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ sva-rāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. My Guru Mahārāja explained this verse in Dacca for three months. Janmādy asya. Actually, it is so important. The beginning.



So we must be very serious to understand Bhāgavatam. If we can understand even one line, one verse, our life becomes sublime. It is so nice. There is no comparison of this literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That we are actually finding in the Western countries, how nicely they are receiving these granthas. We have translated into English, and they're enjoying. Actually that is the fact. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Now, our problem, what is this problem? Problem is that we have got so many dirty things within the heart. The first dirty thing is that "I am this body." "I am Indian," "I am Englishman," "I am American," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya," "I am śūdra," "I am fat," "I am thin," "I am black and white..." These conceptions, these are all dirty things. "I am not this body," that is real knowledge. Therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], to cleanse the dirty things from the heart, that is my first business. And what is that dirty things? To identity myself with this body. That is the dirty things. The whole world is in distressed condition on account of this dirty thing, that "I am this body." This is the conception of the ass.

It is said in the...

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Go-kharaḥ. Go-kharaḥ means... Go means cow, and kharaḥ means ass. Yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile. Now many persons come here in Vṛndāvana, tīrtha, but what do they think? They think, "Let me take bathing in the Yamunā River. Then my business is finished." But no. Śāstra says that you should approach to a bhāgavata, a devotee who is living in Vṛndāvana, pure devotee, and surrender unto him. That is tīrtha-yātrā. Not that coming here and taking bathing in the Ganges or... They are going to dūre vāry-ayanaṁ tīrtham. General people think, in this Kali-yuga, at least, that if you go thousand miles away from your home, then your tīrtha is finished. Just like in Calcutta there is Ganges, but people come to Hardwar to take bathing in the Ganges. Now, what is the difference between the Hardwar Ganges and Calcutta Ganges? But he thinks, "If I go three thousand miles and take bathing there, that is real Ganges." So dūre vāry-ayanaṁ tīrtham. These are the symptoms of the Kali-yuga. Yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicit. Many thousands of people come to Vṛndāvana, but they think by taking bathing in the Yamunā, his tīrtha is finished. Or going to Prayāga, taking... Christian also, they go. They take bathing in the...? Water of...? Jordan?



Devotee: Jordan River.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So... No. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. If you have to cleanse your heart from all misgivings, then you have to do this: śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. You hear about Kṛṣṇa. Where? Kṛṣṇa is speaking about Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā. "I am this. I am that." You hear. Or you hear about Kṛṣṇa from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. So if you hear... Kṛṣṇa is within your heart. He can understand. If you are seriously hearing, then Kṛṣṇa can understand. Not that karma-kāṇḍīya-vicāra. "Let me hear on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for seven days, and I'll get... I have got now one lakh of rupees. I'll get three lakhs." That is karma-kāṇḍīya-vicāra. That is not wanted. The hearing of Bhāgavatam means to cleanse your heart, that you are not this body, you are spirit soul, eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is purification. When you come to this understanding, that "I am not this body, I am spirit... Ahaṁ brahmāsmi," then... Brahmāsmi, finished? The Māyāvādī says as soon as you come to this conclusion, brahma-bhūtaḥ, then your business is finished. No. Your business begins there. That is the verdict of Bhagavad-gītā.



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



After being liberated, brahma-bhūtaḥ, then bhakti begins. People misunderstand that by bhakti one gets mukti. No. One who is engaged in bhakti, he is always... He has already got mukti. Muktir mukulitāñjali sevate 'smān. Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura says that if one has attained to the platform of bhakti, then mukti is hankering after his feet: "What can I do for you?" Muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjali sevate 'smān dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ.



So bhakti is above mukti. Therefore a pure devotee does not aspire for mukti. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye, mama janmani janmani. He says, janmani janmani. Janmani, when He says janmani, it is not mukti. Because mukti means you stop your material transmigration from one body to another. That is mukti. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu: mama janmani janmani. A devotee doesn't require mukti. Janmani janmani tvayi bhaktiḥ. If you are situated in the devotional service of the Lord, then you are already mukta. Avyabhicāriṇī.

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā... [Bg. 18.54]. This is the verdict. So for a devotee mukti is not very big thing. Mukti's already there if he's actually a pure devotee. A pure devotee means just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu says. He has no other desire. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīm [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Everyone is desiring in this material world for riches, wealth, dhanam, and janam, good family, high aristocratic family, or good followers, leader, minister. Janam. They are aspiring popular votes. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitām. And next is to have a very beautiful, obedient wife. These are the aspirations of material life. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "I do not want all these things." Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīm. This is bhakti life. When one is free from all such material desires, he's fit for executing devotional service. That is mukti.



Therefore we have to cleanse our heart. Our heart is always aspiring how to get money, how to get women, how to get prestige, how to become leader, how to become minister, how to become guru. These are the things, always hankering in our heart. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. First of all cleanse your heart. And that is also said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam. Not seven days. Nityam. Read every day. Especially those who are in Vṛndāvana. Every day, as much as possible, read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. Nityam. Then our heart will be cleansed, and we shall know what is our constitutional position, what is our relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and then if we serve in that relationship, our life is perfect.

So here Parīkṣit Mahārāja asked that "Shall I think of Kṛṣṇa, or I shall hear about Kṛṣṇa?" And Śukadeva Gosvāmī's congratulating him, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "Yes, it is very nice." Varīyān, first class, glorious. Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitam. "Now, your question is so nice that when I shall answer, it will be beneficial for the whole universe, loka-hitam." Loka-hitam. Because this Bhāgavata is so nice, transcendental subject matter discussed about Kṛṣṇa, it is loka-hitam. It should be spread all over the world. Loka does not mean your country or your society, brāhmaṇa society, gosvāmī society. No. Loka-hitam, for the benefit of the whole world. That is loka-hitam. Not only of this world, but other worlds also. Of the whole universe. Loka-hitaṁ nṛpa. "My dear King, your praśna..." So this message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam should be spread all over the world.

ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

[Bg 18.68]



na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

[Bg. 18.69]



Don't make it stagnant, that "This Bhāgavata is meant for a certain class of men, and it is to be recited by certain professional men, and make some money, and provide your family, and you become... Bas. Very good, religious." No. Loka-hitam. Bhāgavata should be spread.



That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Whole world, whomever you meet, you speak of Kṛṣṇa. That is guru. That is gosvāmī. Not that gosvāmī profession means that I make a means of my livelihood, and I bring money from outside and engage in my son's marriage and daughter's marriage. That is not gosvāmī. One who is engaged in loka-hitam, spreading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam all over the world, that is gosvāmī. Gosvāmī means... Go means indriya. Svāmī means... Indriya means senses, and svāmī means the master. One has to control. If one is busy only family matters... What is this family? It is simply sense gratification, sexual intercourse. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. So if one is engaged in these family affairs only, sexual affairs, he's not a gosvāmī. Gosvāmī means who has, one who has... Wherefrom this gosvāmī comes? Rūpa Gosvāmī. Vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva... They, they were not family men. They were not in sense gratification. They were in the service of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Kṛṣṇa. That is gosvāmī. We must know what is gosvāmī. Loka-hitaṁ ratam. Everyone who is on behalf of Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is engaged to preach Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, throughout the whole world... Pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt. A gosvāmī means he must have disciples all over the world. That is gosvāmī. Not that within some area. These are the things.

We should scrutinizingly study what is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, what is Bhagavad-gītā, what is a preacher, what is gosvāmī. These things we must study. Loka-hi... These will be discussed by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, that what is what. You'll find in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore it is our duty: nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Nityam. Not that seven days. Nityam. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu [SB 1.2.18]. First of all we have to hear. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. We acquire pious result of hearing. And the result will be manifested... Hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi...

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Then he must be free from the material bondage. That is called hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti, washed off. If it is not completely washed off, if it is partially washed off, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu... Naṣṭa-prāya means we have got all these filthy things within the heart. It is not yet cleansed fully, but even some percentage is cleansed, then... Nityaṁ bhāgavata... But how it can be cleansed? The process is to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That will be explained:



śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



These verse are very nice, I mean to say, instructive verses, and you try to read them regularly, every morning. Or whenever you find time. Then you will understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Everything is explained there. Then the dirty things in our heart will be cleansed, and then we will understand what is our constitutional position, and what is our duty, and how to execute it.



Thank you very much. (end)



740609SB.PAR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1

-

Paris, June 9, 1974



Nitāi: "Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial to all kinds of people. To hear the answer to this question is the prime subject matter of hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists."



Prabhupāda:



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



So this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a question and answer. The beginning, the... This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, first of all it was narrated by Vyāsadeva, and it was heard by his son, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Then Śukadeva Gosvāmī narrated this Bhāgavatam to Parīkṣit Mahārāja at the time of his death. And from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the Sūta Gosvāmī heard. This is the paramparā. (aside:) Not yet. This is the paramparā. Kṛṣṇa says in the Fourth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Bhagavad-gītā was spoken by Kṛṣṇa millions of years ago to the sun-god. Imaṁ vivasvate, proktavān avyayam. Imaṁ vivasvate proktam, vivasvān manave prāha manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt. This is the paramparā system.



Our, this Bhāgavata system, or Vedic system, is not research work. It is not research work. Nowadays it is a fashion that... Just like the Theosophists. They're searching out God. Since the beginning, they're searching out. And so many leaders came and gone, but they are searching out. And they will go on searching out for lives together. But it is not a thing to be searched out. It is not ordinary thing, not material thing. You know...

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



Ciraṁ vicinvan. For forever, millions of years, if you speculate, to understand what is God, it is not possible. It is not a subject matter of speculative knowledge. No. It is to be received through the right source, deductive process, not inductive process. Because our senses are limited. We cannot have any perfect idea on account of our senses being limited. We cannot see.



So there are so many examples. We have talked. This knowledge is not... The exact word used in Sanskrit... There are two ways: āroha-panthā, avaroha-panthā. Āroha-panthā means to know something by your dint of knowledge, ascending process, ascending process. Just like these people are trying to know the moon planet, the Venus planet, or other planets. They're going, ascending by airplane. And to know it. But they're doing it for the last twenty years. They do not know what is the actual position of the moon planet. That is not known. They're coming, going. Or whether they have gone, that they know. But from the situation it is understood they're not going. Maybe some other planet they are going. That is my opinion. Because the description of the moon planet does not tally. We have got in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... The, this moon planet is one of the heavenly planets. There, high class of demigods, they live. Or one who is elevated to the moon planet, he is living there for ten thousands of years. Ten... What kind of ten thousands of years? In the moon planet, one day equal to our six months. Such months' year, and ten thousands of years. That is the duration of life in the moon planet. Those who are karma-kāṇḍīya, perform ritualistic ceremonies very nicely, they are promoted to the moon planet. And there are other planets also. This is Svargaloka. There are seven planetary systems upwards, and seven planetary systems downwards. Now we are living in the Bhūrloka, middle. Then above this, there is Bhuvarloka. Above this, there is Svarloka. Above this is Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka, Brahmaloka. So this āroha... You cannot go to the Brahmaloka, although there is śāstra... Or you cannot go to the sun planet also. You are seeing every day, but go there. But you have no right. You cannot go.

So therefore this process, that "I shall go by my strength. I shall know by dint of my own knowledge, research work," these are all rascaldom. It is not possible. So what to speak of understanding God? You cannot understand even what is in your presence, the material world, and spiritual is beyond the sky. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. That is another sky. You have no estimation of this sky. Not only this, this sky; even in the material world, this is one universe. What sky we see, that is of one universe. But there are innumerable universes. That is material world. And beyond that, there is spiritual sky. Then the spiritual world begins. There are also planets, Vaikuṇṭha planets. And above these Vaikuṇṭha planets, there is Kṛṣṇaloka. That is Kṛṣṇa's abode. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu [Bs. 5.29].

So you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, or God, or His abode by the speculative, ascending process. That is not possible. You have to inquire from. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, "What is my duty now I am going to die?" He was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy to die within seven days. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was quite competent to counteract the curse of the brāhmaṇa boy, but he decided that "I shall die." Because he thought that "I offended the boy's father by encircling a dead snake on the neck of the ṛṣi. So his son became angry that 'You have insulted my father. You die with this snake.' " So he accepted. So this, on the death point, he immediately left his kingdom, family, and everything, and went down to the river, bank of the river Ganges, and many... Because he was king, so many big, big men, even demigods, great saintly persons, they came to see Mahārāja Parīkṣit at his last stage of life, seven days. And so he asked, "What is my duty?" So he was a devotee, Parīkṣit Mahārāja. From his childhood, he was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So he inquired, "What is my duty to know about Kṛṣṇa?" And that is being welcomed by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, that "Your, to inquire about Kṛṣṇa, this question is very much welcome." Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1]. Praśna means question. "You have asked a question about Kṛṣṇa. It is very, very good." Why? Kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa: "It is good for the all human society. Because you have inquired about Kṛṣṇa, you have inquired about Kṛṣṇa, and I'll have to reply. People will hear. It will be recorded. And people will be benefitted." Loka-hitam.

In another place, that Sūta Gosvāmī says... When the ṛṣis inquired... Now, here it is being inquired by King Parīkṣit, being answered by Śukadeva Gosvāmī. In another place, the ṛṣis, great saintly persons, they also inquired, and Sūta Gosvāmī replied. So this kind of question and answer is ātmavit-sammataḥ. Ātmavit. Ātmavit means one who knows, self-realized. Ātmavit means self-realized. Not these rascals, one who does not know what is self, what I am. He's an animal, one who does not know what he is. If I do not inquire, "What I am? I am this body? Or I am something extra than this body?" if this inquiry is not there, he's not human being. He's animal. Animal cannot inquire. Cats and dog cannot inquire, "What I am?" He's suffering. Everyone is suffering who has got this material body. That is the condition. If you have got material body, you must suffer. It is not the question of European, American or white, black. There is no such question. If you are animal or man, as soon as you have got this material body, you must suffer. This is condition. This is material condition. Therefore our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not meant for, I mean to say, mitigating the so-called sufferings of the body. When there is body, there must be suffering. So we should not be very much disturbed by the sufferings of the body. Because you'll have to suffer. Even though you make very nice arrangement. Just like in comparison to Europe and America. In European cities we see so many nice arrangements, living condition, big, big house, big, big road, nice cars. In comparison to India, if some Indian comes from Indian village, he'll see, "It is heaven, so nice house, so nice building, so nice motorcars." But do you think you are not suffering? He may think, the rascal may think that "Here is heaven." But those who are residing in this heaven, they know what kind of heaven it is. (laughter)

So suffering must be there. Suffering must be there as soon as you get this material body. "Why suffering? We are enjoying." What you are enjoying? Is there any guarantee that you'll enjoy? You have got nice building, nice road, nice car. That's all right. You are enjoying. You are thinking enjoying. But is there any guarantee that you will enjoy? Any moment, you'll be finished. Any moment. So there is no guarantee. That is not enjoyment. Real enjoyment is permanent enjoyment. Just like we construct some house, making the, what is called, foundation very strong. In your country, they make very strong foundation. But what is your foundation, sir? Is it very strong? You can be taken away at any moment. So before making the foundation strong, why don't you make your foundation strong that you shall be able to live here permanently? But that intelligence they haven't got. They'll waste time, making the house foundation very strong, not for himself. His foundation tiltering at any moment, any second. This is called yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātu..., sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13].

So this kind of intelligence, they are called animals. The animal does not know. The dog does not know. The dog will live for six years to ten years, but he is very proud: "I have got a very nice master. Gow! Gow!" You see? So this kind of intelligence is no good. Therefore it is said here, ātmavit-sammataḥ. This kind of question, approved by persons who are self-realized. Ātmavit, one who knows what he is. Sammataḥ. Sammataḥ means approved. Ātmavit sammataḥ puṁsāṁ śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. Yaḥ paraḥ. Paraḥ means superior. We are accustomed to hear so many things, radio and dictaphone and so many things. We are hankering after hearing tape record or this gramophone album, and news from in the newspaper. We are always anxious, very anxious. Big, big news... In your country especially, millions of papers, newspaper, such big, just to hear what is going on in the world. But after seeing one or two pages, you throw it away. Because you are hackneyed. You know that there was political strife, there was fire, there was burglary, there was this, there was this... The same story. Carvita-carvaṇānām, chewing the chewed. No, actually, no pleasure. By... We have seen in your country, and nowadays in our country so many nice news magazines, but they see one or two pages and they throw away. Because there is no pleasure, although I have got hankering to hear so many things.

But this kind of hearing will not give me pleasure. Therefore here it is said, śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. This, it is not ordinary hearing. This kṛṣṇa-praśna, question about Kṛṣṇa and answer about Kṛṣṇa, this is not ordinary question and answer. It is ātmavit-sammataḥ. Those who are self-realized, they will understand, they will approve of it. Because it is transcendental. śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. So one can say that "There are many subject matter for hearing. It may be one of them." No. It says, he says, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, "No, it is paraḥ, transcendental, the most superior kind of question and answer hearing." So one may think, "There are different types of subject matter for hearing. It may be one of them."

Therefore in the next verse Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. "My dear King, Rājendra..." Rājendra means "the best of the kings." He's, Śukadeva, er, yes, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, the best of the kings. He has selected, he's preparing. He does not think that "I am now king. And I'll die, I shall again become king." He does not think like that, foolishly. He knows that "I may be king in this life, and the next life, I may be dog." Because he's ātmavit, he knows ātmā, the soul. That is under the control of nature. You cannot say that "This time I am very nice, good-looking French boy and girl. Then next life I shall become also the same." Some poet in India, he sung, ei deśete janma āmāra, ei deśete mari: "I have taken birth in this country." Everyone has got love for his country. That is the modern civilization. Now, the Napoleon, in your country, he loved his country so much. Now where he is, you do not know. You have simply a stone, photograph, statue. You are thinking that "Napoleon, I am worshiping..." You do not worship actually. Worship is here. If you worship, you must keep Napoleon in this way. But no. You keep on the street for passing stool by the crows. (laughter) That is not worship. That is insult. Suppose if you think this statue belongs to Napoleon, and you have exposed this statue for passing stool by the crows, is that very good worship? If I ask you, "Please stand on the street and the crows will pass stool on your head..." (laughter) This is intelligence. This is modern civilization. They have no even common sense intelligence. If you are worshiping Napoleon, why don't you keep like that? We are worshiping Kṛṣṇa. We are keeping in a nice place. That they will say, "It is idol worship." These rascals will say, "These foolish people are worshiping an idol." And they are worshiping Napoleon very nicely. (laughter) Just see their intelligence. So therefore, because they do not know, because they are not ātmavit, therefore their opinion has no value. No value. We don't care for their opinion. Here it is ātmavit-sammataḥ. One should be taken... Approval should be from persons who is self-realized. Their, his opinion has value. Otherwise, a rascal says, "In my opinion..." What is the opinion of your..., value? We don't accept your opinion. We take the opinion of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's devotee. One who is pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa directly, or His representative, we take their opinion. That is called ātmavit-sammataḥ.

So one may think this question and answer may be, as we do ordinarily, it may be like that. Now Śukadeva Gosvāmī mentions, says, śrotavyādīni rājendra: [SB 2.1.2] "My dear King," śrotavyādīni, "the subject matter for hearing," nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ, "of ordinary, common men, there are many thousands of questions and answers." That is life. Any businessman, as soon as he'll go to the association of business, there the only, the hearing, "What is the rate of this commodity?" And another man says, "This is the price." "So, if it is favorable, purchase." So this is going on. But this is not that kind of question and answer, what is the price of this commodity and that commodity. No. Therefore it is said, śrotavyādīni rājendra [SB 2.1.2]. Neither it is radio message or football club or so many things. No. It is meant for the common class of men. Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇām [SB 2.1.2]. Nṛṇām means common people. Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. That kind of questions and answers are many, many thousands. Why they have got so many thousands, and you have got only one question, one answer about Kṛṣṇa?

That is answered in the next line, that apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. General people, people in general, they are gṛheṣu, in the..., at home. But they are gṛhamedhi. There are two words, gṛhamedhi and gṛhastha in Vedic language. Gṛhastha means those who are householder, living for convenience, wife, children. Because everyone cannot... Especially in this age. Especially in your country, to take sannyāsa is very difficult job. It should not be given; neither it should be taken. Actually, in this age, sannyāsa is forbidden. But if one is very strong, he can accept sannyāsa. So better to remain a gṛhastha and cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is better. Don't accept whimsically sannyāsa and then do all nonsense. No. So it is better to remain gṛhastha. But not gṛhamedhi. Gṛhamedhi means that he does not know anything else than to support the wife and children and live very comfortably, well-dressed, and... That is called gṛhamedhi. His center is only that apartment. He does not know anything more than that apartment. That is called gṛhamedhi. And gṛhastha means that he knows many things, Kṛṣṇa, beyond this apartment. He's called... [break] ...in this way and that way. They have got thousands, thousands of questions and answers. But one who is gṛhastha, his question and answer is one: Kṛṣṇa. That is the only subject matter.

Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we don't talk of anything. We simply talk of Kṛṣṇa. And if we talk of Kṛṣṇa, at least, for hundred years, in the present position, still, our present stock will not be finished. We have got so many books. If for one hundred years, whatever stock we have already got, if we read for one hundred years continually and try to understand one word of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, then it will take hundred years. That one word janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], if you try to understand, you can understand it for one hundred years. So it is so nice, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Go on reading every day. You'll find... Both Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. Every day, the more you become realized, ātmavit, you see new meaning, new light. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is so nice. Simply if you read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Vidyā bhāgavatāvadhiḥ. One is learned... What is the limit of learning? The limit, learning, is when you understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That is the limit. Finished. There is no knowledge required anymore. Therefore it is called śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. The ultimate, first class.

But the apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. Gṛhamedhi, they do not know that there is soul, and the soul is permanent. And we, actually, we are hankering after happiness. For whose happiness? It is soul's happiness. It is Kṛṣṇa's happiness. We, we try to protect this body. We are very much fond of this body. Why? Because the soul is there. Everyone knows it. As soon as this body, there is no soul, it is kicked out, throw it away in the street. Nobody cares for it. Suppose a beautiful man and beautiful girl, dead bodies lying on the street-who cares for it? But as, so long the soul is there, "Oh, such a nice, beautiful, such a nice, beautiful boy, girl." The soul is important.

So actually, we do not love this body because the same beautiful body's there. Why do you not care? Because soul is not... Therefore I love the soul. This is the fact. This is ātmavit, ātma-tattva-vit. And why I love soul? Because I love Kṛṣṇa. Soul is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. So why I am so much fond of soul? Because it is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, ultimately, I love Kṛṣṇa. This is the conclusion. And if I do not love Kṛṣṇa, that is my abnormal stage. And the normal stage is I love Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we are trying to awaken Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As soon as one is fixed up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and begins to love Kṛṣṇa, then he doesn't want to love anything more. Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi: "Now I am fully satisfied." So otherwise, we'll have many questions, many answers so long we are not self-realized, and our time will be spoiled.

So this kṛṣṇa-praśna, inquiry about Kṛṣṇa, that should continually go on. And all the answers you'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And simply by questions and answer, your life will be successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



730406SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1-2

-

New York, April 19, 1973



Prabhupāda: (leads chanting, etc.)



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



So Parīkṣit Mahārāja questioned. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī... "What is my duty? Now I am going to die within seven days, what is my duty?" So he enquired about Kṛṣṇa because Parīkṣit Mahārāja, born in a Vaiṣṇava family, Arjuna's grandson... Pāṇḍavas, they are Vaiṣṇavas and devotee of Kṛṣṇa, so from the childhood he had the opportunity to worship Kṛṣṇa. He was playing with Kṛṣṇa Deity, so naturally he was inclined to hear about Kṛṣṇa. So he enquired, "What is my duty? Shall I simply hear about Kṛṣṇa, or something else?" So on hearing this question, Śukadeva Gosvāmī is congratulating, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "Oh, your question is very wonderful, very welcome, varīyān." Varīyān means "very welcome," what I have given, varīyān. "Glorious, yes. Glorious praśnaḥ, because you have enquired about Kṛṣṇa."



So varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa: [SB 2.1.1] "My dear king, this question is all-auspicious for all the people of the world." If you simply enquire about Kṛṣṇa or hear about Kṛṣṇa, even though we do not understand, but that vibration of Kṛṣṇa... Just like we are chanting "Hare Kṛṣṇa," we may not understand what is meaning of Hare Kṛṣṇa, but still, because it is transcendental sound, it is auspicious. Wherever you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, they may hear or they may not hear, it is auspicious for them. So we are sending our men for street saṅkīrtana. It doesn't matter whether people are eager to hear it or not, but it is auspicious. It will create an atmosphere which is very, very congenial to the human society. That should be our principle. Not that because we are chanting, nobody is taking care, we shall not be disappointed. Our, this saṅkīrtana movement is so nice that simply by chanting, the vibration will create an auspicious atmosphere, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1]. Now you can practically see, those who are old members... So I began in this New York in that storefront simply by chanting. So I did not bribe you American boys and girls to come after me. This is the only asset was chanting. That in Tompkinson square park, this Brahmānanda Swami he first came to dance in my chant. (laughter) He and Acyutānanda, that was the first dancing of our Kṛṣṇa conscious movement. (laughter) Yes. And I had no mṛdaṅgas. That was a, what is that?

Devotee: (indistinct) drum.



Prabhupāda: Drum, little drum. So I was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa for from two to five, three hours, and so many boys and girls were coming and joining, and there was first photograph in the Times, New York Times, they appreciated, and people also appreciated. So this chanting, the beginning was only chanting. There was no, nothing more. At that time there was no program of prasāda distribution. That, later on it came. So we should always be confident that this chanting is not a vibration of this material world. This is not vibration of material world. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. It is imported from the spiritual world. It is completely spiritual. Otherwise how it is possible? Sometimes the so-called yogis, they say that chanting... In Bombay there is a so-called rascal, he says, "The chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and chanting of Coca-cola is the same." He is such a rascal. He does not know that this is not a vibration of this material world. But one who has no knowledge, they think that "What is the meaning of this chant, 'Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa'?" But they can practically see that we can go on chanting day and night, still we shall not become tired, but any other material name you take, after chanting three times you will feel tired. That is the proof. You can go on chanting day and night, you will never feel tired. So these people, poor people, they have (no) brain to understand.



Anyway, the chanting is so auspicious, Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given His benediction, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. We are suffering in this material world because we are not cleansed of our understanding or of our heart. The heart is not cleansed. So this chanting will help us to cleanse the heart.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Chanting is so nice that as soon as you take to chanting, or hear about Kṛṣṇa-the chanting is also hearing about Kṛṣṇa-so immediately the cleansing process begins, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ [Cc. Antya 20.12]. And as soon as our heart is cleansed, bhava-mahā-davāgni-nirvāpaṇam, then we become free from the blazing fire of this material existence. So chanting is so auspicious, therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja here, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa [SB 2.1.1]. In another place also, Śukadeva Gosvā..., Sūta, Sūta Gosvāmī says, yat kṛtaḥ kṛṣṇa-sampraśno yayātmā suprasīdati. When the great saintly persons in the Naimiṣāraṇya enquired about Kṛṣṇa, he replied like that. Yat kṛtaḥ kṛṣṇa-sampraśnaḥ: "Because you have enquired about Kṛṣṇa, it will cleanse your heart, yenātmā suprasīdati. You will feel a very transcendental bliss, comfort, within your heart."



So varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitam [SB 2.1.1]. Loka-hitam. Actually our, this movement is the prime welfare activities to the human society, loka-hitam. It is not a business. Business means my hitam, my benefit only. It is not. It is Kṛṣṇa's business. Kṛṣṇa's business means Kṛṣṇa is for everyone; therefore Kṛṣṇa's business is meant for everyone. We therefore welcome everyone. There is no distinction. "Come here and chant," loka-hitam. And a sādhu, a saintly person should always think of loka-hitam. That is the difference between sādhu and ordinary man. Ordinary man, he thinks only of himself, or expanded himself, for family, for community, for society, for nation. These are all expanded selfishness. Expanded. When I am alone, I am thinking of my benefit only. When I am little grown up, I think of my brothers and sisters, and when I am little advanced, I think of my family. Little advanced, I think of my community. Little advanced, I think of my country, my nation. Or I can think of the whole human society, internationally. But Kṛṣṇa is so big that Kṛṣṇa includes everyone. Not only human society, animal society, bird society, beast society, tree society-everything. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā: [Bg. 14.4] "I am the seed-giving father of all these forms." There are 8,400,000 different kinds of forms. Kṛṣṇa claims "They, all of them, are My part and parcel living entities, but they are now covered by different dress only. But they are living entities." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness vision.

Therefore one who is actual Kṛṣṇa conscious, paṇḍita, paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ... [Bg. 5.18]. Paṇḍitāḥ, he does not see the outward dress; he sees the living entity encased in this particular type of body. So he has no concern with the body. Therefore a sādhu always thinks of everyone's benefit. Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī. Of the Gosvāmīs it is said, lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau. Because they were benefactor for all kinds of living entity, therefore they were honored tri-bhuvane, in three worlds. Tri-bhuvane. Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau. A sādhu's business is for the benefit of all living entities. A sādhu does not like to cut even a tree, because he knows, "Here is a living entity. He is standing here for many years by his karma, and he has to continue this for many years more. So he cannot avoid this because it is nature's law." Just like if you are put into prison for six months, nobody can save you, nobody can make you less, one day less than six months. So we get our particular type of body, we have to remain in that body for a certain period by the laws of nature. So by cutting the body-the living entity does not die-but because we check the continuation of his period, therefore we become sinful. You cannot cut even a tree without Kṛṣṇa's purpose. Without Kṛṣṇa's purpose we cannot kill even an ant, we cannot cut even a tree, then we shall be liable to punishment. So a sādhu sees that "Here is also a living entity." Paṇḍitāḥ sama...

vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 5.18]



Paṇḍita does not make any discrimination that "Here is an animal, here is a man." No, he sees, "The animal is also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. He has got a different body, and the man also, he is also a part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, he has got a different body. Karmaṇā, according to one's karma, he is put into different type." So loka-hitam.



Now, this kṛṣṇa-sampraśnaḥ, the question and answer about Kṛṣṇa, if we simply hear, that is recommendation of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir. You remain (in) your position, but you try to hear about Kṛṣṇa. That is recommended. Simply you come in this temple and try to hear about Kṛṣṇa, sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ. That will purify. Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, Kṛṣṇa's name is so powerful, simply if you hear "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa," you become purified. You become purified. Therefore it is said, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa, ātmavit-sammataḥ [SB 2.1.1]. Ātmavit. It is not that I am only eulogizing. Ātmavit-sammataḥ. All great personalities who is self-realized, ātmavit. Ātmavit means one who knows ātmā. General people, they do not know ātmā. But ātmavit means one who knows ātmā, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "I am spirit soul, I am not this body," and one who is well-acquainted about this ātma-tattva. So unless one becomes aware of this ātma-tattva, whatever he is doing, he is being defeated. They are seeing... Generally people, they are thinking that "I am now constructing this big skyscraper building. I am successful. I have become Rothschild, I have become Paul(?)." That is not ātma-vit. Ātma-vit... Because he is materially opulent, that does not mean ātma-vit. That's a subject matter that will be discussed in the next verse, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. One who cannot see his ātmā: gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. They are compact in this materialistic way of life, gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Their condition is very... Actually this is the position of the whole world. They are not ātma-vit. They do not enquire ātma-tattvam; therefore they are less intelligent. Therefore I say that we, our propaganda is to make people more intelligent. They might not have taken it very nicely. They thought that "This poor swami has come to make us intelligent." But actually that is the fact. That is the fact. This is not intelligence, that, bodily concept of life, "I spoil my whole life for bodily comforts, and then after giving up this body, I become a cat and dog." Then what is that intelligence? Is that very good intelligence? Actually it has happened. I do not wish to discuss. Our Godbrother, Śrīdhara Mahārāja, says... He was speaking from a paper that one of our great politician, very, in India, he has now become a dog in Sweden. It is published. There were enquiries about some prominent men in India, and he has answered, and one of the answer is, "Such-and-such politician, he is now one of the two dogs of a gentleman in Sweden." You see. So this time, in this life I may become very big man, or big politician, big diplomat, big businessman, but next life, after your death, it is your big, your greatness of this material will not help you. That will depend on your work, and nature will offer you a certain type of body, you'll have to accept. Of course you will forget. That is the concession given by nature. Just like we do not remember what we had been in our past life. If I remember that suppose I was a king in my past life, now I have become a dog, then how much suffering it will be. Therefore by nature's law one forgets. And death means this forgetfulness. Death means this forgetfulness.

So this is a great science. People do not know it. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very scientific, authorized, so our business is to enlighten people as far as possible, and at the same time we must remain enlightened. We may not be again covered by the darkness of māyā. That we should be... That you can keep yourself very fit not to be covered by the māyā. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. If you very strictly adhere to the principle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then māyā will not be able to touch you. That is the only remedy. Otherwise māyā is always looking after the opportunity, loophole, how she can capture you again. But if you remain strictly in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, māyā will not be able to do anything. Mām eva ye prapadyante. Daivī hy eṣa guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā. It is very difficult to get out of the clutches of māyā. It is very difficult. But Kṛṣṇa says, mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te: [Bg. 7.14] if one is strictly adhering to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, always... Therefore our, this program is twenty-four hours thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Satatam. Satataṁ cintayo kṛṣṇa. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. These are the recommended. So if we simply think of Kṛṣṇa... If you cannot do anything, simply think of Him. That is the highest meditational perfection. So always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, be in touch with Kṛṣṇa in so many ways, then you are secure. Māyā will not be able to touch you. And if we can somehow or other pass our days and at the time of death we remember Kṛṣṇa, then the whole life is successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



691222SB.BOS

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1-5

-

Boston, December 22, 1969



Prabhupāda: ...Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. So I am so pleased that you are doing things just to my satisfaction. And stick to this principle and Kṛṣṇa will bless you, sure. Our line of action is not difficult: chanting sixteen rounds regularly, following the four regulative principles, take prasādam, read books, we have got so many books, speak, discuss about the subject matter amongst yourself, and this is the process.



So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, you know, I have several times spoken, he had only seven days to meet his death. He was young man, but some way or other, he was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy, not a brāhmaṇa, that he would meet death within seven days, and... This is Vedic culture, that before death one should prepare very nicely to go back to Godhead. This is Vedic culture. The modern civilization, they do not know what is going to happen after death. But our Vedic culture is not so blind. Vedic culture has got an aim, what is the aim of human life, not aimless life. Aimless life is animal life. They have no aim. By the laws of nature they are going on, transforming from one body to another, and ultimately they are coming by evolutionary process to the human form of life. And especially this civilized human form of life, it is very responsible life. One has to make his choice whether he wants to continue his materialistic way of life and change the body, one after another. That is very risky job. You should always remember that if in my next body I am given a body like a tree, just see, in this part of the world, how condemned life. They are standing in the snowfall. You have got house. You are protecting yourself. They cannot even move. So there is possibility of getting such life.

So we should be so much responsible, how to avoid such laws of nature. We can have any form of life out of 8,400,000 species that are before you. You should always remember that "If by chance I slip to one of them, then how I have wasted my time." This is responsible life. Labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte. Bahu-sambhavānte means after many, many appearances. This is appearance. This body, present body, is one of the appearances. It will never appear again. He'll... I will have to or you will have to appear in a different body. But this human form of life is a great opportunity. Bahu-sambhavānte. Bahu means many, and sambhava means appearance. After many, many appearances, we have got this. Labdhvā su-durlabham. Su-durlabham. Su means very costly. Durlabham means to gain with great difficulty. This responsibility must be there in the human form of life. Labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte. After many, many appearances. And what is this? Mānuṣya, man, human form of body. Artha-dam: and you can achieve a great success in this life. This is the hint given. Therefore for that great success everyone should try his best. And one may think that "Now we are young men, young boys and girls. Let us enjoy life." And that facility is very much easy to obtain in your country. In the school, college or society, the young boys and young girls, they have got ample facility for enjoying material life. Enjoying material life means sex life. So Bhāgavata says, "No. You should immediately try for the ultimate success of your life. Don't spoil your life." If we become absorbed in the thoughts of materialistic way of enjoyment, then naturally we have to take birth again in any other form of body, may be human body or may not be human body. But unless we purify our mind and consciousness, we must have to accept the material body.

And if we accept a material body, then all the miserable conditions that we are undergoing with this body, we have to accept it. This is not pessimistic view of life, but this is a fact. Only responsible persons, they can understand. Sanātana Gosvāmī was minister of government. His society was very aristocratic. Very rich men they were. So rich society, aristocratic society, could not satisfy him. He... They resigned the post and joined Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu for ultimate solution of life. These examples are many. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's disciples, direct disciples, they were all very important men, just like Six Gosvāmīs. Even Svarūpa Dāmodara, His private secretary, he was very learned man, Vedantist. And next to his secretary, the six Gosvāmīs, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, they were very, very important rich men of that time. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī happened to be the son of a very big landlord, zamindar. That father's income was twelve hundred thousands of rupees in those days, five hundred years ago. And he was the only son of his father and uncle. So he did not like to enjoy the father's property, but he joined Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is known as Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Similarly, Rūpa-Sanātana Gosvāmī also joined. They were also very rich men, important men. And Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī... Jīva Gosvāmī, very learned scholar and philosopher. He was the nephew of Rūpa Gosvāmī. So they were all very important men of the society. They joined Caitanya Mahāprabhu to make life successful. So these examples we should take and make our life successful.

The successful life means to make our consciousness changed into Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is success. Labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte. We have got this after many, many births, mānuṣyam, this human form of life. Therefore the śāstra says, tūrṇaṁ yateta. I am very glad. You all young boys and girls, you are fortunate. I am not bluffing you. Actually you are fortunate. You have come to the right place, where you can learn Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the greatest boon of life. Tūrṇaṁ yateta. The śāstra says that "Very quickly you should try to finish this business." Because Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he was aware that he was going to live for seven days. But we do not know whether our life is still for seven days or seven minutes. Any moment. There is no guarantee. Don't think that "In old age we shall take up this business of Kṛṣṇa consciousness." By the example of Parīkṣit Mahārāja, we can take the lesson that we do not know when we shall die, but before death we have to become competent in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. What is that competency? Always, twenty-four hours, thinking of Kṛṣṇa. That's all. This is competence.

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, at the last of his life, got the association of a big Kṛṣṇa conscious personality, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. So he asked him, "My dear sir, I am now going to die. So what is my duty? Please tell me." Parīkṣit Mahārāja was born in a family of the Pāṇḍus. He is the grandson of Arjuna. Arjuna's son, Abhimanyu, he died in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Everyone joined, so he also joined. He was sixteen years old boy at that time, but he was married. Fortunately he was married. And when he was in the battlefield, fortunately his wife was pregnant, and this Parīkṣit Mahārāja was the posthumous child. He was born after the death of his father. He could not see his father. His grandfathers raised him. All the boys died, of the whole family, in the battlefield. Only these five brothers remained alive, and this child was in the womb of his mother. Otherwise, the members of the whole Kuru family died in the battle. It was such a big fight. So this child was also hit by atomic energy, brahmāstra, but Kṛṣṇa saved him. Kṛṣṇa wanted that "The descendant of My devotees, they must prolong." They were very good family, Kṛṣṇa conscious family. Kṛṣṇa wants to give protection to the Kṛṣṇa conscious men, family. That you know from the Bhagavad-gītā. So this child was saved even in the womb of his mother by Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa also could save him when the king was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy, but Parīkṣit Mahārāja did not like the idea. He took it very seriously that "I have offended the brāhmaṇa, and he has cursed me. That's nice." You see? How much liberal he was. So he accepted. Immediately he prepared for death.

So after all, he was a great devotee. In his childhood he was playing with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deity. Just like our child, devotee, Mr. DDD. (laughter) Yes. He is playing with Jagannātha. That is very nice. Yes. This is the opportunity. My father also gave me Deities in my childhood, and I had the opportunity to serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa from childhood. So as such, he asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Although he was very much anxious to know about his duty, but he was thinking that "My only duty is to think of Kṛṣṇa at this stage." Therefore he asked his spiritual master, "Whether I shall hear about Kṛṣṇa in this last point of my death?" So Śukadeva Gosvāmī was very glad that "This king is already anxious. I was just going to advise him to think of Kṛṣṇa, but I see that he is already anxious to think of Kṛṣṇa." He is always thinking because from the childhood he was playing. From the womb of his mother he saw Kṛṣṇa. So after his birth he was searching after "that figure who saved me." Therefore his name was Parīkṣit. He was examiner. So many... He was royal family child. So, so many people were present after his birth. So he was looking after, "Where is that form, Kṛṣṇa?" Therefore his name is Parīkṣit.

So when he inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, "If I can hear about Kṛṣṇa?" so Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied,

varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



"O my dear king, you are very fortunate. Your question about Kṛṣṇa is welcome." Varīyān. Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: "You are inquiring about Kṛṣṇa. So this very question is very important." Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa: [SB 2.1.1] "And this is not good for you only; it is good for all the human society because you have questioned and I shall reply." So Kṛṣṇa questions and answers are so important that in future these questions and answers will be discussed in the human society. Actually it is being done so now. We are discussing the same incidents. And he said, ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsām: "And this question is so authorized that ātmavit, those who are interested in self-realization, they have got their approval, 'Yes. This is nice question.' " Ātmavit-sammataḥ. Sammata means approved. It is not bogus question. It is approved. This sort of question should be inquired, Kṛṣṇa, about Kṛṣṇa. And if you speak about Kṛṣṇa... The whole world is full with questions and answers, so these questions and answers are approved by ātmavit, those who are self-realized, not bodily realized, ātmavit. There are two classes of men. Ninety-nine point nine percent, they are bodily realized men, always thinking of the body. And just there is another class; they are called ātmavit, self-realized, Kṛṣṇa conscious persons. Ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. Śrotavya means worth hearing. There are many kinds of subject matter for hearing, but this is the sublime subject matter of hearing, kṛṣṇa-praśna.



So questions and answer about Kṛṣṇa, śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ... Para means sublime; śrotavya means worth by hearing. So why it is para, sublime? He said,

śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



This Bhāgavata is so, I mean to say, exalted transcendental knowledge that there are eighteen thousand verses, and if you analyze each verse, each word, you will get a great transcendental information. There is no comparison with this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. Amalam, spotless. This purāṇam, this old history of the world... This is also history. Just like this incidence, Parīkṣit Mahārāja was cursed by a brāhmaṇa, he was the king, emperor of the world, and how he met his death, these things are described in this history. Is it not? So this is also history. But it is not ordinary history, not history, chronological history, as we generally mean, but it is a history of the most important men in the world. Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. He is the most important, at least one of the most important kings in the world. His history of death and life is historical fact.



So Śukadeva Gosvāmī said that "My dear king," śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ: [SB 2.1.2] "for ordinary men there are many, many subject matters for hearing." Just like you see the newspaper, there are many varieties of news, but they are meant for whom? For ordinary men. They are not meant for us. We don't care for what is happening in the newspaper. At least our boys and girls, they do not care for these things, although everyone is anxious to read early in the morning the newspaper. You see? This very fact is stated here: śrotavyādīni. What is this newspaper? Newspaper, the Sanskrit word is śrotavyādīni. Śrotavya means "the things which is to be heard." So what is this newspaper? Unless there is some news, what you will hear? So this word, very word, śrotavyādīni. Pradyumna, you understand śrotavyādīni? No? Śrotavyādīni means subject of news. So he said, "There are many subject of news, or newspaper." Śrotavyādīni rājendra [SB 2.1.2]. He is addressing the king, rājendra. He was the emperor. Therefore, "the king of the kings," rājendra. "My dear rājendra, emperor, there are many varieties of subject matter for hearing." For whom? Nṛṇām: "for the human society." Nṛṇām means human beings. Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. But what class of human being? Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam: "Those who are fools and rascals without any self-realization knowledge. For them." Apaśyatām. Apaśyatām means blind, cannot see. They have got their eyes, but they have no introspection, what is the value of life. Therefore he says, apaśyatām. Simply they have eyes like the peacock feather. (laughter) They have no introspection. Eyes means introspection. Therefore Vedic culture says, eyes... Śāstra-cakṣus: "You should see through śāstra. Don't try to see by these eyes." These are, what is the value of this eye? They are conditioned in so many ways. You don't believe the eyes. See through the śāstra, through the spiritual master, through the śāstra. Try to see through this. That is perfect seeing.

So the subject matter for hearing for the ordinary person, those who are engaged in family matters, gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām... So does it mean to become a family man is bad? No. It does not mean. But if you become gṛhamedhī, that is particularly said, gṛheṣu gṛhamedhī. Gṛheṣu, living in family life, but in family life there are also two classes of men: gṛhastha and these gṛhamedhī. Therefore I say that each and every word of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you will have new enlightening, new. Difference, there is difference between gṛhastha and gṛhamedhī. Gṛhamedhī, just like ordinary persons, their household life means they have made the home as the center of their existence. Just like I was seeing just now the rooms of our gṛhastha, householder, boys and girls. Things are scattered. (laughter) But if you go to another person's, gṛhastha (gṛhamedhī), you will find their apartment nicely decorated, chairs, cushions, and sitting place, but they have no vision about self. And here, although we see that household affairs, their resting place, is not so nicely decorated, but their aim is Kṛṣṇa. So that is the difference between gṛhamedhī and gṛhastha. Gṛhamedhī means they simply want to decorate their apartment and children and wife. That is their end of life. That is all. They have no other business. Apaśyatām, blind of the value of life. Whereas the gṛhastha, he is not blind about the value of his life. He is simply looking forward, how to become successful, Kṛṣṇa conscious. So those who are blind of the point of self-realization, such householders, they have got many subject matter of hearing in the newspapers. Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. Sahasraśaḥ means thousands of subject matters. For whom? Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Such householders who made their aim of life to decorate the apartment. That's all. Work whole day and night, and have good dress, good apartment. That's all. They think this is success. These things are, were before also.

So these are being pointed out, gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. For them there are many thousands of news items. Why they have got thousands? Now, what is their mode of life? That is explained. Their mode of life, Śukadeva Gosvāmī explained to Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ: [SB 2.1.3] "At night they are wasting their duration of life either by sleeping or by sex life." That's all. This is their business at night. Then, at daytime, what is their business? At daytime, divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā: [SB 2.1.3] "And daytime, they are always busy: 'Where is money? Where is money? Where is money? (laughter) Where is money?' " Divā cārthe. Arthe means money. Īhayā, hankering after money. Then? They are getting money. Why they should waste their time? No. Nidrayā... Divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā: [SB 2.1.3] As soon as there is money, there is immediately program how to spend it for family. Kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā. Kuṭumba means family, relatives. You see? They will spend thousands of dollars for family and relatives. But if you ask some dollars for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are not interested (inclined?). You see? So for these persons there are varieties of material news. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. At night... So their life means day and night. So this is the program of their life. At night those, either sleeping or going to the night club or dancing club, sex life. That's all. Not that these things are new. These are old things. People were accustomed to all these things only... The human nature is always... They are thinking, "modern days." What do you mean by "modern days"? Nothing has changed. "Putting the old wine in new bottle." That's all. (laughter) The practice is going on. Divā cārthehayā.

So the question is why they are wasting their life in this way? So that is answered also. He says,

dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



Dehāpatya. Dehāpatya. Deha means this body, and apatya means change of. Dehāpatya-kalatra. Kalatra means wife. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu ātma-sainyeṣu. Just like a nation feels himself well-protected when the nation has got good defense measure, similarly, an ordinary man, he thinks that "If I have got strong built body and very faithful wife and nice children," dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu, "and after this," means, "some good bank balance, some landed property, security, these things," one person accepts, "they will give me protection. Yes. They will give. I am now well-protected. I have got nice children. I have got nice wife. I have got good bank balance. I have got so many properties. So why shall I go to Kṛṣṇa conscious? I am well-protected. These boys and girls, they have no bank balance. They have no home. Therefore they should go." But they are blind. How they are blind? They are thinking that these things will give him protection. Pramatta. Pramatta means crazy. (laughter) Crazy. By craziness he is thinking that "These things will give me protection." No. Teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. Because he is crazy, he does not see to the destruction of these things although he is seeing others, that they are being destroyed every moment. "My father has died. Naturally I shall die. Naturally my sons also will die. So why I am so much anxious of protecting this family? Everyone will die." Paśyann api na paśyati. They see, but still do not see. They see daily that "I am working so hard for these things, but these things will be destroyed, as it has been destroyed previously in the history." So many empires were destroyed. The British empire destroyed, the Roman empire destroyed, the Egyptian empire destroyed, the, I mean to say, the Indian empire... Formerly..., just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. He was the emperor of the world. So these things, paśyann api na paśyati, they see that "They cannot give me protection. When I shall be called for death..." Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja is preparing. "At that time, all these, my soldiers, my bank balance, my good wife, my good children, my good countrymen-no. Nobody can give me any protection." Just like when you have to fly in the sky, you have to protect yourself. No other can... Take it for the birds or for the airplanes. If you are being crushed in the airplane, no other airplane can protect you. You'll have to come down from the sky. (laughter) Similarly, when death will come, none of you will be able to give me protection. Either my good state or good family or good bank balance or good this, that. No. That's all, finished. You see?



So Śukadeva Gosvāmī giving right instructions to Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Then what should be the subject matter? This so-called rascaldom news, they are not meant for hearing. Therefore he concludes,

tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



Icchatā abhayam. Abhayam. Bhaya means fear, and abhayam means fearlessness. If one is actually expecting that he should be protected, abhayam, there should be no more anything of fearfulness. Then Śukadeva Gosvāmī is instructing that tasmāt... Because these things, if you simply divert your attention to the varieties of newspaper or any other information of this world which is full of this gṛhamedhī, whose business is to sleep at night and work hard at daytime, that will not give you protection. Then? What I have to do? "You have to hear about Bhagavān, Hari, Īśvara." Tasmād bhārata sarvātmā. "Bhārata" because Parīkṣit Mahārāja happened to be a descendant of the Kuru dynasty. The Kuru dynasty was begun from King Bharata, Bharata. There are two, three Bharatas in the history of Vedic literature. One Bharata is Lord Rāmacandra's brother, younger brother. His mother, Bharata's mother, wanted to make Bharata king. Therefore, by palace diplomacy, Rāmacandra was sent to the forest. But His brother Bharata declined, "No." His mother wanted that "My son should be king." There were three wives of Mahārāja Daśaratha. So this is one Bharata. He was faithful to His brother, but by His mother's diplomacy Lord Rāmacandra was sent to the forest. So this is one celebrated Bharata. Another Bharata is the forefather of the Kuru dynasty. His name is also Bharata. And another Bharata was the son of King Ṛṣabhadeva, by whose name this planet is called Bhāratavarṣa. This whole planet is called Bhāratavarṣa. So he is addressing Parīkṣit Mahārāja as the descendant of King Bharata, Bhārata." He bhārata. You have to talk and hear about sarvātmā, the Supersoul who is sitting in everyone's heart, Bhagavān, the Personality of Godhead, full with all opulences." Bhagavān, this word, every word, suggests volumes of meaning. And Hari: "who can take away all your sufferings." Īśvara: "and He is the controller, supreme controller."



So instead of diverting your attention to the varieties of news of this world, you just try to... No, not try. You must. You must. Sarvātmā harir īśvaraḥ. What is that? Śrotavya: "Always hear about Him." Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. Kīrtana. Hearing, then preaching. Therefore we have got our Kīrtanānanda Mahārāja, kīrtitavya, who will now preach. Kīrtitavya. Hearing, then kīrt... After hearing, the next stage is spreading, pushing on, the news of Kṛṣṇa. First of all hearing, then kīrtitavyaś ca, spreading. And smartavya. Smartavya means thinking always. Otherwise what you will preach? You hear, you think of it, you preach-this is the business. Smartavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca, śrotavyaḥ. For whom? Icchatā akuto bhayam. Icchatābhayam, those who are actually seeking protection. Not this protection, that your bank balance, your good wife, this and... No. They will not give you protection. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was advised by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, his spiritual master, "This is your business at the point of death." So not only at the point of death. You cannot take to this business all of a sudden, even it is advised. You have to practice. Just like you cannot become a good soldier on the battlefield. You have to be trained yourself before going to the battle, military training. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is training before you ultimately meet death, fight with. So this is the advice given by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and we shall read later on.

Thank you very much. (end)



740626SB.MEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1-5

-

Melbourne, June 26, 1974



Prabhupāda: (leads chanting of oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya and Sanskrit verses:)



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



nidrayā hṛiyate naktaṁ

vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ

divā cārthehayā rājan

kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā

[SB 2.1.3]



dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



Thank you.



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



(aside:) Give me water. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, śrī-śuka uvāca. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the accepted spiritual master of King Parīkṣit, is replying to his inquiry, "What is the duty of a person who is going to die?" Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going to die within seven days. He was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy to die within seven days. The reason is that the king was in the forest, engaged in hunting, and when he became tired he went to the cottage of a sage and asked him for water. But the sage was absorbed in meditation, could not hear him, so Parīkṣit Mahārāja, being thirsty, became angry, and there was a dead snake. So he, out of negligence, he took the dead snake and wrapped over the neck of the meditating sage. This news was spread and his son, twelve years old only, he heard that his father was insulted. So immediately he cursed that this snake would bit him within seven days. So this news was brought, although the father, after his meditation was over, he was very..., he was sorry that such a great king has been cursed. So he was very, very sorry, but what can be done? The brāhmaṇa boy's curse must be effective. That because in those days brāhmaṇas, even by caste, was very, very strong in spiritual strength. So when Parīkṣit Mahārāja was informed that he was to die within seven days, he accepted the curse: "Yes, I was wrong to insult the sage." Otherwise, he could counteract. He was also very powerful. But he did not. So this is the history.



So immediately he left his kingdom, family, children, and went to the bank of the Ganges and sat down there, being prepared for the coming imminent death, within seven days. So because he was emperor of the world... So he was going to die. This news was spread, and all big, big men, great saintly persons, even demigods, they also come to see him. And he was asking everyone, "What is my duty?" So at that time Śukadeva Gosvāmī also arrived there. Śukadeva Gosvāmī was young boy, but paramahaṁsa. So he was received in that big assembly as the great personality of knowledge. Even his father Vyāsadeva was present. So everyone stood up. His father also stood up to receive him, he was such a great personality. And then he was given nice seat, as is the custom, to give advice to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: "What was my duty?" But Parīkṣit Mahārāja was, from the beginning of his life, was a devotee himself, a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. And he inquired, "Whether I shall devote or I shall absorb my mind with Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" Because he was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Many people gathered. They gave different advices: "Mahārāja, you do this at the time of death," and "Do that," "Do this." So there were many big, big persons. He was perplexed. But he was a devotee of Kṛṣṇa from the very beginning of his life, and thus he inquired, "Whether it is better to absorb the mind in Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" This was his question.

So in answer to this question, Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "My dear King..." Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa. Nṛpa, "the king," address. "My dear king, your inquiry is very glorified," varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitam [SB 2.1.1], "because on account of this question, whatever I shall reply..." Means he knew. The reply is this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Question was about Kṛṣṇa, and the reply is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, eighteen thousand verses. And each and every verse is so important that if a serious student studies each and every verse, each verse will take at least one month to understand. And there are eighteen thousand verses. So for serious study of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, it will take eighteen thousand months. So eighteen thousand months meaning how many years? One thousand five hundred years. (laughter) It is such an important book, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Each verse is a new verse, not repetition of the same subject. And it is deeply thoughtful. And every verse is, as it is stated here, ātmavit-sammataḥ, approved by persons who are self-realized. Ātmavit. Ātmavit. Ātmā means self, and vit means one who knows, well aware of self-realization. They are called ātmavit.

Generally people are ātmavit, bodily conscious, mass of people or class of people also. Hardly you will find a person at the present moment ātmavit, self-realized. Everyone is: "I am this body." "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am Canadian," "I am Australian," "I am white," "I am black," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am śūdra," this way-"I am this body." Ātmavit means "I am the self; I am the soul." Bhāgavata... This is the Vedic word. If one understands that "I am not this body; I am spirit soul," he is called ātmavit, or he is liberated. He is not bodily conscious platform. There are three platforms of identification with self. Those who are grossly in ignorance, exactly like animals... Just like a dog. A dog thinks that he is the body. He cannot think that he is not the body, he is the soul. That is not possible. Because he is born in such a body, he is entrapped in such a body, animal body, they cannot think that the animal, the cat and dog, is different from the body. But at the present moment, so many big, big scholars and professors and educationists, they are also the same category as the dog. As the dog is thinking, "I am this body," he is also thinking, "I am this body." And on this bodily concept there are so many nations, big, big nation, they are on the bodily concept of life. Not ātmavit. Ātmavit is different, that "I am not this body; I am soul," Bhāgavata,.

So kṛṣṇa-praśna, inquiry about Kṛṣṇa, and to understand Kṛṣṇa means on the spiritual platform, ātmavit. That is not material body, material platform. Material platform means "I am this body; you are this body. So Kṛṣṇa is also like us. Kṛṣṇa has a material body, and He is like me." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]. Kṛṣṇa should not be considered as ordinary being. We are worshiping Kṛṣṇa in this temple, not an ordinary being. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. He is greater than the greatest and still, He can become smaller than the smallest. That is his greatness. He can become... He can show Arjuna the virāḍ-rūpa, the universal form; at the same time, He can talk with Arjuna as ordinary friend. This is Kṛṣṇa. You have read Bhagavad-gītā. He was talking on the chariot as his friend, but when there was need, He... Arjuna wanted to see the universal friend, and Kṛṣṇa showed him that universal form, gigantic form, everything including. So that Kṛṣṇa is ātmā, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān and Brahman. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11].

So kṛṣṇa-praśna means all-including, everything-past, present, future, moving, not moving, and big and small. This is Kṛṣṇa understanding. Kṛṣṇa understanding means past, present, future, small, large, moving, not moving. This is Kṛṣṇa understanding. But everything is in either of these categories. Everything must be either in the past or at present or in future. So this is past, present and future. And there are moving and... Just like we. We are, animals or man or birds and beasts and insect or aquatics, we are moving. And there are not moving, just like the hill, stones, the trees, plants, the grass. They do not move. But we are moving. So moving, unmoving. And we exist past, present, future. And there is biggest, bigger than the biggest, the whole universe. Although you have got airships, you cannot go, neither others. So many machines have been discovered, but go and see the... They cannot go even to the moon planet, what to speak of others. Therefore it is very big for us. When we speak of universe we cannot think of. They simply calculate, the scientists, by light year, and this year, that year, the speed. But we cannot approach even in this material world, and what to speak of Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is in the spiritual world. We cannot calculate the length and breadth of this material world. Our knowledge is so imperfect and meager, and what we can understand of the spiritual world? The material world is a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's one-fourth energy. And the three-fourths' energy is manifested in the spiritual world. This is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore when one inquires about Kṛṣṇa, he is very glorified. Therefore he says, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ. Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitam [SB 2.1.1]. Because answer to this question will include everything, and people will profit, loka-hitam. The saintly person's duty is to do welfare to the people in general. That is saintly person. Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau. About the Gosvāmīs, ṣaḍ-gosvāmī, it is stated that nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau. The six Gosvāmīs, they were very, very learned scholars, nānā-śāstra, various different scriptures, vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau, very expert in studying all the scriptures scrutinizingly, nipuṇau, expert. This is the, I mean to say, calculation of the Gosvāmīs. So why they are concerned about studying so many scriptures? Sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. Sad-dharma. Dharma means... The exact meaning of dharma is "occupational duty." People are... In English they translate dharma as "faith." Faith can be changed. I like this faith today. Tomorrow I may like another faith. So actually the translation of dharma is not "faith." It is "occupational duty."

So what should be our occupational duty? Sad-dharma. Sad-dharma means... Sat means eternal. Real occupational duty... Now I am working as American or others working as Indian or German or Englishmen, or this family men. Everyone has got some occupational duty. But this occupational duty... Suppose I am working as American or European or Australian. This is temporary, because this body is temporary. And I am in bodily concept of life. Therefore my duty, so-called duty, is also temporary. As soon as the body is finished, I begin another chapter of duty. Suppose this life I am human being; next life I may not be human being. This statement was not liked by the newspaper man. (laughing) He was told that next life you can become animal, so he has published in my name, "The swami can become animal." Also the swami can become also animal. The so-called swami, they will become animal. (laughter) So that is not wrong. But we devotees, we are not afraid of becoming animal. Our only ambition is that we become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

So the animals, the cows and calves, who are Kṛṣṇa conscious... You have seen the picture of Kṛṣṇa? Yes. So better that we shall become animal of Kṛṣṇa. So there is nothing wrong. Even if we become an animal of Kṛṣṇa, that is also very worthy. That is not ordinary thing. Kṛṣṇa is embracing. Kṛṣṇa... You see the picture. Kṛṣṇa is embracing. Surabhīr abhipālayantam. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. Kṛṣṇa always tends the cows. His name is cowherd boy. To become animal of Kṛṣṇa is a great, great fortune. It is not ordinary thing. Any associate of Kṛṣṇa, either His cowherd boyfriends or calf or cows, or the Vṛndāvana trees, plants, flowers or water, they are all devotees of Kṛṣṇa. They like to serve Kṛṣṇa in different capacities. Somebody is serving Kṛṣṇa as animal. Somebody is serving Kṛṣṇa as fruits and flowers, as tree, as Yamunā water, or the beautiful cowherds men and damsels or Kṛṣṇa's father and mother, so many with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is not imperson. So He has got so many lovers. Kṛṣṇa also loves them. So Kṛṣṇa's another name is paśu-pāla, paśu-pāla-paṅkaja. He is, mean, tender of the animals. Surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. He takes pleasure in tending the cows, surabhī. These are surabhī cows, not these ordinary cows, surabhī cows. Surabhī cows means you can milk the cow as many times as you like and as much milk as you like. That is surabhī.

So therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī says "It is glorified question you have inquired about Kṛṣṇa." So about Kṛṣṇa, it is called kṛṣṇa-kathā, topics about Kṛṣṇa. The topics or the instruction given by Kṛṣṇa is the Bhagavad-gītā, and the topics about the activities of Kṛṣṇa is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So some way or other, let us always discuss about Kṛṣṇa. That should be the life of Kṛṣṇa conscious people. So this is life of Kṛṣṇa, worshiping Kṛṣṇa in the temple, to sell Kṛṣṇa's books, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, to think of Kṛṣṇa-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa-to eat kṛṣṇa-prasādam, to take all risk for Kṛṣṇa, to do work for Kṛṣṇa, as Arjuna, to fight for Kṛṣṇa. He did not like to fight, but for Kṛṣṇa's sake he fought. So fight for Kṛṣṇa, work for Kṛṣṇa, think of Kṛṣṇa, eat kṛṣṇa-prasādam, talk of Kṛṣṇa, read for Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. This is life. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So this is very glorified life. Here it is said that varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa [SB 2.1.1]. So ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. Paraḥ means the supreme perfect. You are hearing the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam about Kṛṣṇa. There are many subject matter of hearing. Just like in newspaper you hear so many news. But if you hear something about Kṛṣṇa, that is the only perfect thing. That news has been published in this morning, many papers, "Kṛṣṇa..., the leader of the Kṛṣṇa movement," or "This Hare Kṛṣṇa movement." There is some vibration of the word "Kṛṣṇa." That makes the atmosphere purified, surcharged. So many thousands and millions of people will read "Kṛṣṇa." Willing or unwillingly, they'll read "Kṛṣṇa." That is their profit. Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ, loka-hitam [SB 2.1.1]. Immediately, they once utter the word "Kṛṣṇa," they become benefited. Never mind what is the news. Oh, we don't care for that. (laughter) But because they will utter the word "Kṛṣṇa," that is our profit. That is our profit for Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (aside:) There is water? So chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. [break]

Madhudviṣa: More water? Pertaining to the lecture? Yes, Gopī-kanta?



Gopī-kanta: Śrīla Prabhupāda, what is the exact benefit if a person just takes a Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam on the street and gives some donation to help out the printing costs or whatever?



Prabhupāda: That is already explained. They will read. They will see the picture of Kṛṣṇa. Immediate profit is: they will ask "What is this picture?" And you will say, "Kṛṣṇa." "Oh," they say, "it is Kṛṣṇa?" Then... (laughter) From the beginning of the, what is called, cover, the benefit begins, because the uttering the word "Kṛṣṇa" is benefit. Then, if he reads... Of course, if he pays for the book, he will read. So you give a chance to the person to know about Kṛṣṇa. Their life becomes sublime.



Hari-śauri: Śrīla Prabhupāda, earlier you were speaking that Kṛṣṇa means everything past, present and future and...



Prabhupāda: Everything, whatever you can think of. Kṛṣṇa includes everything. Without Kṛṣṇa, there is nothing. Because... Take anything. Take this table. This is stone. But the stone is also Kṛṣṇa. You have read in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. Kṛṣṇa says that "These five gross material elements-earth, water, air, fire, ether-mind, intelligence and ego, they are My separated energies." Just like I am speaking. Now, this speaking recorded, when it will be replaced, the same sound will come. So that is my energy, but separated. I am on there, but still, the vibration is exactly what I am speaking because these words are emanated from me. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa says that "This earth is emanation of My energy. So therefore this earth... The stone is also earth, another form of earth. Therefore it is manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's energy. Therefore it is Kṛṣṇa. Energy and the energetic-no different. Just like the sun is situated 93,000,000's of miles away from you, but the sunshine, as soon as it reaches your body, you understand what is sun-heat and light-immediately. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When one is learned about Kṛṣṇa, whatever He sees... When he sees the stone, he also sees Kṛṣṇa, immediately remembers the stone is manifestation of the energy of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Nothing is different from Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When one understands that everything is manifestation of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's energy, the... Exactly the same: just like the fire is situated in somewhere, but the fire exhibits or demonstrates its energy, the light and heat, although fire is far away, just like the sun is far, far away, but still, by sun's light and heat, he is spread all over the universe, similarly, Kṛṣṇa, by His two energies, material energy and spiritual energy... That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

[Bg. 7.4]



apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

[Bg. 7.5]



So there are two energies, exactly like heat and light. One, the spiritual energy, and the other is material energy. The material energy is inferior energy and the spiritual energy is the superior energy. What is the spiritual energy? Jīva-bhūta, these living entities. The living entity is superior because it is controlling the inferior energy, matter. These are very scientific. It is not sentiment. Everything Kṛṣṇa consciousness is scientific. Simply one requires the brain to understand. Then, when he understands, he will see Kṛṣṇa in everything. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta: sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe nā dekhe tāra mūrti [Cc. Madhya 8.274]. When a devotee, advanced devotee, sees something, he does not see the formation of that thing. He sees the energy. A highly advanced devotee will not see the stone. He immediately will think of Kṛṣṇa, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is so powerful that His energy is exhibited in stone." Therefore he does not see stone. He sees only Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, perfection of.



sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti

[Cc. Madhya 8.274]



Everywhere he sees Kṛṣṇa, nothing but Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



Madhudviṣa: Śrīla Prabhupāda, you spoke of inferior energy and superior energy. Those are two general categories. Are there other categories of energies besides that, and specifically how could we understand Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī? Is She...



Prabhupāda: She is spiritual energy.



Madhudviṣa: But is She jīva-bhūta or...



Prabhupāda: No, no, no. She is Kṛṣṇa. If everything is Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī is not Kṛṣṇa, what is that? Kṛṣṇa. He (She) is Kṛṣṇa. She is the Kṛṣṇa's pleasure potency.



Madhudviṣa: She is not jīva?



Prabhupāda: No, no, no. She is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa divided Himself into His energy and Himself. That energy, original spiritual energy, is Rādhārāṇī. That is stated by Jīva Gosvāmī. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmāt. When Kṛṣṇa wants pleasure, He cannot accept the inferior energy. The same superior energy, Kṛṣṇa, is divided into two. That is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And again, when they unite, that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Divided, they are Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and united, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya. Anya means another. So Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is combination of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. And when they are divided into two, that is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This is the purport. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau, śrī-caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptam [Cc. Ādi 1.5]. These are the conclusion. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa combination. But He is playing the part of Rādhārāṇī to understand Kṛṣṇa. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Madhudviṣa: One more question.



Devotee (1): Śrīla Prabhupāda, if Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, why do we stress the importance of living a very strict life in the temple atmosphere?



Prabhupāda: But have you got the eyes to see Kṛṣṇa everywhere?



Devotee (1): No, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Then you must attention give to temple. When you have got the eyes to see Kṛṣṇa everywhere, you may not require temple worship. But why do you try to imitate that? You have no eyes to see that. Yes.



Devotee (2): Śrīla Prabhupāda, you mentioned three states of identification. One was like the animals. What was the other two?



Prabhupāda: What is that?



Devotee (2): One was to identify with the body as the self like the animals. And then you mentioned... You said there were three altogether.



Prabhupāda: Oh, yes. Bodily conception, mental conception and spiritual conception. When one is ignorant, he is like animal. When he is farther advanced, he is a philosopher. And when he is farther advanced, he is a devotee. These are three different stages: like animal, like philosopher and like devotee. So when you think like devotee, that is perfection. And you think that "I am American," "I am Indian"-that is animal. So it is according to the advancement of one's life. There are three stages: animal conception, mental conception and spiritual conception. So spiritual conception is perfect, all perfect. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





700702SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.1-6 Excerpts

-

Los Angeles, July 2, 1970



(Prabhupāda and devotees recite verses)

Prabhupāda: Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2].



"My dear king..." Śukadeva Gosvāmī is speaking to King Parīkṣit that "There are many subject matters for the persons who are materialistic." What sort of... Why they are engaged in so many topics? Ātma-tattvam apaśyatām. They do not see what is self-realization. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Apaśyatām... Generally, we do not know, we cannot see what is ātmā in these material eyes. Therefore the material scientists, they say that there is no soul, because they cannot see. With their instruments or with their knowledge it is not possible. Apaśyatām. They do not see it. Therefore we cannot believe our eyes. These eyes are not fit to see anything. It is under certain condition it gives us some impression. Otherwise... Therefore my Guru Mahārāja used to say that saintly persons should be seen not through the eyes, but through the ears. There are different processes of seeing. Don't believe that eyes are sufficient to see everything. No.

So ātma-tattvam. Those who are not interested what is self, for them there are different thousands and millions of topics. Śrotavyādīni rājendra [SB 2.1.2]. Everyone is hearing. Somebody is talking, somebody is hearing... Even there is politics, conspiracy, there is also hearing and talking. But these talkings, thousands and thousands of talkings of different subject matter, for whom? For them who are unable to see what is soul. For them. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Why they have become so? Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. They want to be packed up within this material package and they have made their life in that way. Gṛheṣu. Just like ordinary man, he is interested with his apartment, family. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4]. That śloka is next explained. He's interested with these things: how his nice apartment is maintained, how his wife is nicely dressed, how his children are nicely educated. So much. That's all. They are called gṛhamedhī. These words. Gṛhamedhī. So those who are married disciples, I will request them specifically that because you are married, you don't become gṛhamedhī. Then you lose this chance. I am getting reports from outside that some of our family disciples, they are not very much attending temples regularly. So if they do not attend temples, do not take to the service, then gradually they'll become gṛhamedhī, just like ordinary karmīs.

So as soon as one becomes gṛhamedhī, he becomes blind to see what is self-realization. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that those who are blind, those who have been encaged in the materialistic way of life, for them, there are thousands and thousands of topics to hear and to chant. But those who are seeing to the self... Self is one. Ekaṁ brahma dvitīyaṁ nāsti. For them, one talk only about Kṛṣṇa. So I'll request you, all my beloved disciples present here, that don't turn to that point, gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Stick to this point, Kṛṣṇa. Then you'll be happy. Don't talk, create. Thousand... As soon as we go out of the scope of this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there will be so many talks. And that will mislead you. That is māyā. And if you stick to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no secrecy, there is no duplicity, there is no diplomacy. One talk, Kṛṣṇa: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma... That will make you satisfied. Yayātmā suprasīdati. If you want actually happiness then you stick to these Kṛṣṇa consciousness topics. Don't bring in anything other, else. Then that will become gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2].

So I am especially talking to my sannyāsī disciples, who are going out today on a great mission. Please stick to this principle-one-Kṛṣṇa. You will be benefited, and the persons to whom you'll talk, they will be benefited, the world will be benefited. So you have got a very great responsibility. Don't turn into the talks of the gṛhamedhī and break it. That is my request.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Yes. Chant. (devotees offer obeisances) So you will start just at half past seven? So we have got little time. Better perform... That's all. (kīrtana) [break] Car is ready? Car? We'll go to the car or you have got...

Gargamuni: Yes, there will be a truck?



Prabhupāda: Truck? Where is that truck?



Brahmānanda: It will be out front.



Prabhupāda: So they'll go there? No.



Gargamuni: We have to take our bags.



Prabhupāda: Oh. So I want to see you in the car. [break] (Prabhupāda and devotees recite together SB 2.1.1-6) Again this verse.



etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ

sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā

janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām

ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ

[SB 2.1.6]



Again this verse (repeats again with devotees). So we discussed which verse? Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. This verse we discussed yesterday, that "Those who are materialistic persons, they have got hundreds and thousands of topics," and, although we are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because we are in the material world, sometimes we have to deal with many unnecessary talks. But mind that our unnecessary talks and others' unnecessary talks are not the same, because we sometimes talk unnecessarily, but the aim is Kṛṣṇa. Just like Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. The Bhagavad-gītā begins,



dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre

samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

kim akurvata sañjaya

[Bg. 1.1]



The topics began from the warfield, dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre. But it is dharma-kṣetra. "Why dharma-kṣetra? It is battlefield." Because Kṛṣṇa is there. Kṛṣṇa is conducting the battle, therefore it is dharma-kṣetra. Dharma-kṣetra means religious... (end)





710913SB.MOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.2

-

Mombassa, September 13, 1971



Prabhupāda:



...apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



Now here is one significant factor. The Suta Gosvāmī, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he is addressing a king, rājendra. Formerly, that was the system. The saintly persons, learned brāhmaṇas and sages, they would give instruction to the kings because the king was in charge of the public affairs. So they would take instruction from the learned and by their direction, they would rule over the citizens. This is the division of four orders of life: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. The brāhmaṇa means the most intelligent class of men in the society. Kṣatriya means the administrators, the politicians, the rulers of the society. Vaiśya means the productive class, traders, industrialists, those who are producing money or food, vaiśya. And śūdra means ordinary workers. That is the Vedic social system. And in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13], "The social order, the brāhmaṇa, the kṣatriya, the vaiśya, and the śūdra, they are created by Me." So anything created by God is present everywhere within the universe. So point is that don't think that the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, these divisions of society are in India only, no. Everywhere. Everywhere there are men who are very intelligent. They are supposed to be brāhmaṇa class. Then less, the politicians, the rulers, kṣatriya class. Then less, the traders, industrialists, they are vaiśyas. And the ordinary workers, they are śūdras.



So formerly, instructions were given to the administrators so that their brain may be adjusted how to rule over the people. Rājendra Mahārāja Parīkṣit-rājendra means the emperor of the world-he was taking instruction at the point of his death. This subject matter we discussed in the last meeting last night that Mahārāja Parīkṣit, King Parīkṣit, was just awaiting his death within seven days. Therefore, he was consulting learned sages what to do. So the Śukadeva Gosvāmī advised that "You hear about Kṛṣṇa. This is the most important subject matter." Therefore, he is discussing, śrotavyādīni rājendra [SB 2.1.2], "My dear King, rājendra," śrotavyādīni, subject matter for hearing. Nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ, the human society has got many thousands varieties of subject matter to hear. Just like newspapers in every country, they are being published not only once, twice, thrice, four times in a day and they are giving news of the city and the subject matters are very important, say, for two minutes or five minutes, then the newspaper is thrown away, nobody cares for it. But people have got the tendency to hear. That is a fact.

Now, what subject matter you are interested to hear, that depends on your quality. Because the whole world is running on under three qualitative divisions. And under these three qualitative divisions, some of them are very intelligent class of men, some of them are administrator class of men, some of them are trader class of men, some of them simply worker. So this subject matter is also divided into three groups according to the quality of the readers or hearers. Here Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, "For ordinary general people, there are many thousands varieties of subject matter for hearing." Just like you have got, especially in your country, so many varieties of magazines. So some time ago I was seeing that there is a society, Diabetic Society. All the diabetic persons are members of the society and they have got magazine, and that is also distributed very widely. So that is nice division, different division. So that is the point not now, it was also in the past days.

So Śukadeva Gosvāmī says the subject matter for hearing for the people in general, there are varieties, varieties. Why varieties? Why not one? Why people are not interested in one subject matter? That is replied in the next line that ātmā... Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Apaśyatām means those who are blind. Paśya means to see, a means negation. Those who are blind, those who cannot see, what is that? Ātma-tattvam. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are blind to the subject matter of self-realization. There is a subject matter of self-realization that just like we are body, mind, and soul. The soul is covered by the underwear, mind, intelligence, and ego, and the underwear is covered by the gross coat, this body. This is our position. So those who are blind to the subject matter of the soul, those who are thinking "I am this body," they are very less intelligent class. They are almost animal. The animal cannot think beyond his body. A dog is thinking, "I am this body." The cat is thinking, "I am this body." Beyond this he has no power. He is so low-grade. Therefore, he is called animal. But a human being can understand that "I am not this body." A human being can meditate, he can see his hands. Am I this hand? Am I this finger? No. The answer will come, "No, it is my hand. It is my finger."

Similarly, you study-this is called meditation-you study yourself. So many things, so many subject matter. Take, for example, miseries of life. You can meditate upon that "I don't want these kind of miseries, but they are enforced upon me." This is subject matter for meditation. So a man dies. A man dies means his body is finished. But a person who is in different sense of knowledge, he wants to think over subject matter, what is that thing which is no longer existing so that the man is dead? These are the subject matters for one who is interested in self-realization, ātma-tattvam. This is called ātma-tattvam, to understand oneself, what I am. This is very important part of knowledge in human form of life. In the human form of life, if he does not come to this stage of inquiring what I am, am I this body, am I this mind, am I this intelligence, or I am something else? So apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are blind to see the self, for them there are so many subject matters. The newspaper will supply, the magazine will supply.

Just like, for example, our students in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they never read newspaper nor any other magazine. They simply read these Kṛṣṇa consciousness books. We have got so many books. Kṛṣṇa, Nectar of Devotion, Teachings of Lord..., big, big books, one of the Bhāgavatam in twelve parts. So we have got about twenty books already published, and our program is to publish at least sixty books like this. So our subject matter is very vast. We have no time to read newspapers, neither any magazines. Vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ. Just like a big scientist or a big medical practitioner, he reads scientific magazines, a scientist. A medical man, a doctor, physician, he reads medical journals. He does not waste his time in big, big capture(?) in the newspaper. He has no time. So those who are interested in self-realization, that is the only business for the human form of life. Human form of life means to make solution of all the problems of material life. Sukham ātyantikam. Every one of us, we are searching after happiness, that's a fact. But we are misguided. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamāna. I am asking somebody, "Will you give me any information how I can become happy?" He is also rascal. He gives you something wrong information. And you try it and you will fall down, there is no happiness. This is going on. The inquiry is there, where is happiness? What I can do? But unless one is fortunate to come in contact with a person who can give you information of Kṛṣṇa, you cannot have happiness. This is a fact.

So Vedic instruction is there that if you want happiness, if you want solution of the problems of life, then tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. In order to learn that science where I can get happiness, one must approach a guru, a spiritual master. This is Vedic instruction. Not only Vedas, in all the śāstras. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. Guru, who is to seek out that guru? Not ordinary person. Ordinary persons who are trying to know the news of the world, they do not require any guru. There is no necessity. Their subject matter is supplied by the newspaper, magazines, and so many other things. But guru is needed for whom? Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. One who is inquisitive to learn about the transcendental subject matter, uttama. Uttama means... Ut means transcendental, and tama means the darkness. This world is dark. Just like at night now because there is no more sunshine, it is dark. Actually it is dark. Simply by sunshine, moonshine, electricity, fire, in this way we keep it glittering. Otherwise, it is dark. This whole universe is dark. By God's arrangement, there is sun, moon, like that, illumining. But there is another world where there is no need of sun and moon, and that is spiritual world. That is spiritual world, this information is there. So, therefore, uttamam, one who is inquisitive to learn about that spiritual world, not of this dark world... The world is dark, I have already explained. Against this there is another world who is full of light. Because unless there is light, there cannot be darkness. We cannot understand what is darkness unless there is light. Or we cannot understand light unless there is darkness. So because this world is dark, therefore, you can conclude by logical argument there must be another world which is full of light. That is not very difficult to understand. Just like here is light, the other wall is darkness. So because this world is dark, tama, there must be another world which is full of light. Not only your logical conclusion, but it is confirmed by the Vedic literature. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said,

paras tasmāt tu bhavo 'nyo

'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ

(yaḥ sa) sarveṣu( bhūteṣu)

naśyatsu na tad vinaśyati

[Bg. 8.20]



It is information is there that there is another nature which is sanātana, eternal. This nature, this material nature, darkness, is not eternal, temporary. Just like your body, my body, everyone's body is temporary. Similarly, this universe, this gigantic body, this is also temporary. It has got a date of creation, and it will be annihilated at a certain date, everything. Therefore, this dark world or nature is subject to birth, death, old age, and disease, whereas that nature which is full of light, that is eternal and even after annihilation of this material world, it remains. That is called sanātana, eternal.



So one who is not interested to know about the other nature of light, how that nature is, how there are planets, how living entities are living there, who is predominating, so many things we have to learn, that is called ātma-tattvam. But people are blind, they do not know. In the university, there is no such education. They are simply satisfied with the knowledge that they are going to moon planet, that's all. (Sanskrit) What is this moon planet? There are living(?) within this material world, there are millions and trillions of other planets, how you can go there? Just try to understand how much limited we are, how much our freedom is (indistinct) in this material world. You are trying to go the nearest planet, Candra, moon planet, still you are unsuccessful. What to speak of other. There is sun planet. I think they cannot dream of going to the sun planet. It is not possible. But there is a planet in your front. If you are scientist, if you are advanced, go. But you can go actually. Actually you go. People formerly, they used to go. Just like in Bhagavad-gītā you will see this is described. Kṛṣṇa says, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1], "I first of all instructed this system of bhakti-yoga, Bhagavad-gītā, to the sun-god." That means Kṛṣṇa went there. Otherwise, how He could instruct the sun-god? Not only that, He says, vivasvān manave prāha manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt. So the sun-god said to his son, Manu, and Manu is the original person of the man, human being, manuṣya, man. Man, the word comes from the Manu. So Manu is the son of sun-god, so he came from the sun planet. And he begot sons here in this planet, Ikṣvāku. These are all stated by the Vedic śāstras., imaṁ vivasvate... So there was connection. In India, there are two kinds of kṣatriya family, administrator, royal family. The one royal family is coming from the sun-god, and the other royal family is coming from the moon-god. So it was not difficult to go to the sun planet if you can. Just like you are trying to go to the moon planet.

Similarly, you can go to the sun planet, you can go to other planet, there is different process. There is one planet which is called Siddhaloka. In that planet, the residents are so expert, more expert. Therefore, without any airplane or sputnik, they can travel interplanetary system, they can travel. These are wonderful things there are. So these are the material information. And this material informations, they are only one-fourth of the whole creation. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.

atha vā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



Sthito jagat. Jagat means this material world. This material world means this universe which you can simply see a big sky, and within that sky there are millions and trillions of planets. This is one universe. Similarly, there are millions and trillions of universes. And all together, that is called material world. All together. Ekāṁśena sthito jagat. And that is God's one-fourth creation. And three-fourth creation is the spiritual world.



So just imagine what is the value of our so-called knowledge. We cannot understand even things within this planet or within this universe, so many planets. So how to understand the other nature where there is spiritual planets, where there are spiritual living entities, they are also working, their center is God. So there are so many information, these are called ātma-tattvam. So apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are blind or rascals, have no complete knowledge, their subject matter of understanding is this newspaper, that's all. Their subject matter is newspaper. Because they have no other information.

So when it was proposed that I am going to translate this sixty volumes of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for describing God, so some of the friends, they inquired, "What is the description sixty volumes of books of God?" So our reply was that this universe is a fragment of the whole material creation, and within this universe there are millions and trillions of planets. Out of those millions and trillions of planet, this planet is most insignificant. And within this planet, there are so many cities. London, New York, Calcutta, Bombay, so many. And from each city there are hundreds of newspapers. And each newspaper they are publishing four times. So if for this teeny place there are so many information, just imagine how much information you can have from the spiritual world. Just imagine. So sixty volumes of description of the spiritual world is nothing, it is simply sample. If sixty millions of volumes would have been written, it still was insufficient. There are so many information.

So here it is said apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. One who has no information of the spiritual world, they are interested in these newspaper and magazines. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Gṛheṣu means they have an impact of understanding. This is my body. Or this is my society. Or this is my community. Or this is my nation. Or this is my humanitarian. They can expand. But what is the... Even if you take the whole human society, what is the value? If you take all living entities, there are so many other living entities. Not only human beings, there are animals, thirty thousand species of animals. Not thirty thousand, thirty hundred thousand. Similarly, twenty hundred thousand species of living entities who are called the trees, plants. So where is the knowledge of all this? Suppose if one is naturalist, what knowledge he has got? He can study a thousand species of plants and trees, but there are two millions of plants and trees. Just try to understand how much meager a small quantity of knowledge you have got. It is practically not possible. But at least one must know that this material world, this material body is not myself. At least this self-realization should be there. Otherwise, we remain animals.

Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. Gṛheṣu means within the bound up impact of life. This bodily concept of life, the social concept of life, the national concept of life. No, there is unlimited field of activities, and you should try to know. But because we are not interested, we are not educated to become interested to understand the light(?) and field(?) of spiritual life, we are compact, gṛheṣu. Gṛheṣu means at home. Gṛheṣu, at home. Just like I remember when the Russians put sputnik for flying in the sky, the man, he was trying to see from that sputnik where is Russia, Moscow. So this is called gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Our attachment is in this body or in the society or in this country. This is called gṛha-medhī. Gṛha-medhī means one who has made his center of activities only home or nation or community. He has no other aim. Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. They are called gṛheṣu. A cultured man, he is also remaining in the house, but his field of activities is different. That is spiritual knowledge. But here, those who are gṛha-medhī, those who are compact within this body, society, and nation, their field of activities is very limited, gṛha-medhinām. Just like a cow. In your country, I do not know, I think you have, in Hawaii I have seen a cow is stuck up with a rope and it is roaming around that rope, and he is thinking this is the world, that's all. This is the world.

So our knowledge is so poor, a little bound up rope and I am going round about it and we are thinking that we know everything. So therefore, Suta Gosvāmī says that these people have many subject matter or so-called subject matter of understanding but a person who is advanced in spiritual knowledge, his subject matter-that will be explained later on-his subject matter is God, Kṛṣṇa, that's all. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Don't think Kṛṣṇa is an ordinary person. He has got most extensive activities, and you cannot finish in one life what are the activities of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, in the next verse it is said,

nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ

vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ

diva cārthehayā rājan

kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā

[SB 2.1.3]



Now these materialistic men, their activities are described here. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual world or the spiritual self, simply bodily concept of life like animal, they are gṛha-medhī, compact in this idea. If one can decorate his apartment and decorate his children and wife, he thinks he is the most successful man. Or similarly, national, nation, if you can have nice road, nice car, nice skyscraper, and all facilities for material happiness, then we think that we are perfect nation. But the thing is, unless you know ātma-tattva, self-realization, you do not know what is your next life. The next life is there. The next life will depend on your work in this life. You may become very rich nation's son, you may have very good asset, but you are not allowed to stay here. Suppose in America, you have got so many nice cities. But we sometimes come to see your cities and opulence but the fact is that in spite of your development of this national asset, you will not be allowed to stay here. That we forget. And after I leave this place, leave this body, I do not know what is going to happen to me, we are in ignorance. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ [SB 2.1.2], because we are blind.



Life is not finished by this body. It is a chance, it is a chance only. Just like you are going somewhere and you, on the way you find so many stations, some of them not very good and some of them very nice. Similarly, this human form of life is a station of our journey. We have begun our journey since we separated from the Supreme Personality of Godhead to become happy without God's connection. Therefore, our journey has begun, we do not know when it has begun, but it is going on through different(?) species of life. Dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Dehāntara means one body after, one body after, one body after it is going. So here in this human form of body is a chance. Lower than this human form of life you cannot understand self, ātma-tattva, it is not possible. But you can understand in this human form of life what is ātma-tattva. If you miss this chance, if you do not work to understand what is ātma-tattva, what is self, what is Superself, what is the spiritual world, how things are going, so many things you have to know, if you don't know, if you don't try to know, then you are missing the point. And missing the point, we are busy. So how we are busy? That is described in the next verse. How? Nidrayā hriyate naktam. We are spoiling our life by sleeping. Nidrayā hryate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ, or by sex. At night we have got two business. One who has no facility for sex, he takes some pill and sleeps very soundly. (indistinct) Or one who has got sex facility, he enjoys sex. So that is stated here. Nidrayā hryate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ. Then at daytime, what is the business at day? Diva cārthehayā rājan. And during daytime, there is business, where is money, where is money, where is money? divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā [SB 2.1.3]. And as soon as one gets money, then go to the storehouse, purchase things for my wife, for my children, for me, for this, that. So this is the activity of the materialistic person.

Just five thousand years ago these two lines are there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and just see how it is happening, developing. This is called śastra. So what is the opportunity of understanding the self? The whole night is engaged either in sleeping or in sex life, and the whole day every day you have to get money in order to purchase things, that's all. Finished, day and night. But after all, this human form of life, so important, I have to know myself but I do not get my time. They do not get time. If this meeting would have been a political leader's meeting giving all kinds of false hope, millions of billions of people would have come. But because it is a meeting for understanding ātma-tattva, self-realization, nobody is here, interested. This is our position. So our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is being pushed in unfavorable circumstance. Nobody is (indistinct) unless he is very, very intelligent man. We cannot get immediately members of the society like the political parties get or the (indistinct) parties they get. We have to canvass from door to door, "My dear sir, why you are forgetting yourself? Kindly try to understand. Here is a book, Bhagavad-gītā, try to understand. Here is book, Teachings of Lord Caitanya." So our task is very strenuous. Sometimes they become angry, dissatisfied, "Why you are bothering me?" But we have to do it because we have dedicated our life to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, we have to do it. Kṛṣṇa comes to do this business Himself.

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



Because we are sons of Kṛṣṇa, God, we are misled, bewildered, the father is more anxious to see us go back to home, back to Godhead. Therefore, He comes personally. People misunderstand, "This Kṛṣṇa is a human being." Therefore, He comes as a devotee, as Lord Caitanya. He leaves behind Him all books of knowledge, Bhagavad-gītā. So we are canvasser. So our request is that don't take this movement as very sentimental or insignificant, it is the greatest science, greatest philosophy. Try to cooperate with us and you will be happy. Thank you very much. (applause, devotees pay obeisances)



Devotee (1): Are there any questions?

Devotee (2): What time is it? Do you have the time?

Devotee (1): 8:45.

Prabhupāda: Chant. (end)



740317SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.2

-

Vṛndāvana, March 17, 1974



Prabhupāda:



śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



Material world means apaśyatām ātma-tattvam, one who has no enquiry or vision of the ātmā. Ātmā, paramātmā. Ātma-tattvam. Tattvam means "in truth." Ātmā means this body also. Ātmā means the mind also. Ātmā means the soul also. So in the present material world they are interested in understanding ātmā-the body. The medical science, physiology, biology, they are studying the science of the body. And some of them are studying the science of mind, psychology-thinking, feeling and willing. But nobody is studying the deepest meaning of ātmā: soul. There is no such... Throughout the whole world there are schools and colleges and universities to study the physiology, psychology, biology, sociology, so many things. But there is no university, school, college throughout the whole world to understand the soul. Is there any? Eh? You have come from all parts of the world. Is there any school, college or institute to study what is the soul? They have no information even. Even Russia is so proud of scientific advancement falsely, but they have also no... They are thinking that the body finished, everything is finished. That's all. This is going on. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape. Ātmā I have already explained. Ātmā means body, mind. But one who is thinking ātmā only this body, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13], in this bag of three elements, kapha-pitta-vāyu, he's go-kharaḥ, he's ass. He's rascal.



So therefore it is said, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam: [SB 2.1.2] one who cannot see ātma-tattva, the science of soul, they are busy only in this material body. Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. So gṛhamedhi and gṛhastha. Gṛhastha is good. Gṛhastha is interested in ātma-tattva. Just like our students. Although they are gṛhastha, they are interested in ātma-tattva. They are not gṛhamedhi. But those who are not interested in the science of soul, ātma-tattva, but they are interested only in the science of body and mind, they are gṛhamedhi. Gṛhamedhi. They are not gṛhastha. So my point is that our philosophy, Kṛṣṇa consciousness philosophy, is meant for understanding ātma-tattva.

vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



We are interested in that tattva, that ātma-tattva, soul, ideal. So to understand this ātma-tattva one has to become just the opposite number of these materialistic persons. The materialistic persons, they are interested only in sense gratification, materialistic persons. Or mental speculation. They are materialistic. There are so many big, big so-called sādhus, saintly persons, simply busy on mental speculation. They are not perfect. And those who are busy in understanding the bodily concept of life, they are also materialistic. The difficulty is that these, these materialistic persons, in different forms, they are accepted as the leaders. They are accepted as leader, as politician, as sociologist, as philosopher, mental speculator, or so-called incarnation of God, and magician, yogis, so many things. They are leading the whole society at the present moment. Therefore people are in chaotic condition.



So for them Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that they have many subject matter to hear. Śrotavyādīni... Nṛṇām, śrotavyādīni rājendra [SB 2.1.2]. The Parīkṣit Mahārāja is addressed here as rājendra, the best of the kings. Rājendra, rāja, he was king, rāja. But indra means the best. Best of the... Because he was listening Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam at the point of his death, therefore he's addressed especially, rājendra, "Because you are best of the kings." Generally, people are not interested. Or course, in those days, everyone was interested. But he was the most interested-rājendra. Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇām [SB 2.1.2]. Nṛṇām means ordinary human beings, mostly engaged in the bodily concept of life or mental speculation, nṛṇām. Nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ, they have got hundreds and thousands of subject matters because they are not conversant with the ātma-tattva. But those who are interested in real ātma-tattva, they are busy in understanding... Not understanding. Busy in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So that, our aim is how to become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious. And to become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, the examples are the Gosvāmīs. Just like śrī-rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa-raghunātha, śrī-jīva gopāla-bhaṭṭa dāsa-raghunātha gosvāmīs. We are followers of the Gosvāmīs. But these Gosvāmīs are not these titular gosvāmīs. You should understand. The titular gosvāmīs are different. They are making a profession of gosvāmī. Real gosvāmī means the six Gosvāmīs. How one can become interested in ātma-tattva, that example is given by the six Gosvāmīs, śrī-rūpa sanātana bhaṭṭa-raghunātha, śrī-jīva gopāla-bhaṭṭa dāsa-raghunātha. When we speak that these gosvāmīs, who are indulging in all sinful activities, that does not mean the Gosvāmīs... Gosvāmīs cannot take in sinful activities, take part in sin... That is not possible. But still, there are so many so-called gosvāmīs who are taking in sinful activities; still, they are being passed as gosvāmī. So we do not mean... When we speak of gosvāmī, we mean the six Gosvāmīs and their followers.

So Vṛndāvana, in Vṛndāvana, those who will remain here to..., especially to guide this temple, they must be followers of the six Gosvāmīs. So where is our Gurudāsa? He is not present? Why? He is busy? Very busy? Where?

Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: He told me that Yamunā's feeling a little sick...



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Yamunā's feeling sick tonight. Went to see...



Prabhupāda: Oh. Anyway, so these six Gosvāmīs, we have to follow. Now, this is... Not śrotavyādīni rājendra... [SB 2.1.2]. We are not interested with this bodily concept of life and... Although we have got this body, but we, we do not think that body is all in all, mind is the..., mental speculative... No. The Gosvāmīs, they are described, how the Gosvāmīs, six Gosvāmīs. First gosvāmī, the first qualification is sense control. Vāco vegaṁ krodha-vegam udara-vegam upastha-vegam manasa-vegam. In this way, six kinds of vega, urge. Urge for talking, vāco vegam; krodha, or anger; mind, and that belly, stomach, and then genital. They are forcing. They are forcing. Material life means these six senses are forcing us to remain in the material... But a gosvāmī means one who has control over these six urges of the senses. Etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ [NoI 1]. As soon as one is practiced to control the urges of the senses, then he becomes a gosvāmī. That is the first definition of gosvāmī. Etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ. Being forced by the urges of these six senses... And there are so many people. They are being criminally charged, police inquiries, and still, they are gosvāmīs. So this is not good. Gosvāmī should be very ideal. We have given title "Gosvāmī." So you must be very ideal. Ideal is there-six Gosvāmīs.



So we should be distinct from the so-called gosvāmīs. Those who will remain in Vṛndāvana, esp... Everywhere. Everywhere is Vṛndāvana. Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa's temple, Kṛṣṇa's saṅkīrtana, that is Vṛndāvana. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "My mind is always Vṛndāvana." Because He's always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is there-He's Kṛṣṇa Himself-just to teach us. So similarly, anywhere you live, if you are actually follower of the instruction of Kṛṣṇa, as Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], then that is Vṛndāvana. Wherever you live. Do not think that "Because in Melbourne we have got a temple, the Melbourne Deities are here, so that is not Vṛndāvana." That is also Vṛndāvana. If you worship the Deity very rigidly, follow the rules and regulations, so wherever you do, that is Vṛndāvana. Especially this Vṛndāvana dhāma, where Kṛṣṇa actually appeared. So this is Vṛndāvana, Goloka Vṛndāvana. Here, those who will manage this institution, they must be first-class gosvāmīs. This is my proposition. Not gṛhamedhi. Not gṛhamedhi. Gosvāmī. As...

Because this place was excavated by the gosvāmīs, ṣaḍ-gosvāmī. Sanātana Gosvāmī came here, Rūpa Gosvāmī came here. And then other Gosvāmīs, Jīva Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, all joined together for executing the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu-to write books about Kṛṣṇa, His pastimes, His līlā; very, I mean to say, highly spiritual understanding books they wrote. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. This is the business of the Gosvāmīs, the symptoms. The first symptom is, kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau. They were always busy-Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana. Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana means... Just like we perform kīrtana with khol, karatāla, this is also kṛṣṇa-kīrtana. And to write books, that is also kṛṣṇa-kīrtana. And to read books, that is also kṛṣṇa-kīrtana. Not that simply this kīrtana is kīrtana. If you write books about Kṛṣṇa, if you read books about Kṛṣṇa, if you talk about Kṛṣṇa, you think of Kṛṣṇa, you worship Kṛṣṇa, you cook for Kṛṣṇa, you eat for Kṛṣṇa-so that is kṛṣṇa-kīrtana.

Therefore gosvāmī means twenty-four hours engaged in kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, in this way or that way. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau. How? Premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī. Because they were merged into the ocean of kṛṣṇa-prema. Unless we have got kṛṣṇa-prema, love for Kṛṣṇa, how we can remain satisfied simply in the business of Kṛṣṇa? That is not possible. Those who have not developed love for Kṛṣṇa, they cannot be engaged twenty-four hours in the business of Kṛṣṇa. We should consider that... We should save time always to be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa business. The period we sleep, that is wasted. That is wasted. So we shall try to save time. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. Hari is another name of Kṛṣṇa. Sadā, twenty-four hours. Actually, the Gosvāmīs used to do. They are our examples. They were sleeping not more that two hours or utmost, three hours. So nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **. They conquered over. This is gosvāmī. They conquered over these things. What is that? Nidrāhāra, nidrā, āhāra, vihāra. Vihāra means sense enjoyment, and āhāra means eating or collecting. Generally, eating. And nidrā. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau. Conquered. That is Vaiṣṇava. Not that out of twenty-four hours, thirty-six hours sleeping. (laughter) And at the same time, passing on as gosvāmī. What is this go...? Go-dāsa. They are go-dāsa. Go means senses, and dāsa means servant.

So our policy should be, instead of becoming servant of the senses, we have to become servant of Kṛṣṇa. This is gosvāmī. Because unless you conquer over, senses will always ask you, "Please eat, please sleep, please have sexual intercourse. Please have this, please have this." This is material life. This is material life, subjected to the dictation of the senses. That is material life. And one has to become... (sic:) Go-dāsa means the mind is dictating, "Please eat more, please sleep more, please have sexual more, please have defense fund more..." So this is materialism. Defense fund means to keep money. That is defense fund. So... So this is materialism. The spiritualism means, "No, that is no." Nidrāhāra. The senses dictating, "Do this, do that, do that," and you have to become so strong that you'll rightly reply, "No, this is not." Then gosvāmī. This is gosvāmī. And that gṛhamedhi, gṛhastha-appearing like the same. But gṛhastha means no dictation of the sense. Then you become gosvāmī. Then, as Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, gṛhe vā banete thāke hā gaurāṅga bole ḍāke. Hā gaurāṅga, "Always chanting Nitāi-Gaura, and thinking of Nitāi-Gaura," such person, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says... Gṛhe vā... "He may be a sannyāsī, or he may be a gṛhastha. It doesn't matter. Because he is absorbed in the thought of Nitāi-Gaura." So narottama māge tāṅra saṅga: "Narottama is always desiring to associate with such person." Gṛhe vā banete thāke, hā gaurāṅga bole ḍāke, narottama māge tāṅra saṅga. Narottama is always desiring the society of such person. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau.

And gosvāmī has to become very dear to all classes of men. There are two classes of men: dhīra and adhīra. Dhīra means one who has controlled the senses, and adhīra means one who could not. Gosvāmīs are very kind to all classes of men. Dhīradhīra-jana-priyau. So how you can...? How the gosvāmī can be...? When six Gosvāmīs were here in Vṛndāvana, they were so popular to the whole people. Even in this Vṛndāvana dhāma, the village people, if they had some quarrel with husband and wife, they would to go Sanātana Gosvāmī, "Sir, there is some disagreement between us. You settle up." And Sanātana Gosvāmī will give his judgment, "You are wrong." That's all. They will admit. Just see how the popular they were. Sanātana Gosvāmī would give decision among their family quarrel also. So dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau. These ordinary men, they were not saintly persons, but they were devoted to Sanātana Gosvāmī. Therefore their life was successful. Because they would abide by the orders of Sanātana Gosvāmī, therefore they were also liberated. They may be personally wrong, but they abided by the Sanātana Gosvāmī. And Sanātana Gosvāmī was kind to them. This is the Gosvāmī. Dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau.

So you can become dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau. Adhīra, those who are ordinary men, you can also call them, give them prasādam, treat them very nicely: "Just hear Hare Kṛṣṇa. You come here. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Take prasāda." They'll be your..., under your control. They'll be under your control. And as soon as they become under your control, they make advance. Immediately. Because under the Vaiṣṇava, if he agrees to abide by, he becomes... That is called ajñāta-sukṛti. Because he offers you... Just like when we walk, they say, "Hare Kṛṣṇa. Jaya Rādhe." That is the method of offering respect. So if these ordinary people offer respect to the Vaiṣṇava, they become advanced. So you must be Vaiṣṇava. Otherwise why they will offer you respect? Respect cannot be demanded. It must be commanded. By seeing you, they will give you respect. Then dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau. This is gosvāmī. Automatically they'll offer respect. So unless you become perfectly clean and Vaiṣṇava, pure Vaiṣṇava... Automatically they'll give you respect. You haven't got to... Just like sometimes we see a person, by seeing us, they chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. It is not that at the spot we are asking them to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, but automatically they are chanting. So that means we have to keep ourself so clean, nice Vaiṣṇava, gosvāmī, that people will offer you respect. Dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau. Dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau.

Nirmatsarau. Nirmatsarau means they were not en... Vaiṣṇava is not envious. Vaiṣṇava's only business is to see people, how they will... [break] ...let them go to hell. This is Prahlāda Mahārāja's philosophy. Śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. The whole world is suffering from the material disease, and they are always unhappy. So let us preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They should try to save at least one man. That was the version of my Guru Mahārāja, that "I have got so many temples and buildings. If by selling all these buildings, if I can save one man from this material disease, then my mission will be successful." He used to say like that. So that is gosvāmī. They are trying, always trying, how to save. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. Just like Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, writing Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, quoting from so many Vedic literatures, giving evidence. Because formerly people would take it as truth when it is proved by the version of the Vedic literature. Nowadays, they have become more and more rascal. They would not take any evidence. They will take evidence of their only senses. If they like, they will accept. If they do not like, they will...

Formerly, the society was not so much degraded. They, as soon s you give evidence from the Vedic literature, they would accept. So these Gosvāmīs therefore were making research from the Vedic literature, from the Purāṇas, from the Vedas, from the Vedānta-sūtra, and Upaniṣads, like that, Mahābhārata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and Sāma Veda, Ṛg Veda. You'll find in the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu evidences... Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. What is the, what was the purpose? The purpose was to establish real religious principles. If actually Gosvāmī principles were followed strictly and real gosvāmīs would preach, then there would not have continued the so-called religious systems, or increase the so-called... Because any religious system which... That is the verdict of Bhāgavata. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, ahaituky apratihatā [SB 1.2.6]. Religion means by following the system one will become a great lover of God, or Kṛṣṇa. That is religion. Then why this system of religion is going on, maintaining slaughterhouse? That means the..., there was no attempt to preach sad-dharma, real dharma. Therefore, in the name of religion, they are maintaining thousands of slaughterhouse. You see? It is asad-dharma. Asad-dharma. But the..., they studied. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu... They wrote so many books just to establish what is real religion. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. Why? Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau. They were simply doing welfare activities for the people in general, lokānām. For everything. They...

Without following the principles, religious principles... The human life is given a chance by the nature, that "In this life you make a solution of this birth and death," janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. So these rascals do not know that janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi is actually problem. They are simply trying to solve so many temporary problems. They do not know the real problem is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi. Therefore, following the real religious principle means sad-dharma. That is lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau, the greatest benefit to the human society-to stop their repetition of birth and death. That is the greatest... That is the business of the Gosvāmīs. Not this, this party or that party, capitalism and communism, this "ism," that... What they will derive? You may follow capitalism or communism or this "ism," that "ism"; after death, you'll be immediately under the grip of material nature, karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. "Now all your so-called rascal nationalism go to hell. You become a dog. Finish." That is nature's course. You have treated your life like cats and dogs. You did not take advantage of your human life. Now nature will give you, "All right, again you become cats and dogs." Punar mūṣiko bhava. They do not know. They do not know the secret science of nature. You may be a very great leader, prime minister now. Next life you are going to be a dog in Scandinavia. (laughter) You see?

But how can you check it? What is your power? Suppose by nature... There are so many lives. Kṛṣṇa says, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. So you have to accept another body. Now, that is not in your hand, how to accept. That is, that will depend on your nature, karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa, and nature will give you the suitable body. So if you waste your time in this human form of life like cats and dogs, then you are going to get... Otherwise, wherefrom the cats and dogs are coming? They are coming... Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. We are changing this body. So why you deny that in your next time you cannot become? No. That is your theory, but nature's law is different from your theory. You rascal, what do you know? You learn from the authorities. So the Gosvāmī's business is to do, how to save these people, these rascals, from this repetition of birth and death.

So there are so many description of the Gosvāmīs. These eight ślokas of Śrīni... Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau pūjitau. Because they were nirmatsarau pūjitau, they were worshiped by everyone. Pūjitau. Śrī-caitanya-kṛpā-bharau bhuvi bhuvo bhārāvahantāra... And because they received the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they were able to lessen the burden of this material world. Bhārāvahant...vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau. So if you simply study these eight verses of the Gosvāmīs... Vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau. In Vṛndāvana, they lived, and they set the examples. And if you follow their footsteps, then your life will be successful. So, so many others, the so-called gosvāmīs, have become envious about us, but if you become one of them, then your life is not very... You just try to follow the real Gosvāmīs and make your life as gosvāmī. Then people will adore you. Śrī-caitanya-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau. The verses, you have translated? This kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau...?

Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Śrī-caitanya-kṛpā-bharau bhuvi...



Prabhupāda: Bhuvo bhārāvahantāra... No.



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Śraddhā-samṛddhy-anvitau.



Prabhupāda: Śrī-gaurāṅga-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau śraddhā-samṛddhy-anvitau. Eh?



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Pāpottāpa-nikṛntanau tanu-bhṛtām...



Prabhupāda: Pāpottāpa-nikṛntanau tanu-bhṛtām...



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Govinda-gānāmṛtaiḥ.



Prabhupāda: Govinda-gānāmṛtaiḥ. These were the symptoms of gosvāmī. You study this. I want at least twenty-five men to live here, to become ideal follower of these Gosvāmīs. They'll see how you'll be adored, how you'll be respected, how you'll be ideal. That I want.



Thank you very much. (end)



740611SB.PAR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.2

-

Paris, June 11, 1974



Nitāi: "Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowledge of the Ultimate Truth, have many things as subject matter for hearing in the human society, O Emperor."



Prabhupāda:



śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



Now, subject matter of hearing long, long, very... Not long, long, say, about sixty, seventy years ago, one big politician of India, Madanmohan Mayabhya,(?) he came to see my Guru Mahārāja. So he was inquiring about our activities. So he was informed, amongst other activities, my Guru Mahārāja was publishing papers monthly in English, in Bengali, in Hindi, in Oriya, in Assamese, and one Bengali daily, Nadiya Prakash. So this politician was surprised that "Oh, you are publishing daily a Bengali paper?" "Yes. Why you are surprised?" He was surprised. He was politician. He was thinking that "What one may speak of God, or Kṛṣṇa, daily in a paper?" He was surprised. Because they think that "Sometimes we go to the temple, 'O God, give us our daily bread,' " finished God's business. And my Guru Mahārāja replied that "Why you are surprised? This Calcutta city is most insignificant part of this universe."



Now, Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "The whole material world is situated in one part of My energy." Ekāṁśena sthito jagat. When Arjuna asked about the opulence of Kṛṣṇa, He was describing. And He summarized,

athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



"How much I shall go on speaking to you? Just try to understand about My potency, that this whole material world is sustained in one part of My energy." The spiritual world is the three-fourths part. Suppose Kṛṣṇa's energy is acting, one unit. So out of that, one-fourth unit is exhibited, this material world. And the material world is... What is that material world? Now,



yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudādhi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.40]



The, the Brahman effulgence being spread, in some corner of this Brahman effulgence, there is mahat-tattva, material energy. And that material energy means... That is described in another place:



yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



The material world means innumerable universes are coming out through the breathing of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Innumerable universes. We cannot account for one universe in which we are. There are innumerable planets. Everyone has experience in stars and planets. This is one universe. And such universes are coming out, millions, through the breathing period of Mahā-Viṣṇu. When He exhales, they come out. When He inhales, they go within. That is the creation and not creation. Yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā... [Bs. 5.48]



So the purpose was that this material world is only a manifestation, exhibition, of one-fourth energy of Kṛṣṇa. And within this material world, there are so many universes. And each and every universe, there are so many planets. So this is one of the planets, in which we are living. And in this planet, there are so many cities-Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Delhi, Paris, London, and so many, hundreds and thousands. And each and every city, there are newspapers. And each newspaper is publishing three, four editions daily. So this is the most insignificant planet. Still, there are so many news to hear. Therefore it is said here, śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ: [SB 2.1.2] "Millions and millions, subject matter for hearing." This is a fact. Every paper is publishing three, four editions daily, especially in the Western countries. So if they have got so much news in the material world in this insignificant planet, just imagine how much news are there in the three-fourths' manifestation of His energy. So my Guru Mahārāja said that "You are surprised, Mr. Mayabhya, that we are publishing a paper daily. So we can publish every minute a paper. Unfortunately, there is no customer." They have customer for using this newspaper, but our news, we have to canvass, "Will you kindly take this? Will you kindly take this." They are not interested. They're interested in this material news-Radio, paper, magazine, edition after edition. Therefore it is said...

This is the meaning of śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. So they have no time to read a little news we are giving about God in the Back to Godhead. They have no... Why? Now apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. They do not know what is ātmā, what is the active principle of all these activities. They do not know. The superficially... Bahir-art... Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ durāśayā ye, durāśayā... What is that? Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Durāśayā, they have got so many news to hear with a hope-means useless hope-that they will be able to exist here and be happy. Just like your arch, this Napoleon Arch. Napoleon was conquering all over Europe, and he thought that he would be able to enjoy this. But where is Napoleon? The arch is there. That's all. This is the position. But he worked so hard. Not only he. Everyone is working. The arch will remain, because a stone, but he's finished. He's finished. This is called apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Because these people, they do not know what is really reality. Real reality. They are simply after so-called reality. It is very important point. Try to understand. Ātma-tattvam, one who does not know what is ātmā, what is soul, the nature of soul...

Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa first of all begins the constitution of the ātmā, or spirit soul. He begins. When He began to teach Arjuna Bhagavad-gītā, the A-B-C-D lesson was to make him convinced about the soul within the body. That is called ātma-tattvam. And nobody knows. Therefore, bahir-artha-māninaḥ: they are accepting this external feature. Just like we have got external feature. We can understand very easily that this body, this body is external feature. Real "I" am within. As soon as I go away from this body, this external feature, as good as the garbage in the street. That they do not understand. They are busy piling garbage. "Bring more garbage, more garbage." And this is the working capacity. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ. They think, "This garbage will save me." Very important question. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. The ātma-tattvam means "I am now within this garbage for the present. And after leaving this, in this garbage, I pile up so many other garbages. And in this way, working uselessly the whole life, then I transmigrate from this body to another garbage body." That I do not know. This is called apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Apaśyatām means "not seeing." A means "not," and paśyatām means "seeing, one who sees." He's seeing, "This garbage is everything." He does not see ātma-tattvam.

Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu [SB 2.1.2]. Gṛheṣu means gṛha means home. So you can take this body as home. Because I am, you are all living within this body. So this is also home. And then again, expanded, I am living in this planet. So this is also home. And again living within this universe. That is also home. Or I have got a little home, apartment, ten feet square. That's all. That is also home. So we have got attachment for this home, ten feet by ten feet or millions of feet on millions... This is home, within the compact. We living entities, we are within this home. Take this whole universe, apart from other universe, this universe. This is also home because we're living here. And we are changing, from this place to that place. Suppose I have come from India. From Bombay, I have come to Paris. This is all within the home, within the universe, or within this planet. So we see people are very busy. Seventy miles speed, they're driving car. But within the Paris, within the Paris, they may go seventy miles, eighty miles, but they cannot go beyond. That, our one countryman, Rabindranath Tagore... So perhaps you heard his name. He was a big poet. So when he was in London, so he saw that people are very, walking very fast. So he remarked that "These people are walking very fast. But there is a very small country. They'll fall down on the sea." You see?

So this is going on. (laughs) A dog in the park is jumping very fast, walking. But as soon as the master, "Come one. Come one," immediately, "Yes, sir." "Give me your neck." "Yes, sir." Chain. Chain. He's thinking that he's very free, but as soon as the master calls, immediately he has to submit. This is our position. We are very busy, but the master is the material nature. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duraty... [Bg. 7.14]. The fact is that we are under the stringent laws of material nature. We have no freedom. That we do not know. We are struggling so much. War has been waged in, all over the world, especially in Europe, for freedom. You have got that freedom statue. And in America also, there is freedom. But where is freedom, sir? That they do not know. Why? Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. They do not know what is freedom and whose freedom. That they do not know. Therefore they have created so many newspapers for freedom. The so-called freedom. But there is no freedom. Even big, big leaders, they have no freedom. What we are?

Therefore Kṛṣṇa points out in the Bhagavad-gītā that real freedom is when you get freedom from four different problems. What is that? Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. If you get freedom from these four things-no more death, no more birth, no more old age, old age, and no more disease-that is freedom. But where is that freedom? The so-called scientists, big, big scientists, they have very scientifically advanced, but they had no freedom from death. They had to die on a fixed-up date. Professor Einstein or any other big, big scientist, they could not manufacture any scientific instrument and keep it in the custody of his student, that "As soon as I die, you just apply this machine. I shall come alive again." Where is that freedom? So this so-called scientific improvement, advancement in civilization, it is just like jumping like the dog. That's all. It has no value. Real value is to understand ātma-tattvam, "What I am? Why death is imposed upon me? I do not wish to die. Why old age is imposed upon me? I do not wish to become old man or old woman. I wish to remain a beautiful young..." "No, sir, that is not possible." Then where is your freedom? What for you are jumping so much? As soon as the master will call "Yes, sir. Bind me..."

So you are completely under the nature's control. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14].

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



Prakṛteḥ, prakṛti, nature, is pulling by the ear, "Come here." "Yes, sir." "Come here." "Yes, sir." And he's freedom. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ. He is completely under the control of the modes of material nature. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā. This is called false egotism: "I am something." "I am Napoleon Bonaparte," "I am Mussolini," "I am Hitler." This is ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā. Fool, rascal. They are thinking like that. "No freedom, sir. No freedom."



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



Being puffed-up with false prestige, he's thinking, "I am something. I can do something, I am..." This is the disease.



So for them, these newspapers are very useful. But one who is fixed up in ātma-tattvam, Bhāgavata,, "I am Brahman. I am not anything of this material world," for them, there is no need of this so-called news of newspaper. There is no... Simply, they should try to understand Kṛṣṇa. That is the only business. There is no other business. And as soon as you understand Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa assures, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. If you simply try to under... Here is Kṛṣṇa. If you simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa... And how you'll understand? By service. By service. Kṛṣṇa has agreed that "I'll accept your service." Therefore He has come. You cannot serve Kṛṣṇa in His universal form. Now Kṛṣṇa has agreed, as you have got limited potency, you can touch Kṛṣṇa. You can touch His lotus feet. You can make dress for Kṛṣṇa with devotion. You can put the dress on Kṛṣṇa. You can prepare, according to your capacity, foodstuffs. You can offer to Kṛṣṇa, so Kṛṣṇa will eat. He says, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati, tad aham aśnāmi [Bg. 9.26].

So Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He, although He is all-pervading, universal, He has agreed to accept your service just to give you liberation from this misunderstanding, no ātma-tattvam. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that Kṛṣṇa, God, is great. How great He is, you cannot imagine. But still, He has agreed to accept your service, becoming small. That is greatness. In the material world, if something is big, very big, he cannot become, or it cannot become small. Just like, say, for... Elephant is very big animal. You ask the elephant, "Please become like an ant." "Oh, that is not possible, sir. That is not possible." But God is so great that although He's universal, He can enter into the atom. That is... Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān: "Greater than the greatest, smaller than the smallest." That is God. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato... Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu... In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said, eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ, aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Eko 'py asau. One portion of Kṛṣṇa, Paramātmā, just to create this material world, He has entered in the mahat-tattva as Mahā-Viṣṇu, and He entered within the universe as Garbhodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu, He has entered everyone's heart as Supersoul, Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu, and He has entered into the atom-although He is so great. So it is Kṛṣṇa's mercy that He can become smaller than the smallest and the greater than the greatest.

So we cannot capture the greater than the greatest. That is not possible. Therefore it is His kindness that He has become just to be handled by you. This is called arcā-mūrti. Arcā-vigraha. The Deity worship means arcā-vigraha. Because the devotional service, one of the items of devotional service: arcanam.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



So you hear about Kṛṣṇa, you chant about Kṛṣṇa, you memorize or remember about Kṛṣṇa. You worship Kṛṣṇa, the Deity, arcanam. You offer prayers to Kṛṣṇa. There are nine different ways. So you just try to understand Kṛṣṇa in nine processes or either of, some of the processes, or one process only, Kṛṣṇa will agree. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. And as soon as you understand Kṛṣṇa, His nature, then, actually, you become liberated. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. This is the process. Real problem is how to get out of this material existence. If we remain attached to this material existence, either in this body or in the society or in the nationalism or in the greater, greater, greater-you make greater-but that is your bondage.



So one should be careful to understand the position of the soul, and how he can go back to home, back to Godhead, again meet the Supersoul, Kṛṣṇa, and live there permanently with blissful life and full of knowledge. This is wanted.

Thank you very much. (end)



681023SB.MON

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.2-5

-

Montreal, October 23, 1968



Prabhupāda: They have come here to become technologist. They have lost all interest of this, in original Vedic culture. (pause)



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



vande 'haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca

śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam

sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and of all the other preceptors on the path of devotional service. I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇavas and unto the six Gosvāmīs, including Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī and their associates. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrī Advaita Ācārya Prabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all His devotees, headed by Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura. I then offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and all the gopīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā.]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho

dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta

rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi

rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi

praṇamāmi hari-priye



[I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.]



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



[My dear Lord, and the spiritual energy of the Lord, kindly engage me in Your service. I am now embarrassed with this material service. Please engage me in Your service.]



śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



The same subject matter, that those who are too much attached in the family affairs, gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Gṛhamedhī means one who has made his center of activity home. He is called gṛhamedhī. There are two words. One word is gṛhastha, and one word is gṛhamedhī. What is the significance of these two words? Gṛhastha means one... Not only gṛhastha. It is called gṛhastha-āśrama. Whenever we speak of āśrama, it has got spiritual relationship. So all these four divisions of social orders-brahmacārī-āśrama, gṛhastha-āśrama, vānaprastha-āśrama, sannyāsa-āśrama... Āśrama. Āśrama means... Whenever... Āśrama, this word, has become little popular in your country also. Āśrama means situation for spiritual cultivation. Generally, we mean that. And here also, there are so many yoga-āśrama. I have seen in New York so many āśramas. "New York Yoga Āśrama," "Yoga Society," like that. Āśrama means it has got a spiritual connection. It doesn't matter whether a man... Gṛhastha means living with family, wife and children.



So to remain with family and children is no disqualification for spiritual advancement of life. That is not a disqualification because after all, one has to take his birth from the father and mother. So all great ācāryas, great spiritual leaders, after all, they have come from father and mother. So without combination of father and mother, even there is no possibility of begetting a great soul. There are many instances of great souls like Śaṅkarācārya, Lord Jesus Christ, Rāmānujācārya. Even they had no very high hereditary title, still, they came out from the gṛhasthas, father and mother. So gṛhastha, or the householder life, is not disqualification. We should not think it, that only the brahmacārīs or the sannyāsīs, they can elevate to the spiritual platform, whereas those who are living with wife and children, they cannot. No. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has clearly stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta that

kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei 'guru' haya

[Cc. Madhya 8.128]



Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "It doesn't matter whether a person is gṛhastha or a sannyāsī or a brāhmaṇa or not brāhmaṇa. It doesn't matter. Simply if one is Kṛṣṇa conscious, if he is elevated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he is just, I mean to say, eligible to become the spiritual master." Yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei guru haya [Cc. Madhya 8.128]. Tattva-vettā means one who knows about the science of Kṛṣṇa. That means fully Kṛṣṇa conscious. Sei guru haya. Sei means "he." Guru means "spiritual master." He doesn't say that "One has to become a sannyāsī or a brahmacārī. Then he can..." No. But here the word is used, gṛhamedhī, not gṛhastha. Gṛhastha is not condemned. If one lives in regulative principle with wife and children, so that is not disqualification. But gṛhamedhī, gṛhamedhī means he has no higher ideas or higher understanding of spiritual life. Simply living with wife and children like cats and dogs, he is called gṛhamedhī. That is the difference between these two words, gṛhamedhī and gṛhastha.



So Śukadeva Gosvāmī said that gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. "One who does not know anything about this family life or sex life"-family life, they have taken it as sex life, that's all-"so they have many things to hear." Śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2]. Actually, you see. People are reading so many newspapers. In big country, big cities, there are big, big volumes of newspaper, magazines. They are very much eager to learn or to hear about the current news. So hearing means śrotavyādi. There are volumes of volumes literature, magazines, newspaper. They are hearing. But when you say, "Please come here. We are reciting Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Please hear," they will not come. They will not come. This minus. When you speak of God, then they are not ready to hear. But if you speak of dog, that "Here is a dog's medicine. You can maintain a dog like this, and a dog can become fatty like this," oh, it is very scientific matter. You see? So they are called gṛhamedhīs. So they have got many subject matter to hear, but they are not agreeable to hear only one thing-about God.

Why? Now, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam: [SB 2.1.2] "They do not know what is self-realization." Apaśyatām, cannot see. Their vision is very poor. Why? They are thinking this body as self; therefore they are very poorly thoughtful. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in another place, it is stated, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Every day we are experiencing that "I am not this body. The body is growing. I am still there." There are so many instances. But we cannot understand that we are not this body. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Ātmā means, the ātmā... There are various meanings of ātmā. Ātmā sometimes is meant, indicating this body, ātmā is sometimes indicating this mind, ātmā is soul, and ātmā, Paramātmā, the Supreme Lord. Ātma-tattvam. Tattvam means truth, philosophy, or science. So they do not know the science of ātmā, either take it body or mind. Generally, they take it as this body. So so far body is concerned, there are so many departments: medical department and health department and... I do not remember. There are so many departments. All these departments of knowledge, they are practically on the basis of this body. Then higher than this, ātmā, if you take it, "mind," there are psychological department, speculation department, philosophical department, so many departments, mind. Then intellectual department. But there is no department of the ātmā, of the soul. That is the defect of the modern civilization. Therefore Bhāgavata says, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam: [SB 2.1.2] "They have no information of the real ātmā, of the real position, real background of all these activities. They do not see it." Therefore they have got many subject matter to hear about this body, about this mind, about intellectual activities, and so many things. But because they do not know that ātmā means the self, they do not know, therefore they have got many subject matter except this one-the soul, the subject matter of soul. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2].

And why they are so much ignorant? "Because they have made home as the center of activities. They do not know; neither they are educated. It is not their fault. The system of education is faulty. They do not give any education about the ātma-tattvam. They give education that, about economic development, about technological understanding, about scientific understanding of the laws of nature, and so many other things, but there is no department of knowledge to understand what is soul. Apaśyatām. Because they do not see, they do not know, therefore they are too much attached to this body, and this body means home. And home means wife. Wife means children. Children means money. Money means society, so many things. Yes.

Ataḥ gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. First thing is that this material world is existing on sex attraction. And as soon as there is combination of sex, then the next attraction is for home, for land, for children, for society, for wealth, for bank balance, and so many things. Then extend it more, society to nationality, nationality, humanity, and go on increasing, but they are not ātma-tattvam. They are all gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām, extended selfishness. Selfishness... Just like a dog. He knows simply about his body. He won't allow another dog to come in his boundary. That is very poor selfishness. You extend it little more, human society. There is family, wife, children. That is also extended selfishness. Then you further extend it. You have got society or nationality, consciousness of nationality. That is also still further extended selfishness. Similarly, you extend the same propensity humanity-wise. Because we are...

There is a class of men. They are very much anxious to serve the human society. But they are not anxious to serve the animal society. The animal society may be killed for the satisfaction of the human society. Therefore, unless you come to the point of ātmā, whatever extended selfishness there is, it is selfishness. There is no, I mean to say, broadmindedness. And broadmindedness, when you come to the platform of ātmā. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. When you come to the point of God, then you see, "Oh, everything belongs to God. Everything belongs to God. Here is an animal. Here is an animal. He also as good as I am because he is also soul." So ātma-tattvam to be discussed, but they are not prepared. Therefore gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. So what is their business, those who are blind to the ātma-tattvam? So that business is described in the next verse.

nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ

vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ

divā cārthehayā rājan

kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā

[SB 2.1.3]



So their business is very nicely explained. What is that? Nidrayā, sleeping. Sleeping. Hriyate. They waste their life by sleeping. When? At night. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. Or they waste their time in sex life. At night there are two things. One who has no advantage of sex life, he sleeps alone. And if he has got advantage of sex life, he enjoys. So at night they waste their life in this way. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ [SB 2.1.3]. In this way their life is being wasted. And at daytime? Now, divā cārthehayā rājan. At the daytime, simply "Where is money? Where is money?" Artha. Artha means... Because to maintain this body we require money. Divā cārthehayā rājan. All right, if one gets money, then next? Kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā. Then shopping. As soon as you get money then shopping, the wife's bill. Yes. So in this way, day and night, they are simply under the impression of this bodily conception of life. Why they are doing that?



dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



They are attached because they are attached to this body, therefore attached to the children. Dehāpatya. Apatya means children. And kalatra. Kalatra means wife. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu ātma-sainyeṣu. This very word sainya... Sainya means soldier. Here in the material world, every one of us is struggling very hard. That is a fact. Everyone knows. So when we struggle, when we fight, then we must have soldiers. Without soldiers, nobody fights. So they are our soldiers: this body... Everyone wants to keep this body fit. And maintaining the children and the wife... Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu. We are thinking that "My, this body and wife and children and home and country and society will save me." I am struggling against... What is that struggling? I do not wish to die. I do not wish to be diseased. I do not wish to become old man. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. I don't wish to get birth again, or I want to stop birth. Janma-mṛtyu. I want to stop death. I want to stop disease. And I want to stop old age. These are the activities, material activities, struggling against. And I am thinking that "These soldiers, or this, my body, or my wife, my children, will protect me," dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api [SB 2.1.4], although I am experiencing every day that they are asat, they will not exist. How do I know they will not exist? My father has died. My elderly, my mother has died, my grandfather has died. Therefore I will also die. And my next generation, he will also die. My wife also will die. So everybody will die. Asatsv api. They know by experience that they will not exist, but still, their business has become to struggle for existence. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu. These are very important subject matter. Try to understand. We know that nobody will exist. I want to exist. That is my intention. I do not wish to die. I want to exist, but I know also that all these, my soldiers, including my, this stout and strong body, it will also not exist. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu, teṣāṁ pramattaḥ.



Pramatta means crazy, mad. Pramatto nidhanam, distraction. Nidhanam paśyan. Paśyan means although he is seeing every day, every moment. Just like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was quested by Yamarāja, "What is the most wonderful thing in this world? Can you say?" Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira immediately replied. What is that? Ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchantīha yamālayam: "Every moment, every second, every day, every night, there are so many hundreds and thousands of living entities, they are going to the temple of death, or dying." Ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchantīha yamālayaṁ śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti. "But one who is living, he is thinking that 'I will not die. I will live for good.' That is the most wonderful thing in this world." Nobody is taking experience that "I will have to meet death. And what is next after death? What I was before my birth? Why I am here? Why I am struggling so hard? I want to be happy. I want to be peaceful. Why there is no peace? Why there is no happiness? Why these things? Why I am put into this...?" These are called ātma-tattvam. These are called brahma-jijñāsā. If a man is not enlightened to this point of inquiring of this, "What? What I am? Wherefore I am come? What is this world? What is this body? Why I am getting old? Why I am getting diseased?" So many "whys" there are. This is called brahma-jijñāsā. But they are pramatta, they are mad after the struggle for existence, although they know nothing will exist, it has come just like a flash, and it will end like a flash. Then what is the actual platform of my life, my living condition? They do not inquire. They do not inquire.

So gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api, teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanam [SB 2.1.4]. Everyone is seeing that it will destroy. Suppose if you know... Suppose you are constructing a very nice skyscraper building, but if you know... Somebody says that tomorrow the whole city will merge into the Atlantic Ocean. Would you like to construct such building? No. I am giving that one example, but it is a fact that the struggle for existence for living, but living condition will not be allowed. Then the next question should be that "Why this is happening? We are, everyone is struggling for existing, but existence, there is no... I will not exist. Nobody will exist." This question, unless there is in the human mind, then, Bhāgavata says, parābhavas tāvat: "His all activities are simply defeat." Yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. So ātma-tattvam. One should be inquisitive to understand, "What is my constitutional position?" Then it is perfect life. Otherwise it is crazy life. We may try to live by so much hard struggle of life, but we cannot exist. We can exist only when we understand "What I am." This is diagnosis. If I know that what is my actual need, if I know what is my actual position, if I know that wherefrom I have come and where I have to go, all these informations, if we are fully informed, that is perfection of life. Otherwise it is simply defeat, whatever we may do here. Apaśyatām. Teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati.

tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



Now he is concluding that "Don't be misled by so many subject matter of hearing. Just concentrate upon hearing Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Tasmāt. Tasmāt, "Therefore," tasmād bhārata, "O descendant of Bhārata..." Sarvātmā. Sarvātmā means the all-pervading Supersoul; bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśvara, the supreme controller; hariḥ, who can, I mean to say, protect, who can take away all your miseries, who can protect you from all miseries. Tasmād bhārata sarvātmā bhagavān hariḥ, īśvaro hariḥ, śrotavyaḥ: "You have to hear about Him." Instead of hearing so many other news, which will not exist, you just try to hear about Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because Parīkṣit Mahārāja's question was that "Now I am going to die. What shall I hear about?" Because hearing is our main business. You are hearing. If you go out from this temple you will also hear. Or the sound is always going on. If we do not want to hear, the hearing is going on. So here it is recommended that "That Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme controller, who is Hari, or who protects us from all difficulty, Hari, and sarvātmā-He is situated in everyone's heart-that Supreme Personality of Godhead, Supersoul, should be heard." Śrotavya, should be heard. We should be prepared to hear about Him. Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. And we should discuss about Him, kīrtitavyaś ca. Smartavya. And if we hear and discuss, then, if we are really serious, then we shall remember also. Smartavya, and smartavyaś cecchatābhayam. Those who are actually desiring abhayam...



Abhayam means fearlessness. So long we are not connected in Kṛṣṇa consciousness or not connected with the Supreme Lord, we shall always be fearful. Fearful is one of the qualification of the conditioned soul. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca: four necessities. Why we are defending? Because on account of fearfulness. The animal, a small animal, ant, it has got also fear, and the biggest nation, Russia or America, they are also fearful because this is the qualification of conditioned life: āhāra, eating, nidrā, sleeping, and fearing, and mating. So if you want to get yourself free from fearfulness, then Śukadeva Gosvāmī recommends that you have to chant and you have to hear and you have to remember about the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the conclusion. Don't try to hear so many nonsense things. Vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana [Bg. 2.41]. Just concentrate. If you want to hear about God, there are volumes of literature.

One political leader... Perhaps you have heard his name. His name was Madan Mohan Mallabhya.(?) In India. He came to see our Guru Mahārāja, and he inquired that "What are your activities?" So then some of our Godbrothers presented that "We have got six periodicals in six languages: one in English, one in Bengali, one in Hindu, one in Oriya, one is Assami. And we have got one paper, Bengali, daily." So this Madan Mohan Mallabhya was astonished that "You are issuing a paper daily, simply discussing about God?" So my Guru Mahārāja said, "Yes. Why not?" Then he gave him a nice example, that in the Bhagavad-gītā it is stated that ekāṁśena sthito jagat: [Bg. 10.42] This material world is only one-fourth part manifestation of God's energy. Now, apart from material... There are innumerable universes and innumerable planets in each universe. Out of that, this earthly planet is very tiny. And in this planet there are so many countries and so many cities. And each and every city there are so many periodicals, so many newspapers, and each paper having so many editions daily. So in comparison to the whole universe or whole material creation, this planet is nothing and this city is nothing. If you can produce so many news, then what about the three-fourth energy, Vaikuṇṭha?

So we can give you a minute edition of the transcendental news of the spiritual world. But unfortunately, there is no customer. There is no customer. The same thing, the śrotavyādīni... If you put magazines about this material world, you will get many customers. But as soon as we put forward Back to Godhead, we have no customer. The unfortunate thing is that nobody is interested about ātma-tattvam. So actually we should be interested to understand. We should be interested to understand ātma-tattva if we actually want to be free from fearfulness. Icchatā abhayam. Abhayam means fearless. If we are actually... Now, icchatābhayam, who are those? Transcendentalists.

So there are four classes of persons who are trying to get transcendental perfection or spiritual life. They are called jñānī, who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by philosophical speculation, and yogi... Those who are trying to visualize the Supreme Soul within the heart, they are called yogi. And jñānī, yogi, and bhaktas, and the devotees. Those who are trying to leave this material world and go back to Godhead and associate with the Supreme Person. There are three classes of men. They are trying to get out of this fearful world. Icchatābhayam. Therefore here, sarvātmā, the yogis are trying to find out the Supersoul. Therefore sarvātmā. So tasmād bhārata sarvātmā, and īśvara. Īśvara. The jñānīs are trying to merge into the effulgence of īśvara, or the yogis are trying to find out the Supersoul. Therefore sarvātmā. So tasmād bhārata sarvātmā, and īśvara. Īśvara. The jñānīs are trying to merge into the effulgence of īśvara, or the yogis are trying to find out the īśvara, the supreme controller. And the jñānīs are trying to find out the impersonal Brahman. And Hari, and Bhagavān, the Personality of Godhead, Hari, or Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu, the devotees, persons who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are trying to find out.

So either of them, their aim is how to get out of this fearful material existence. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, concludes, that icchatā abhayam. Abhayam means fearful. If you actually want to be free from fear, then you should concentrate your mind, discussing, hearing, remembering, either of the impersonal Brahman... Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti [SB 1.2.11]. Either you think of Brahman or Paramātmā or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but your subject matter should be this: hearing, chanting, discussing, talking, knowing. Don't divert your attention to this flimsy, I mean to say, so-called subject matter which will end. Because everything, whatever we are discussing in the material world, everything will end, nothing will exist, we should concentrate our mind on the subject matter which will exist. Because I am soul, I am ever-existing, eternal, my business is, therefore, "What is my eternal engagement?" This subject matter is proposed by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and we shall discuss later on, in the next meeting. Thank you very much. Any question?

Guest: What were your activities after your initiation? What were your activities after initiation?



Prabhupāda: Initiation means beginning or spiritual activities. Initiation means just to begin.



Guest: What were your activities after that?



Prabhupāda: Don't you see what are our activities? Is it very secret? You can see what are our activities. We are discussing about Kṛṣṇa. We are talking about Kṛṣṇa. We are chanting about Kṛṣṇa. We are eating about Kṛṣṇa. We are typewriting about Kṛṣṇa. We are dictaphoning about Kṛṣṇa. Don't you see it? Then? Everything engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness-that is our activity. The same thing will be there; nothing will be changed. Here we are staying in also big apartment and the down, they are also staying in the similar apartment. But this is called temple, and that is called factory. Why? Here the consciousness is different from the consciousness down. That's all. Nothing has to be changed. Simply the rubberstamp has to be changed. Somebody is signing, "for, on behalf of such and such," and the rubberstamp is changed. We have to change our rubberstamp on behalf of Kṛṣṇa. That's all. [break]



...sign it. That's all. The business is the same, but little difference, little difference in this way, that we are eating and others are also eating. So so far eating is concerned there is no difference. But we are eating Kṛṣṇa prasādam, and they are eating sense gratification. That is the difference. We are sleeping; they are also sleeping. But we are sleeping to get energy to work more diligently and nicely for Kṛṣṇa, and they are working, taking rest for working for sense gratification. So eating, sleeping, fearing. We are also fearful in this way, that "Māyā may not catch me." We are always cautious. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Because māyā is very strong, so we should be always fearful that "Māyā may not catch me." Always stick to Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet so māyā may not be able to touch you. Just like in a contaminated, diseased area, the doctor is also fearful, but he has got prophylactic administration. He is quite fit. He can go even in the contaminated state. Similarly, if we are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even if we are in the midst of mayic activities, it will not affect. So everything is there, but if you change your consciousness, then you are safe. Icchatā abhayam, no more fearfulness. That is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Pradyumna: Swamiji, is there such thing as mind, intelligence, and ego on the spiritual realm?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Why not? Ego... I am thinking at the present moment ego falsely. "I am somebody belonging to this material world," either I may think that "I am American," either I think "I am Indian," something of this material world. But similarly, when you think ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "I am spirit soul," that is also aham, ahaṅkāra. Ego means ahaṅkāra, identification, self-identification, ahaṅkāra, "I am." Everyone has got the sense, "I am." Now, that "I am" thinking, at the present moment I am thinking in my material concept. So when I will think in spiritual concept, that is my pure ego, pure identification. So ego will remain. Ego will not vanish. This "I" consciousness will remain, but here, at the present moment, I am misidentifying myself, and when I actually know myself, that identification is pure ego.



Haṁsadūta: You say the chanting cleans the dust from the mirror of the mind. What does mirror mean? How does it mean mirror? What is it reflecting?



Prabhupāda: Mirror means you see so many things within your mind. Is it not a mirror, reflection? Don't you see? As you see mirror reflection of your face, but you see this body. When you will see in the mirror that you are not this body, you are something within this body, that is dustless mirror. Yes?



Devotee (1): What is Balarāma's relationship with Rādhā?



Prabhupāda: That is not our discussion here. What you got this Balarāma's relation... [break]



Devotee (1): I mean, what is Their relationship? I understand that all the expansions come through Balarāma, but...?



Prabhupāda: That's all right, but Balarāma has no relationship with Rādhā.



Devotee (1): I mean not a friend or anything?



Prabhupāda: No. Who said it?



Devotee (1): I was wondering.



Prabhupāda: Why do you think like that? No. Balarāma is... Rādhā... As Kṛṣṇa has expansion, similarly, Rādhā has also expansion. So as Rādhārāṇī is directly connected with Kṛṣṇa, similarly, Rādhā's another expansion is connected with Balarāma. All Lakṣmī are connected with the..., not exactly Rādhā directly. As Kṛṣṇa expands Himself in multi-forms, similarly, Rādhā also expands Herself. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta you will find. Yes?



Pradyumna: So in terms of spiritual potency of Kṛṣṇa, and... Rādhā was...



Prabhupāda: You put an unnecessary question. When I shall ask you to question the subject matter which I have discussed, you should put questions on this matter. If you bring so many other subject matter, there will be no end. Try to understand what we have spoken in this meeting. We have not spoken anything about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Why you are bringing this question? Question means the subject matter which we have discussed, if you have got any question about that thing, you should put question. Otherwise, if you make me a dictionary, that go on questioning, there will be no end. That should not be done. Now, we have not discussed here about Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Of course, this is also relevant question, but the public will not understand. We are discussing on general subject matter. Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa discussion is very confidential. You have to go to the platform first of all by understanding Kṛṣṇa. You see? Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-tattva is discussed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the Tenth Canto. So first of all you have to go through the nine cantos very carefully. Then you will understand. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta you'll find, rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmād ekātmānāv api bhuvi [Cc. Ādi 1.5]. If you want to discuss about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, that is not in the public meeting. They are very confidential subject matter. People may misunderstand what is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Generally, questions should be put on the subject matter discussed in the meeting. That should be the point. Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-tattva is very confidential, for higher status of understanding. Yes?



Himavatī: Vyāsadeva, you say, lived with his wife and children in a cottage, and people would come and bring them foodstuff from the village. Now, the four divisions of brahma cārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and so on, I thought that the gṛhasthas' duties in the āśrama, varṇāśrama-dharma, was to supply the other three.



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Himavatī: How is this...? How is this connected with Vyāsadeva and his situation?



Prabhupāda: Vāsudeva?



Devotees: Vyāsadeva.



Prabhupāda: Vyāsadeva? Vyāsadeva was a gṛhastha. He was a householder man. He was brāhmaṇa.



Himavatī: But he had no luxuries.



Prabhupāda: No. Those who will depend on the charities and alms of the society, they are not allowed to make any luxury at the cost of others. They can simply ask help for the bare necessities of life.



Himavatī: And that's permitted to the gṛhasthas?



Prabhupāda: No. Gṛhastha, when a brāhmaṇa is gṛhastha, he shall be a teacher. Paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana dāna-pratigraha. Generally, the brāhmaṇas, those who are gṛhasthas... There are four varṇas, or division of castes. The brāhmaṇas, they are generally teachers, priests, and writers, philosophers. So society requires all these things, so they take up this charge. And the kṣatriyas, they are administrators, so they rule over the country. They exact taxes from the citizens. They live on the tax, and the brāhmaṇas, on the contribution of the public. Just like we are teaching, we are living on the contribution of the public. The public knows that there is an important institution. They are giving good lessons. So public contributes. So we can accept contribution. But a king is not allowed to take contribution. Because he is administrator, he can tax, so his source of income is tax. And the brāhmaṇas' source of income is contribution because they are rendering transcendental service. Similarly, the vaiśyas or the mercantile class, their means of living-trade, cow protection, and agriculture. And those who are śūdras, laborer class, they will serve these three higher classes, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, and the vaiśyas, because they have no independent means. They cannot do anything, neither they are educated, nor they are king, princely order, nor they have money to do business. Therefore they have to serve.



Paricaryātmakaṁ karma śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. Śūdra means they earn their livelihood by serving others. And in the Kali-yuga, in this age, ninety-nine percent or at least ninety percent, they live by serving others. Therefore it is said, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ: "In the Kali, in this age, almost everyone is śūdra." There is no brāhmaṇa, no kṣatriya, no vaiśya. Of course, there are vaiśyas. Factually, at the present moment the population are the vaiśyas and the śūdras. And there is fight, that your American nation, they are vaiśyas, and the Russians, they are śūdras. So there is always fight between the vaiśyas and śūdras. Actually, there is no brāhmaṇa or kṣatriyas. They are extinct. And because the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas are extinct, therefore social orders are in chaos. There is no brain; there is no good administration. That's all. Without kṣatriya, there cannot be any good administration, and without brāhmaṇa, there is no good brain. Therefore we pray to Kṛṣṇa, namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca, kṛṣṇāya govindāya...

namo brahmaṇya-devāya

go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca

jagad-dhitāya kṛṣṇāya

govindāya namo namaḥ



So this is very important. We are worshiping, offering our respect to Kṛṣṇa, as brahmaṇya-deva. Brahmaṇya-deva means "the Lord who is worshiped by the brāhmaṇas." So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not for the śūdras. Kṛṣṇa conscious... One who is elevated to the standard of becoming brāhmaṇa, they can become Kṛṣṇa conscious. But by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, every one comes to the stage of brahminical standard. Only to observe these four principles and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, you are at once more than brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava position is more than brāhmaṇa. So in this age the pāñcarātriki-vidhi is introduced because it is very difficult to find out whether a person is actually son of brāhmaṇa or higher caste. It is to be accepted that everyone is śūdra. It doesn't matter whether and what he is. But he should be given chance to become the Vaiṣṇava, whose position is more than a brāhmaṇa. That is the highest gift of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is claiming everyone to the highest stage of Vaiṣṇava. So your question is answered?



Himavatī: Yes.



Prabhupāda: All right.



Haṁsadūta: Swamiji, did you say that householders should not associate with brahmacārīs?



Prabhupāda: Who said?



Haṁsadūta: Did you say that? Did you ever say that?



Prabhupāda: No. No.



Haṁsadūta: A brahmacārī should not associate with brahmacāriṇīs. But you did say that brahmacārīs should not associate with brahmacāriṇīs.



Prabhupāda: Actually, there is no... Brahmacāriṇī is not allowed in the śāstra. Where is the question of brahmacāriṇī? Because according to Vedic system, as soon as a girl is fourteen years old or sixteen years old, she is at once married. According to Vedic system, no girl should be allowed remaining unmarried. So there is no question of brahmacāriṇī. Every girl is supposed to be married. That is the Vedic system. A father's duty is that as soon as the girl is grown up, she must be married. She must be given in charge of a suitable boy. That is Vedic system.



Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyāḥ. A woman is meant for being protected. So long she is not young, she is under the protection of the father. And as soon as she is young, she is given in charge, in charity. Kanyā-dāna. Dāna means charity. He should find out some suitable boys and give in charity: "My dear boy, take charge of this girl. So long she was under my charge. Now it is under your charge." So where is the brahmacāriṇī? There is no question of brahmacāriṇī. And when he is old enough, then the husband leaves the home and gives charge to the elderly son: "My dear boys, take charge of your mother." So she is always in charge of somebody. So according to Vedic system, there is no independent life of woman. Na strī svātantryam arhati. Manu-saṁhitā, that "Strī"-strī means woman-"should not be allowed independence." They should be given all protection. That's a very nice system. Not... Independence does not mean their position is very lower, no. Just like children. Children has no independence. No independence means they are well-protected. No independence does not meant that he has no independence to act. No. She has got. But under the protection. Just like there are some nation still now, protectorate. America is protecting. America is a big nation, and protecting another small nation. That does not mean they have no independence. They are also independent. They are acting like that. But because weaker, they should be given protection. Similarly, woman, children, brāhmaṇa, cow, old men, diseased men, they are to be protected. That is the social order.

Haṁsadūta: Now, if someone is married, gṛhastha, under the varṇāśrama-dharma, is it the duty of gṛhasthas to have children? Are there some qualifications of gṛhasthas, that gṛhasthas, they're required, like they are required to support the brāhmaṇas, like that?



Prabhupāda: Gṛhastha? Gṛhastha means to live with wife. This is the meaning of gṛhastha. And a gṛhastha is supposed to support others who are not gṛhasthas just like brahmacārī. Brahmacārī means student life. So gṛhasthas support them. [break] ...sannyāsīs, other three classes. Because they are engaged in a different subject matter, they have no time to earn their livelihood, and therefore, those who are gṛhasthas, they take charge of him. This is the Vedic system. But they should live also on the bare necessities of life. They should not be luxurious. A brahmacārī cannot be luxurious. A sannyāsī cannot be luxurious. A vānaprastha cannot be luxurious. Luxury is allowed only to the householder because they are earning their own money. Others are dependent. So one cannot be luxurious at the expense of others. That is not allowed.



Devotee (2): Pertaining to the varṇāśrama-dharma system, a mother is... the wife of a husband is usually put in charge of the oldest son. If the oldest... If, say, the husband is not present, then the oldest son is supposed to be in charge and he is a brahmacārī, in what way is the mother cared for?



Prabhupāda: Well, brahmacārī means he has gone out of home. Brahmacārī does not remain at home. He goes to the spiritual master's home. So there is no question of giving wife's charge to a brahmacārī. He is not at home. Do you follow? Yes. The elderly children mean those who are married also, those who are in gṛhastha life, for him, not for the brahmacārī or sannyāsī. Just try to understand. A brahmacārī and sannyāsī does not remain at home. The brahmacārī goes to the spiritual master's home and the sannyāsī, he is a traveler from one country to another, preaching. So they are not at home. So if they are not at home, who is taking charge? To give charge means the elderly son who is a married man, who is living at home, the charge is given of the mother to him. Is that all right?



Devotee (2): Yes, but I'm still wondering. Is it the nature of the Kali-yuga that mother and father always separate? Is it the nature of the Kali-yuga that this family separation is always happening?



Prabhupāda: (chuckles) Therefore I say, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ: "In the Kali-yuga there are only śūdras." There is no brahmacārī system, no... Now we are introducing it, even collecting from the śūdras. But actually, these four divisions, scientific division of social order for spiritual uplift..., that is already gone. It is not existing. Do you follow? Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In the Kali-yuga, amongst the śūdras, there is no āśrama, simply earn, earn, get some money and eat. That's all. That is śūdras life. There is no question of Vedic culture, there is no question of knowledge. Simply labor, get some money, and eat. Almost like animal. So at the present moment, as you say, in the Kali-yuga, it is accepted that everyone, almost everyone is a śūdra. But in the pāñcarātrika system, not Vedic system, Nārada-pañcarātra, they are... Otherwise, do you mean to say because everyone has become śūdra, the science of Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, should be stopped? No. Even they are śūdras, they should be given that opportunity. And that opportunity is given by Lord Caitanya very liberally: "Whatever you may be, come on, sit down, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and you become more than a brāhmaṇa." This is the highest gift of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But if you take otherwise from the social conventional life, oh, there is no brāhmaṇa, there is no gṛhastha, there is no brahmacārī. There is all gone, all finished. So those rules and regulation are not now applicable because amongst the śūdras there is no such rules and regulation. It is meant for the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, and those are gone. They are finished. Now, even though the people are in the status of śūdra, they should be given opportunity for spiritual advancement, and that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's special gift, and very easy, that "Whatever you may be, you may be a brāhmaṇa, you may be a kṣatriya, vaiśya, that doesn't matter. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and gradually realize."



So at the present moment we cannot strictly follow; neither we are strictly following; neither it is possible to strictly follow. As far as possible, that's all. Our conception of brahmacāriṇī is in the Kṛṣṇa society, because... Especially in India, there is no brahmacāriṇī. But here, in your country, the boys and girls mix very freely, but just to restrict such free mixing, we think that the unmarried girls should remain separately. That is the contemplation. Actually, in the Vedic system there is no brahmacāriṇī system. Or get yourself married. That is our proposal, that we do not allow illicit sex life. That is impediment. That will not enhance your spiritual interests. Yes?

Devotee (2): Swamiji, so the government, the present government in the world...



Prabhupāda: We are not concerned with government. We say there is no kṣatriya, there is no government. At the present moment, anyone who has got some artificial power, he is government. That's all. You get some way or other a little vote, and you become government. So government does not mean that. Government is another. Because there is no kṣatriya, and where is government? They are thinking... Government means they should be always thinking how the citizens should be peaceful and happy and spiritually advanced. That is government. And who is caring for the citizens? They are simply exacting tax. That's all. So actually, in the Kali-yuga, because there is no kṣatriya, where is the government? Śūdra government is no government. Śūdra has no right to govern, but by force they are governing. That's all. "Might is right."



Devotee (3): Swamiji, Indian literature and movies, they're... The subject is quite often romantic love. But in the literature of Indian religion, it seems to me that there's no place for romantic love. It's either divine love or it's, as you say, "cats and dogs." Do you find a place for romantic love within...?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Devotee (3): What is it?



Prabhupāda: That is in spiritual world, not in this material... In the material world there is no love. It is lust. We are making business under the name of love. In the material world there cannot be love because... Suppose a girl loves a boy or a boy loves a girl. Both of them are actuated by sense gratification. So that is not love. That is not love. When there is question of sense gratification, that is not love. Just like there is little example. Just like mother loves the child. There is no question of sense gratification. Simply for the sake of love, the mother loves the child. It is simply a little example. Similarly, love means if I love you, I don't want any return. Still, I love you. You may ill treat me. You may badly treat me. You neglect me. Still, I love you. There is no question of return from you. That is real love. That you cannot find in this material world. Because it is based on sense gratification, therefore there is love between a boy and girl, and as soon as there is little discrepancy, there is divorce. They are separated. Because the whole principle was on the basis of lust. So there is no love. Or we do not know what is meant by love. Love does not mean just a boy is attracted by a girl or a girl is attracted by a... That is not love. That is sense attraction. So in the material world there is no love. It is impossible. There is little, little example, just like I cited the example of mother and son or similar. That is also temporary. But real love is in the spiritual... That is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That is real love. There is no separation. There is no cheating. There is no divorce. There is no sex attraction. Simply for love's sake, loving, that is real love.



Devotee (3): But in the great literature, lust is not defined as love. It's more defined as something that has to do with spiritual affinity or communication or... In other words, there is a place for romantic love as distinct from lust because lust is rather elementary.



Prabhupāda: Romantic love is in the spiritual world, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That is the origin of romantic love. And here we are trying to imitate, although we are on the platform of lust. It is imitation, shadow, perverted reflection. So actually, Kṛṣṇa consciousness means we are trying to reach that platform of real love, exchange of love. The example... One example can be given: just like in diseased conditioned, actually there is no enjoyment, but still, the doctor gives some diet: "You eat this." But he does not enjoy. Eating enjoyment is in healthy life, not in diseased condition.



So our present condition is diseased. Why you are dying? Because you are diseased. Why you are becoming old? Because you are diseased. That is due to this body. But actually I am spirit soul. I am neither old nor diseased, but I have fallen into the condition of material contamination. Therefore I am thinking that I am diseased. This is called māyā. Just like in the dream I am feeling that a tiger is eating me, and I am crying, "Here is a tiger eating me, eating me. Save me." But there is no tiger. This is called illusion, or māyā. But so long we'll have this body just like so long we shall dream, we shall have to suffer the effect, even it is illusion. A man is crying, "There is a tiger." Actually, there is no tiger; neither tiger is eating. But because he is in hallucination, he is feeling the pain. That is actual fact. So the whole process is to stop this illusion, bodily contamination. Then we are in real life. And then we can understand what is love, what is reciprocation of love, everything. That is real, healthy life. So this human form of life is meant for getting out of this illusion to the spiritual life. That we have been discussing. But instead of taking advantage of this human life, if we simply treat ourself just like animals and be engaged with eating, sleeping, fearing, and mating, then we are missing the chance. So long we have got this human intelligence, we should utilize it for the highest perfectional stage of life. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Haṁsadūta: What happens to the Vaiṣṇava if he is following the spiritual master and he's not successful in spiritual life? Does he also take birth on higher planets like it says in the Bhagavad-gītā?



Prabhupāda: If he is not successful, he is guaranteed to get another human form of life in rich family or a pious family.



Haṁsadūta: Like Bhagavad-gītā says.



Prabhupāda: Yes. In rich family, to take birth in rich family, means he has no economic problem, so he can engage fully in developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And pious family means automatically he gets chance to become Kṛṣṇa conscious.



Haṁsadūta: So can it be understand that if a person, for instance, some Americans are very wealthy, that they...



Prabhupāda: Yes. They must have done pious activities in their previous life, all Americans. But they should know that this is their advantage to become Kṛṣṇa conscious: "We have no economic problem, but we are employing our facilities in sense gratification." That is a mistake.



Haṁsadūta: Suppose a person is born in a very poor family. What does that mean? Suppose someone is born in a very poor, low, very low, and he becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is open to all. Just like we are calling everyone, "Come and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." It is open to all. There is no question of becoming poor or rich. But if he takes the advantage, that is up to him. We are not restricting here that only the rich persons or brāhmaṇas or pious family or rich family can come here, no. Everyone. Everyone is welcome. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ. Poor family or uneducated family, uncultured family, they are called pāpa-yoni, sinful family. But Kṛṣṇa says, "Never mind. Even if he is in sinful family, whatever he may be, if he comes to Me, he also can enter into the spiritual kingdom." So there is no such restriction.



māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim

[Bg. 9.32]



Parāṁ gatim means the highest perfectional life. And that is practical. Here, when people come here, we don't inquire whether he is poor or rich or this or that. "Come on. Sit down. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." The opportunity is equal for everyone.



Haṁsadūta: How is it that people who have done some pious activity, they get a nice birth in this statement, but usually people who are not wealthy or not so educated, sometimes they more or less take to worshiping Kṛṣṇa or God.



Prabhupāda: That is the grace of the devotees. The devotees offer their service, and they get the opportunity. Never mind what he is. It is the grace. Therefore, when Bhāgavata says, yad-apāśrayāśrayam... Apāśrayāśrayam means a devotee is already under the protection of God, and if one takes protection of a devotee, he also becomes a devotee and becomes purified. Therefore a devotee is more merciful than God. Even in God there is consideration-pious, impious. For a devotee there is no such consideration. "Everyone come." What is the purpose of opening so many centers? Just to give people opportunity to take advantage, without any consideration of his position. But if one does not take the advantage, it is up to him. That independence has everyone. We are inviting everyone to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but nobody is coming. What can we do? Those who are fortunate, they are taking advantage. That's all.



Now you take the mṛdaṅga, and you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Two mṛdaṅgas must be sounded equal, equally, on the same level. And how many cymbals? (end)



731106SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.3

-

Delhi, November 6, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.) Translation: "The lifetime of such envious householders is passed at night either in sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in the daytime either in making money or maintaining family members."



Prabhupāda:



nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ

vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ

divā cārthehayā rājan

kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā

[SB 2.1.3]



This is the description of the persons who are blind. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Yesterday we have discussed this verse. Apaśyatām means one who does not see. Apaśyatām, paśyati. Paśyati means "one who sees," and apaśyati, "one who does not see," "blind." So there are two kinds of men within the world: paśyati, apaśyati. Simply having the eyes, one cannot see. This is not... Because our senses are imperfect. We see every day the sun just like a small disc. But it is not a small disc. It is fourteen hundred thousand times bigger than this planet. Therefore our sensual perception is not all. That is not perfect. We are deficient: we commit mistake, we are illusioned, we cheat, and our senses are imperfect. As such, there is no possibility of having perfect knowledge by a conditioned soul. That is not possible.



We have to receive knowledge, therefore, from the supreme perfect. That is real knowledge. Just like we have got experience that nobody knows that there is soul. Nobody knows. But we have to receive the knowledge from the perfect person, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says there is soul. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanam, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Asmin dehe, in this body, there is the proprietor of the body, the soul. But if we want to see... Some rascal said, "Show me where is soul." He cannot see because he has no eyes to see. These modern materialistic persons, they want to see everything, but he does not understand that his seeing power is very limited. If the light is off, immediately he cannot see. So what is the value of your eyes? Why you are so much proud to see everything? "Can you show me God? Can you show me the soul?" You cannot see. You have no eyes to see. And what you cannot see, you can hear. Just like a blind man, he is sitting. He cannot see. Somebody comes. He inquires, "Who has come here?" Now, if somebody says, "It is such and such person," by hearing only he can understand, "Oh, such and such person has come." So seeing is not extremely perfect experience. There are other senses.

So which is beyond the sense perception you have to hear. Therefore Vedic knowledge is called śruti. You have to hear. Not by seeing. Simply by hearing. Śravaṇam.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



If you want to know the Supreme, then you have to hear from Him. Just like about Kṛṣṇa, we have to hear from Him. Kṛṣṇa is speaking Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa is speaking everything. All Vedic knowledge is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is speaking. How Kṛṣṇa is speaking? That is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. Kṛṣṇa spoke to Brahmā. Ādi-kavi means Brahmā. He spoke to him. But if somebody says, "Brahmā..., when Brahmā was born from the lotus flower, there was nobody there. So how he could hear from anybody?" Therefore Bhāgavata says, tene brahma hṛdā. Hṛdā means "through the heart." Through the heart he was educated. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's another name is caitya-guru. Caitya-guru means "the guru who is sitting within your heart." Caitya-guru. But He does not speak to anyone. He speaks to everyone, but only the devotee can hear. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



Unless you are a devotee, unless you are constantly engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, He will not speak to you. He speaks, but you cannot hear. You have no ears to hear Him. That is not possible. Kṛṣṇa is speaking. Just like Kṛṣṇa is speaking in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. It is open speaking, but who is hearing? Nobody is hearing. Nobody is hearing. They have got their own conception of life.



Therefore, unless there is mercy of Kṛṣṇa, there is no possibility of understanding Kṛṣṇa. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. By your these blunt material senses you cannot understand what is the name of Kṛṣṇa, nāmādi.

Guest: (Hindi)



Prabhupāda: That's all right. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi. (aside:) That's all right. Why you are bothering? Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ. In these blunt material senses you cannot understand what is this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. It requires purification of the senses, when you will understand what is Kṛṣṇa's name, nāmādi, what is Kṛṣṇa's form, what is Kṛṣṇa's quality, what is Kṛṣṇa's entourage, what is Kṛṣṇa's pastime. You cannot understand. How you will be understanding? Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When you are engaged in the loving service of the Lord, beginning with your tongue, sevonmukhe hi jihvādau, by chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and taking prasādam, in this way, gradually, when you will be purified, you will understand what is Kṛṣṇa. He will reveal. Kṛṣṇa reveals. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. For others, He is covered with yogamāyā's curtain, but for the devotees, He is open.



This is the secret. Vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. If you simply study Veda, you will never be able to understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore so many so-called Vedantists, they do not know what is Kṛṣṇa. They consider Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. So the mūḍhas, the rascals, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Only the devotees. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to understand Kṛṣṇa in truth, then you will have to accept this process, bhakti. Kṛṣṇa never says that "By jñāna, by yoga, by karma, you can understand." No.

bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram

[Bg. 18.55]



These things are...



So the gṛhamedhis, as I have described last night, they are not interested, gṛhamedhis. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Those who are simply attached to this bodily conception of life, they are unable to see the truth. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam. They cannot see. Their only business is... That is described here: nidrayā hriyate naktam. (aside:) Yes, come if you like. Their business is, these apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are blind, those who cannot see, the ātma-tattvam, "What I am," such persons, what is their business occupation? That is the distinction between devotee and nondevotee. A nondevotee, he is very much happy by sleeping. We have seen it practically in Western countries. You know very well, if they can sleep twenty-four,-five hours instead of twenty-four hours, they are very happy. They think that they are getting some profit. Not only Western countries. I have seen long, long ago, about fifty years ago in Calcutta, the office peons, they took letters for distributing to other men, but what do they do? They will sleep at Delhousie Square with the peon book. I have seen. They thought that "This sleeping is our gain. We are getting salary. That is another gain. But because without working I am sleeping now for three hours in Delhousie Square, it is also another gain."

So this is the conception of the (someone coughs loudly) Disturb... (Hindi) So sleeping is also pleasure, but for the devotees, for advanced devotees, just like Gosvāmīs in Vṛndāvana, śrī-rūpa-sanātana-bhaṭṭa-raghunātha, they conquered over sleeping. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **. Vijitau, they conquered over sleeping. That is required. Just like Arjuna is addressed, "Guḍākeśa." He conquered over sleeping. To conquer over sleeping is the success of life, not to be servant of sleeping. That is not required. That is for the conditioned soul. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. For conditioned soul. Therefore we have to practice. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau. Śrī-gaurāṅga-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau śraddhā-samṛddhy-anvitau, nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau. This is the description of the gosvāmīs. Rūpa Gosvāmī used to sleep generally one and half hour only. And that is also sometimes not sleeping. That is the description in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

So to increase sleeping is no qualification. To decrease sleeping. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhir narāṇām. Eating, sleeping, sex life and defending, these business is meant for the animals. So we have got the animal portion of our life, because we are animals. Unless we come to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness point, we are simply animals. Those who are working on the bodily concept of life whole day and night, they are simply animals. Their business is to sleep as much as possible at night. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. Otherwise, vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ. Vyavāya. Vyavāya means sex. Two business at night, either sex indulgence or sleep. This is ātma-tattvam apaśyatām, apaśyatām. Those who are awakened to the ātma-tattva, they will simply think, "How much time I have wasted!" That is... Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]. Avyartha kā... A devotee should be always alert whether he is wasting time or utilizing time. That is devotee's business.

So this nidrayā hriyate naktam or vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ this is wasting life, wasting time. It should be minimized as far as possible. This is not required. This is the bodily necessities of life. And we have to come to the spiritual platform. We have to be engaged only in spiritual activities. But those who are not interested in self-realization, there must be some engagement. There are two things, Kṛṣṇa or māyā. Just like darkness and light. Where there is Kṛṣṇa there is no darkness. Kṛṣṇa sūrya-sama, māyā haya andhakāra: "Māyā is just like darkness, and Kṛṣṇa is just like sunlight." So as soon as there is sunlight, there is no darkness. Just like this is night. What does it mean, night? Means there is no sunlight. Sunlight is there in other part of this globe, but here there is no sunlight; therefore it is darkness. Similarly, as soon as we are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, there is māyā, immediately. Either māyā or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you are not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you should understand that you are in māyā. And if you are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then there is no māyā. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. These are the open description. Anyone who is fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he has no māyā.

Now, this does not mean that we shall completely exclude sleeping. That does not... Just like gosvāmīs. They were liberated persons, but they were also sleeping. Because we have got this body, sleeping, rest, is necessary. We cannot neglect this body. But not that that we shall increase the necessities of life, increase the necessities of the body. That is... Rūpa Gosvāmī has given: nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. We have to, I mean to say, mold our life in such a way. What is that? Anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. This is viṣaya. Viṣaya means this āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. This is called viṣaya. Viṣaya does not mean one who is very rich man, he is viṣayī. No. Anyone, he may be very poor man, if he is attached to this eating, sleeping, mating and defending only, he is a viṣayī. The Locana dāsa Ṭhākura says, viṣaya chāṛiyā, se rase majiyā. One has to gradually give up, minimize this viṣaya. Viṣaya means āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. Viṣaya.

So Rūpa Gosvāmī gives the instruction, anāsaktasya viṣayān. Anāsakta. Anā..., means no attachment. Sleeping required, but not for attachment. Somebody is living for sleeping, and somebody is sleeping just to give rest to the body. Similarly, eating also. Eating is not prohibited. You have to eat, because you have got this body. But not that simply for eating I am living. This is called yukta-vairāgya. Rūpa Gosvāmī says anāsaktasya viṣa... Don't be attached to the viṣaya, eating, sleeping, mating, that "I have to eat so much. I have to satisfy my palate. I have to eat this thing in the restaurant." No. You eat simply just to keep your body fit, not extra. Atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ [NoI 2]. Don't eat more than it is required for maintaining your body. Similarly, don't sleep more; as much as you require for maintaining your... Don't have sex life more than it is required. They are allowed. Just like Kṛṣṇa says that "Sex life which is not against religious principle, that is I am." Sex life against religion, what is that? Avaidha-strī-saṅga. Avaidha, illicit sex life, that is against religious principles. Otherwise, to get married and to beget nice children, Kṛṣṇa conscious children, according to śāstra, that sex life is not forbidden. Kṛṣṇa says. So dharmāviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi, "Which is not against religious principle, that kāma, that kind of lust, I am." But not for other purposes.

In this way we have to mold our life if we are actually interested to become free from this janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9], if we actually want to get free from the repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. That is our real problem. People do not understand that this is our real problem. They are simply engaged in some temporary problem. The real problem is that "Why I am dying? In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre: [Bg. 2.20] 'The soul does not die even after the destruction of this body.' So why my body should be destroyed?" This is real inquiry. "Why... Can I not get a permanent body which will never be destroyed?" Yes. You'll get. You will get. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says, "You will get a permanent body. After giving up this body," tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], "you do not get again material body." "Then where shall I go?" Mām eti: "You come to Me." If you go back to home, back to Kṛṣṇa, then, as Kṛṣṇa has got eternal body never to be destroyed, similarly Kṛṣṇa has got eternal body. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa has got a body like us. Just like Kṛṣṇa, when it was inquired by Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa said that "This Bhagavad-gītā philosophy I spoke first of all to the sun-god." That (I) have calculated. It is about 400,000,000's of years ago He said. How does He remember? That means He does not change His body. We, we forget because just like in our last, past birth... Now I can remember not all, but some of my incidences of my life I remember. But I do not remember anything of my past life. Death means forgetting about the past life. So because I have changed my body, I have forgotten. But anyone who does not change his body, he does not forget. And that is the proof that Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's body is not ordinary body. Anyone who thinks Kṛṣṇa as one of us, He is a mūḍha. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. Because He comes just like a human being, we consider that He is also a human being.

So it is a great science. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired about Kṛṣṇa, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī is describing, and he immediately said, varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "Your question is very glorified." Yad loka-hitam: "It will be..." Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa.

varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



Kṛṣṇa praśna, and Kṛṣṇa answer. So answer is śrotavya. So śrotavyādi, we are hearing so many answers. Just like you go to the market. We question and answer. There are so many questions, so many answers. But this Kṛṣṇa question and Kṛṣṇa answer, śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. Paraḥ means superior or transcendental. This is not material things. Nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ avyaktāt. Anything about Nārāyaṇa, that is not of this material world. That is of the spiritual world. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa question and Kṛṣṇa answer, they are not material things. Therefore, if we always engage ourself in Kṛṣṇa question and Kṛṣṇa answer... śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. Therefore it is called Viṣṇu. Not that any other śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. Only Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu means viṣṇu-tattva. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan. Viṣṇu-tattva means rāmādi-mūrti. Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Varāha, Kṛṣṇa... There are so many. They are described. They are viṣṇu-tattva. Viṣṇu-tattva, jīva-tattva, śakti-tattva. There are different tattvas. So śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. If you engage yourself in śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam, that should be for Viṣṇu, not for any other, anyone else. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam. Smaraṇam, meditation. That is also Viṣṇu. The yogis, those who are actually yogis, they meditate upon the viṣṇu-mūrti within the heart. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Yogis, their meditation, Viṣṇu.



So this kṛṣṇa-praśna, Kṛṣṇa question and Kṛṣṇa answer, this is loka-hitam. Anyone hears... In another place Śrī Bhāgavata says, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. "About Kṛṣṇa, if you hear and speak, it is automatically puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ." As it is said, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. So this śravaṇam Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, means puṇya, puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Even if you do not understand anything, if you simply sit down silently and give aural reception to the sound vibration of Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, you become purified. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Simply by hearing, you become pious. Because we are all impious. Unless we are impious, we don't accept this material body. There may be difference of degrees. That does not make... Anyone who has come to this material world, he is to be considered as impious.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa said, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. Because all of us are now in this material body means there is pāpa. Otherwise why there is... Just like in the prison house, anyone, he may be Gandhi or he may be a small pickpocket, anyone who is in the prison house, it is to be considered that he is criminal. He is a criminal in the eyes of the government. We may worship Gandhi, that's all right, or any political leader, but government think that he is a criminal. Similarly, we have to accept the government's decision. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's decision. Kṛṣṇa's decision is that anyone who is in this material world, beginning from Brahmā down to the small ant, some way or other, they are criminal.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



The māyā's business is to capture. Just like criminal is arrested by the police, similarly, māyā is also engaged for this purpose. Anyone who forgets Kṛṣṇa, anyone who wants to enjoy life, imitate like Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa is the supreme enjoyer. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. He is the enjoyer. But we are imitating. Sometimes we say, "I am Kṛṣṇa, I am God." This is our disease. We want to imitate Kṛṣṇa. We want to become Kṛṣṇa. We want to enjoy like Kṛṣṇa. This is going on. So so long we have got this propensity, we are sinful. This is the substance.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyaḥ: "If you surrender to Me... Because you have rebelled against Me. Rebelling against Me, you have come to this material world to enjoy. So I have given you all chances. I have given you chance to become Brahmā, to become Indra or become Candra, to become Nixon, to become Gandhi, to become Jawaharlal Nehru, to become ant, to become cat, to become dog. I have given you all chances, and you have enjoyed. But you are not satisfied. Now, if you have got sense, just surrender to Me."

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



"If you actually want real happiness, then you surrender to Me. I will give you protection from this sinful reaction of life."



So those who are very grossly sinful, their business is in sleeping. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. To sleep at night or to indulge sex life.

Pradyumna: Vyavāyena.



Prabhupāda: Vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ. Vyavāya means sex life. So vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ. The vayaḥ... Vayaḥ means duration of life. The more you indulge in sex life, your duration of life is reduced. That is the scientific method. Therefore the yogis, they give up sex life. It is a very great science, the breathing. During sex life there is more breathing. So the more you misuse your breathing, your duration of life is reduced. And if you can preserve this breathing, then you can increase your duration of life. Why people are dying nowadays, fifty years, sixty years, seventy years? No. One should live for at least hundred years. But because they unduly indulge in sex life, they die early. Their duration of life is reduced.



So these people, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are ignorant of the ātma-tattvam, they indulge in nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā [SB 2.1.3]. This is their night's business. And day's business. What is the day's business? Divā cārthehayā rājan. During daytime, "Where is money? Where is money? Where is money? Where is money? Where is money? Go here, go there, go there, go... All right, take money. Then how to utilize it?" Now, kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā. 'Then go to the shop. Purchase this thing for my wife, for my children, for this, for that." So money earned and spent, and night, sleeping and mating. Then where is your time for cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness? This is the position. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. Those who are blind, who do not know what is the value of this life, this human form of life, they are busy in these things. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2].

But actually, this life is meant for understanding ātma-tattvam. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This life is not meant for like cats and dogs-eating, sleeping, mating and defending. This is all cats' and dogs' business. Therefore those who are engaged only in these business:

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Go-khara. Go-khara means... Go means cow, and khara means ass. Those who are acting on this bodily concept of life, they are no better than cows and asses. Therefore one who is inquisitive about ātma-tattva, one who is inquisitive about Kṛṣṇa and such praśna, such inquiries as Parīkṣit Mahārāja did before Śukadeva Gosvāmī... He welcomed it immediately. Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "Oh, you have questioned very nicely about Kṛṣṇa." Loka-hitaṁ nṛpa: "Oh it is not only good for you; it is good for all the people of the world."



So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not a sectarian movement. It is good for all human being because as soon as there is question of Kṛṣṇa, people will hear. Actually, it is happening all over the world. Especially the younger generation, why they are taking interest? Because loka-hitam. They are understanding that it is beneficial. Every student, every disciple, they write me letter how much they are feeling grateful, that "We have got something. Prabhupāda, you have given us something." Of course, I have not given. It is not my property. I have simply informed them, "Here is Kṛṣṇa, and the life's business is to become a devotee." Kṛṣṇa said, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is your business. So anyone who becomes engaged in this loka-hitam, beneficial to the human society, he will be happy. But he has to control over these things: āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. These animals propensities should be controlled. Then it will be impetus. It will give acceleration to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore we have got the restriction: no illicit sex life, no gambling, no meat-eating, no intoxication. If we can control, if you follow these regulative principles and regularly chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, gradually you'll realize everything. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam.

So this is the actually understanding of Bhāgavata. We are speaking on the Second Canto. So Bhāgavata should not be finished... Now they have become, made a business, finish within seven days, Bhāgavata-saptāha. So what they will understand Bhāgavata. One śloka, you cannot understand in seven months, one śloka. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. What you will understand? This has become a business. The Bhāgavata never says that "You hear for seven days." Never says it. We have read. There is no mention in the Bhāgavata that Bhāgavata should be heard for seven days. No commentator. There are many, many big commentators. Śrīdhara Svāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī and Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Vīrarāghavācārya, Madhvācārya, so many big, big. There are... Nobody has mentioned about Bhāgavata-saptāha. And in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam: "daily." What you will understand? What is your merit that you will understand?

So everything has become professional. So therefore people are in darkness. One should be very serious, serious to understand the teachings of Bhāgavatam. Then he will actually make profit and make a successful life. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. This... Nityābhiyuktānām. Nityābhiyuktānām. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for engaging the people twenty-four hours in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, twenty-four hours. Not that partial: "Twenty-three hours and sixty minutes I spoil myself in this nidrayā hriyate naktam, and for fifteen minutes I make some Kṛṣṇa consciousness." No, not like that. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ.

tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



Sadā means twenty-four hours. You should have to mold your life in such a way that twenty-four hours you will be thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. That will make your life perfect.



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



740318SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.3

-

Vṛndāvana, March 18, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.) Translation: "The lifetime of such envious householders is passed at night either in sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in the daytime either in making money or in maintaining the family members."



Prabhupāda: So somebody of you can lecture on this verse. Who will do that? Anyone?



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa:



nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ

vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ

divā cārthehayā rājan

kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā

[SB 2.1.3]



Prabhupāda: So somebody's there? The door is closed? Somebody?



Satsvarūpa: They're sweeping.



Prabhupāda: Oh, that's all...



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: So it's described that such is the life of such envious householders. So in previous verses householders were described: gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. So these gṛhamedhis, they're described as being envious. And so this enviousness means that they do not accept that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Enjoyer. And because they do not accept this, they falsely think themselves to be the enjoyer. But this is not actually the position of the tiny living entities. The tiny living entities are described in Bhagavad-gītā as being parā-prakṛti.



Prabhupāda: Anyone else? Hm? You can speak.



Devotee: This verse indicates that... [break]



Prabhupāda: Hm. Anyone else who will speak? Pradyumna Mahārāja?



Pradyumna: Nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya...



Prabhupāda: Hm. You have to speak. Try to speak.



Pradyumna: This is a continuation of the previous verse. It said that...



Prabhupāda: I have a question now. You are maintaining your institution by the grace of the householders. You are begging. So how you can condemn householders? If the householders do not become your life members, your institution will be stopped. So how do you condemn the householders?



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Isn't it the original Vedic process that the householders would willfully give their charity to the brāhmaṇas?



Prabhupāda: So therefore, for charity householders required. You cannot condemn householders.



Akṣayānanda: We do not condemn the householders, though. All of Lord Caitanya's, many of His followers were householders, and He encouraged them to progress in devotional life. Kṛṣṇa says, dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu, "I am householder life within the religious principles." In that way, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is for everyone. It is not restricted to sannyāsīs or brahmacārīs or persons who are celibate, but to all persons who follow the principles that are set down in Bhagavad-gītā and the śāstras.



Prabhupāda: My point is that śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Householder is not bad. That is not condemned. Real thing condemned: apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. That is condemned. Because they do not know what is the aim of life. That is missing. All these people... Ask anybody, that "What is the aim of your life?" Nobody... Nobody will be able to say. Any householder, any businessman, ask. They will simply say that "It is my duty to earn money. It is my duty to maintain my children, to give them education, to give them good opportunity for prospective life. And if I have got little more money, then I can give in charity to the poor man, daridra-nārāyaṇa. And..." These are their program. But nobody knows the necessity of, I mean to say, liberating the soul which is conditioned by this material covering. Nobody knows. That you will find. Nobody knows. Big, big professors, big, big... They simply say that "Yes ..." If you ask, "Why you are constructing some big, big scheme?" "Oh, for the future generations. That's all." They will reply. Nobody will reply, nobody knows about the necessity of the soul. That is the important point. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Nobody knows. Nobody has any vision of the ātma-tattva. Simply they are talking superfluously. This is the defect.



So "I am not this body," that is the whole scheme of Vedic knowledge. Apaśya... This is the important point. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. Because they do not know what is the necessity of life, therefore they have created so many news. Just like big, big newspaper, bunch of papers, full of rubbish news only, advertisement, cinema. But you won't find anything talking about the necessity of the... [break] So to become a gṛhastha is not bad. But to become unaware of the necessity of the soul, oh, that is bad. The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs, they are sannyāsīs. They have also renounced gṛhastha life. But they have no idea what is the goal of life. They are simply thinking in negative way: "This life is very troublesome." That they have realized, that even in highest stage of life of the material relation, your country, President Nixon, he's the president of the most rich country, but there is no happiness. He is now embarrassed, so many attacks are upon him. And he does not know how to defend him, how to keep his position. He's embarrassed. So in this way, everyone is missing the point. Nobody sees that "Why I am embarrassed? I have become now President of USA, and still I am embarrassed. And when I was a, a nonsignificant man, ordinary man or ordinary lawyer, nobody cared for me. That time I was also embarrassed. I was trying to improve my position. And now I have come to the highest point of success in the material world. Still I am embarrassed." Is it not a question?

These rascals, they cannot see. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. That is the defect. Nobody thinks that, that "I was embarrassed from the very beginning of my life. I was embarrassed even within the womb of my mother. I was packed-up. And when I came out from the womb of my mother, there also I was embarrassed. I could not express my pains and pleasure. I was crying. Some ant was biting me, but I was crying and my mother gave me more milk, (laughter) although I was fully fed." This is embarrassment. I wanted something; my mother gave me something else. Because mother cannot understand that what is the pain and..., neither he can express what is the pains and pleasure. So the embarrassment was at the beginning. Otherwise why the child cries? He's feeling some pain, but mother does not know how to relieve. But he's crying. This is going on. Then childhood. I do not like to go to school. My parents force me to go to school. So embarrassment. Then all right. I became married, or I enjoyed sex life. Then children. Then embarrassment. Contraceptive. That is also embarrassment. So this embarrassment is going on. And then again death. Then again go to the womb of the mother, and be killed within the womb of the mother, abortion. So the whole life is full of embarrassment. Why? That "why" question does not arise, that "Why I am embarrassed?"

So therefore the Māyāvādīs, they think that "Make me zero, void. Then there will be no pains and pleasure, no embarrassment." Their philosophy is like that. Impersonal, that is also the same thing. Or void. Voidism, the same thing. "Make it zero." Just like the foolish man, when one is embarrassed, he commits suicide. He commits suicide. He thinks, "If I end this body, then my embarrassment will be finished." So these are the circumstances. Why? Now, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. He does not know "What is the necessity of me, soul, how to get me relieved from that." That he does not know. So therefore this word is used: apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. He does not see that "I am spirit soul. My necessity is different from the bodily necessity." [break] "Then I'll become comfortable." Even one knows that "I am not this body," but the body is home... Or I know that "I am not this room," but I am engaged always how to keep this room very neat and clean. That is my business. I do not know that there is another business. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. That is the defect.

Therefore it is the duty of every human being-animals cannot do-to understand about the ātma-tattvam. Ātma-tattvam, necessity of the soul. That was presented by Sanātana Gosvāmī when he went to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "I was minister, quite comfortable. People called me learned scholar. That is also, some way or other, it is right. But I did not know why I am suffering in spite of becoming the minister or king or this or that. And people say that I am a learned man, but I do not know how to get out of the suffering." This should be the question. They are trying to get out of the suffering, but they do not know the ways, how to get out of it. That is ātma-tattvam. He does not know what is the nature of ātmā, what the ātmā wants, and how the ātmā will be comfortable. That he does not know. That information is given by Kṛṣṇa, by Caitanya Mahāprabhu: jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. The, every living entity is eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore unless he comes to the platform of serving Kṛṣṇa, there is no question of happiness. There is no question of happiness. And Kṛṣṇa also says the same thing: duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. "This place is simply full of miseries, and if you come to Me..." Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6].

So whole world is missing the point that he is not this body, the body is his encagement, and we are accepting sometimes golden encagement and sometimes iron encagement, and sometimes silver encagement and wooden encagement. He's thinking by changing the encagement, he will be happy. But he does not know this is encagement, or cages. So either you are put in the golden cage or iron cage or wooden cage or any cage-cage is cage. And so... So long you are not free... Just like the bird is kept into the cage. He's unhappy. He's unhappy. It may be golden cage. It doesn't matter. Similarly, we cannot be happy with this encagement. We must be free from the encagement. Freedom. That is called liberty, mukti. That is required. So the Māyāvādī philosophers, they do no know that "Suppose, even I get free, so where shall I go?" He thinks, "I shall be free in the sky." Just like impersonalism. Sky is impersonal. So if suppose a bird is given freedom, but he flies in the sky, will he be happy? No. That also he'll not be happy. Then he'll again think of that "It was better to remain in the cage. Now what is the value of my, this freedom? I'm not happy." And again go back to the cage. You will see in India. There is a bird, fiftil.(?) Fiftil. The man who keeps that bird in the cage, sometimes he takes it to the open field, and he opens the door, opens the door, and the bird walks, sometimes flies. He is given freedom. Then again the man: (makes coaxing sound:) ts-ts-ts-ts. He says like that, and the bird comes again within the cage. You'll see. If you have seen, those who are Indian. But he thinks that "I have been given freedom now. But where shall I go? Where shall I go? I have to eat." So he again comes back: "Better to live within this cage. Better to live within this cage."

So Māyāvādī's position is like that. Māyāvādīs, they have got a... Because we are sure that we are going to Kṛṣṇa. But they have no Kṛṣṇa. Aiye. They have no Kṛṣṇa. Therefore they again come to this material world. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅ... Because they have no shelter, therefore they'll come back again within this material world. Because in the impersonal feature they cannot remain many days. You get freedom from the cage, but if you do not get to eat something, how long you'll live? Therefore they prefer again to come to the cage. That fiftil... Because they have no other way. Therefore this Māyāvāda philosophy, voidism, impersonal philosophy, is not very good. You cannot remain impersonal or in void because your position is..., because you are living entity, because you are part and parcel of the supreme living entity, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). He is always full of jubilation. So you also, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, you also want jubilation. But how you can get jubilation, how you can be jubilant in the sky, in the zero? This is the difference between Māyāvāda philosophy. Therefore you cannot be happy even by getting free from this encagement, material world, and if you place yourself in impersonalism and voidism, that will not help you. Try to understand it. That will not help you.

So therefore you have to go back to home, back to Kṛṣṇa, where there is everything variety, spiritual varieties. You can play with Kṛṣṇa. You can dance with Kṛṣṇa. You can talk with Kṛṣṇa. You can fight with Kṛṣṇa. That is also... Cowherd boys, they fight. They enjoy. That is also enjoyment. Everything enjoyment. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to give information to the rascals who are mentioned as apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], one who does not know what is the nature of ātmā, what does he want, how he'll be happy. That is... They are called apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. They have no information. Therefore gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. They are trying to be happy here within the cage. That's all. That is not possible. So without knowing this Kṛṣṇa conscious philosophy, within the cage and without the cage, they are unhappy. Is it clear? Their imagination of liberty without the cage, that is also unhappiness. Because he does not know where to go. Therefore after remaining for some time in that impersonal stage, again he comes back to the cage. So this kind of going and coming will not help him. Tyāga and bhoga.

So ātma-tattvam means to know what is the nature of ātmā and how he reveals... That is all explained by Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā. If we take advantage of this lesson and instruction, that is our success of life.

That's all. (end)



740612SB.PAR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.3

-

Paris, June 12, 1974



Nitāi: "The lifetime of such envious householders is passed at night either in sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in the daytime either in making money or in maintaining family members." [SB 2.1.3]



Prabhupāda: So this is our civilization. At night also, we waste our time, and in daytime also, we waste our time. How? Now nidrayā hriyate naktam. At night, we sleep. Everyone sleeps. The dogs sleeps, the cat sleeps. We may sleep in a very nice apartment, skyscraper building, and the dog may sleep on the street, but the pleasure of sleeping is the same. It does not mean that because you are sleeping in a very nice apartment, a skyscraper building, your sleep is better than the dog's sleeping? How it is sleep... Sometimes you may dream something very ferocious, and the dog may sleep without any agitation, sound sleep. Sometimes you have to take tranquilizer pill for sleeping. So impartially studying, your sleep is not as nice as dog's sleep. Is it not? The dogs sleep without any anxiety. And I go to sleep with so many anxieties that the sleeping is disturbing unless I take one pill. At least, in America we have seen. In your country, in Paris, you do not? You sleep without pill? Is it? That's a good credit. Anyway, every one of us, we sleep at night. And another, our, means, advantage is that at night we enjoy sex life. Sleep or sex life. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena. Vyavāyena means sex. Vyavāya.



In this way, this human form of life is very valuable. The more we are engaged in these animal propensities, more we waste our valuable life. That we should know. The more we decrease these animal propensities... The animal propensities means eating, sleeping, sex life and defense. So just see. The whole human civilization, how they are wasting their time in animal civilization. It is very serious thing, to be thought of by serious, thoughtful men, that "What we are doing as human being? Eating, sleeping and sex life and defending, that is done by cats and dogs. What extra things we are doing?" That is thoughtfulness. The extra thing is here, worshiping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. This is wanted. This is extra thing. Therefore, those who are intelligent and fed up with this eating, sleeping, sex life and defense, they take Kṛṣṇa consciousness very seriously. They get something. "Yes, there is some..."

So this is our night's business. And day's business is to earn money. Without earning money, the night's business will not go very nicely. Therefore money we must have. Divā cārthehayā rājan. And as soon as we get money, kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā, then those who are responsible, householders... But at the present moment, the civilization has so advanced that even though, even they have no responsibility for maintaining family. This is advancement. Even formerly, although they were engaged in eating, sleeping, mating, still, they had some responsibility to maintain family. Family means to get one's self married and take charge of the wife and children and... That is gṛhastha life. All gṛha... Even the gṛhamedhis, they used to do that. But at the present moment, because it is Kali-yuga, that if he can maintain a family, namely, wife and some children, he'll be considered as great hero. He's a big hero: "Oh, he's maintaining a family."

In America, when I was first there in New York, so one lady, she had a son. So according to our Indian method, I asked that her, that lady, elderly, that "Why don't you get your son married?" She said, "I have no objection. If he can maintain his family, let him marry." Then I could understand that he, although America is so rich, that they are not even main..., able to maintain the family. This is civilization. Although they are advertised so much, becoming very, very rich, but they're unable to maintain the family. I was surprised. I thought that in India, although, still, although they are very much advertised as poverty-stricken, still, they maintain their family. Even a worker, ordinary worker... I have seen in Ahmedabad one, what is, ṭhelā man. What is called? Who pushes that hand cart.

Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Ṭhelā walla.



Prabhupāda: Ṭhelā walla? You call also here? No. Here? You have no such thing here. You have got your motor truck. There is no question of ṭhelā walla. But in India, there are ṭhelā wallas-means a human being takes a cart and loads it to the best capacity, and he pushes like an ass. You see. This is Kali-yuga. A man has to work like an ass simply for bread. Simply for bread. This is Kali-yuga. So I saw that one side, there is the wife, and the other side, there is the husband, pulling on that ṭhelā, and they have got a child. On the top of the loaded articles the child is sat down. So he's sitting very comfortably. And the father and mother, they are pulling on ṭhelā. My point is that even a man, very poor, who has to work just like an ass, still, he has got family and he's maintaining him. That is my point. Still. You'll find the poorest man-he has got his wife, he has got his children. He has got... Anyway, some home. Although it is not very nice apartment, but he has got home. That means even in material life, if one has got peaceful home, then he..., there is something. But even that is now not possible in the modern, artificial civilization. Nobody has family. Nobody has got home. So how they are happy? So anyway, it is going on. Divā ca artha īhayā. Artha means money. So... Rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā. So in this way, everyone is going on.



Then the next verse says,

dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



So these family men, may be a big man or a ṭhelā walla, it doesn't matter-everyone has got family. Even the dog has got family. Dog has got also wife, and some cubs also. What is called?



Devotees: Pups.



Prabhupāda: Puppies. And the mother is helping the puppies by giving breast milk. So family you'll find everywhere. Even the birds, they have family, two birds, always together, the husband and wife. They have got a nest, and some eggs also. And they are also trying to, I mean to say, manufacture some nest. As soon as the lady bird is pregnant, they, immediately their attempt will be to find out some straw and make a nest. You have seen it perhaps, studied it. You see? So long the lady bird is not pregnant, there is no question of nest. This is natural. You'll find everywhere. Even the ants and the birds, beasts, everywhere. So this kuṭumba-bharaṇam is a duty of living entity. It doesn't matter whether he's a human being or a dog or a bird or a cat. That is natural. That is not very great credit. But the present yuga, Kali-yuga, if one can maintain his family and maintain an apartment, he's to be understood as a very great, successful man. He does not see that this success is there even in the ants and the birds and the beasts. What is this success? And he's happy. And he's happy.



How he's happy? Now deha. Deha means this body. He thinks, "I have got this strong body, very stout and strong body; by exercising, by yogic practice, I have become very strong." So what is that strength? Will you not die? "Yes, I'll die, but after few years." So he is very much fond of his deha, śarīra, deha. And apatya... (aside:) Why don't you...? It is working or not? Why this big humbug? (laughter) If it is not working...

Nitāi: It's working, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Deha means body, and apatya means children. Apatya. So those who are family men... Those who are not family men, their question is different. They are not even human beings. Ordinarily, the Vedic process is that first of all you try to remain without family, alone. Be independent, no cares, no anxieties. You can lie down here, or whatever you can eat, that's all. But be spiritually advanced. That is called brahmacārī life. Brahmacārī means... Brahma means Absolute Truth. And cārī means who is, whose business is only with Brahman, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, with spiritual advancement of life. That is called brahmacārī. And he has no interest with anything material. He's, at least, educated in that way, that "Actually, you have no interest with these material things. You are, you should be interested only for your spiritual advancement. This is the opportunity."



There(fore) Prahlāda Mahārāja said to his class friends... Prahlāda Mahārāja was a great devotee. He learned spiritual knowledge from Nārada from the womb of his mother. So he decided that "I shall live a spiritual life." So although he was king's son, a very powerful king's son, he was not interested anything with spiritual, er, material. He decided. So from the childhood, he was trying to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Where he should get opportunity? He was a child of five years old, and king's son, locked up within the palace. So he was taking opportunity in the school. As soon as he go to the school, and the teachers are out, he'll stand up on the bench and speak of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A five-year-... You have seen the picture. So he was advising, "My dear friends"-they were all five years, four years old-"now take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha: [SB 7.6.1] "This kaumāra, this age, from the very beginning of life, you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." He was advising. They, they were all asuras. They were asking, "Why Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Let us play now, jump like monkey." So he was not... "No, no. Let us take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." "Now, why we should take Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" Now, durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma: "Oh, it is very valuable. This human form of life is very valuable." Because in this life only you can become Kṛṣṇa conscious, not in the body of cats and dogs. That is not possible. Or trees.

Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja advising, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha. Dharma... "So we are, we are pursuing some kind of dharma, Hindu, Muslim or Christian." No, dharmān bhāgavatān. That dharma which teaches you how to love God. That dharma. That is first-class dharma. Otherwise, you stamp over "I am Christian," and do all nonsense; "I am Hindu," and do all nonsense. This will not help, simply by stamping. So many Christian gentlemen I meet. They cannot understand even Christianity that Lord Jesus Christ said, "Thou shalt not kill," and they are very busy simply in killing business. And still, they're Christians. First of all, let us see who is a Christian. Similarly, every religion, simply by rubber stamp, "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian," but they do not know what is religion. They do not know. Therefore (in) the Bhāgavatam you'll find religion, religious person, who is a religious person first-class religion? Religious person means who has learned to love God. That is religious person. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, ahaituky aprati... [SB 1.2.6]. And this religion is universal. To love God, you don't require any education, don't require any rubber stamp. God is one, and you are part and parcel of God. You try to love. You have got the loving propensity. You love God, and you'll be satisfied, you'll be happy. Everyone is trying to love God, somebody else. Love is not alone. Love must be two. So that two, Kṛṣṇa and myself, that is called love. Not that...

Impersonalists, they do not know what is love. Because he's one. Their philosophy is oneness. So how there can be love, one? Is it possible? Have you got any such experience? Love means one? No. Love means two. There must be two, the lover and the beloved. So lover... Kṛṣṇa is already lover. He's so lover of you that He's trying to get you back. That is Kṛṣṇa's attempt. "Please, My dear boy, or My dear friend, My dear servant..." Any way, as we are related, He's after us.

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



He's situated within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61]. Just see how much He loves you. He's trying always to get you back to home. And He says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You rascal, why you are engaged in such nasty things, material life? You come to Me. You'll be happy. I shall give you all protection." "No, Sir, I am not going. I shall become a hog, and I shall eat stool. That, that is my advancement of material civilization." You see. Hog means he has no discrimination of food. That is hog. You have seen, a hog can eat up to the stool. So anyone who has no human brain, has no discrimination of food, anything he can eat, he's a hog. "Anything, anyone, never mind, mother, sister or anyone, let us have sex life"-that is hog's life. You'll find the hog's life is practical like that, to eat anything and have sex life with anyone. That is hog's life. Is it not? What is the hog? You have seen hog? They have no discrimination of sex and no discrimination of food. That is hog's life.



So therefore śāstra says that "This human life is not meant for becoming a hog." Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. You are working so hard, day and night, very busy, going this side, that side, this side, that side, and getting money, and leading a life like hog. What is this civilization? This is not civilization. Then what is civilization? That is also said, tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. This is Ṛṣabhadeva's instruction to His sons. "My dear boys, this life, this human form of life, is not meant for wasting like hogs and dogs, but tapasya, just have little restraint. Don't become hogs and dogs." What is that restraint? Just like we are prescribing, no illicit sex. No illicit sex. Sex is not stopped. Sex is there. But no illicit sex. Illicit sex-unnecessary sex life. Sex life is meant for human beings. There is regulation. Sex life is meant for producing nice children, that's all, not for sense enjoyment. Therefore one is trained as brahmacārī from the very beginning.

The brahmacārī means no sex life. No sex life. Even the guru... Sometimes guru... Mostly in a school, the teachers, they were householders. It is restricted, "If the guru has a young wife, you should not go to carry out her order." It is restricted. This is brahmacārī life, voluntarily accepting hardship for making life successful. That is brahmacārī life. And then married life. Married life. When the... Brahmacārī is meant for the boys, not for the girls. Girls, they are to be married. A brahmacārī may remain unmarried for life, but according to Vedic civilization, a girl must be married. As soon as... Before the age of attaining puberty, it is the duty of the father, or if she has no father, it is the duty of the elder brother to get her married somehow or other. (laughter) Give her in responsibility to another young man. This is the duty. Yes. This is the duty. So therefore... Female population is always bigger than the male population. Then you can ask, "Where so many husbands?" Therefore polygamy was allowed. And the kings, the kṣatriyas who had money and who had very nice strength also, they used to marry more than one wife. You'll find all the kṣatriyas... Even Kṛṣṇa, the best kṣatriya, He married 16,108 wives. Wholesale. (laughter) Yes.

So Kṛṣṇa, as kṣatriya, proved how much strong He was, how much able He was, that He married sixteen thousand wives, and for each wife, separate establishment, separate servants, separate house, separate palace. Everything separate. Not that "I marry only. Therefore I have no responsibility." Not like that. That is Kṛṣṇa, ideal. He married 16,108, but He had 16,108 palaces, big big palace. And palace all made of nice, what is called, marble, and decorated with jewels. The... Kṛṣṇa's house, there was no need of this light. The jewels were glittering. These are description in the Bhāgavata. And the furnitures were married of ivory. That is Kṛṣṇa's house. And the garden, compound, pārijāta flower. Then is that sufficient? A woman will be satisfied simply with this palace, nice palace, and...? No. He expanded Himself into 16,108 Kṛṣṇas. Each and every wife is able to receive her husband individually. So anyway, you cannot imitate Kṛṣṇa, neither you can do like that, neither you can marry sixteen thousand, but you can marry-that is Vedic civilization-more than one wife. Because every female must be married, so where are so many husbands? So therefore polygamy was allowed, but the man who marries, he must be able to maintain the wife very nicely. That is Hindu, or Vedic civilization. That is kuṭumba, kuṭumba-bharaṇa, maintaining the family.

Anyway, even though we are able to maintain a very nice group of family members, then I may be puffed up that "I am maintaining such a nice family," but that is also not very good situation. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu. I am thinking, "Now I have got good home, good wife, nice children, nice bank balance. So I am safe now." No, sir, you are not safe. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣu [SB 2.1.4]. This world is struggle for existence. You should not think that because you have got nice wife, children, and nice nationality, or everything nice... Still, you are not safe. This is to be understood. Yes. Just like Napoleon in your country, he had many soldiers. He was fighting. He was conquering all over. And because he had very, very good military strength, he was thinking he was safe. But he was also defeated, and he had to die also, leaving all the opulences he created. So nobody's safe. You must always remember that. So here it is said, dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api [SB 2.1.4]. Although I know that this national strength, or this material strength, the bank balance strength and good wife and everything is there, but they'll not be able to save me. This is the intelligence. They'll not be able to save me because when death will come, nobody will be helpful to me. I'll have to go. I cannot say, "Now I have got my children, I have got so much duty, I have got this to do, this to do, this to do." No. Now your time is over. Your so-called arrangement for material happiness is now over. Now you must get out. Is it not?

So the fools, the rascals, they cannot see it. Therefore teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanam. A intelligent man will see that "What they'll do me? I will be also annihilated, and they will be also annihilated. I cannot save them, neither they cannot save me." But this is intelligence. But those who are not intelligent, for them it is said, teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanam. Pramatta, because we are mad, we are thinking that these things will save me... Pramatta. Therefore mad. So because we are... Madman cannot see. Just like a madman lies down on the street. He does not see, "Immediately, I may be killed by the motorcar, driving." But he's thinking he's safe. He is thinking, "I have ordered. Nobody can come here." A madman. We have seen in India, a madman lies down on the street. That is not in your country? But he thinks that he's safe. He's not safe. Similarly, we are, because we are mad, by the influence of māyā, we are not safe. We are unsafe because at any moment, we have to die, and we have to accept a body. That also we do not understand, the modern civilization. That is the first beginning of spiritual understanding, that "I am not this body, I am the soul. Within the body, I am living, and after giving up this body, I'll have to accept another body." This is the beginning of knowledge. One who does not understand these plain, primary principles of knowledge, he's animal. He's animal. It is not my manufactured word. It is stated in the śāstra that yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13].

Kuṇape. Kuṇape means a bag. This body is a bag. What is is made of? Now, it is made of flesh, bone, marrow, and nerves, and stool, urine, and so many things, blood. So I am not this blood. I am not this urine, I am not this stool. This is the composition of the body. But one is thinking, "I am this body. I am stool. I am urine. I am blood. I am flesh. I am this and that." So there are so many big, big scientists. Take these ingredients and make an intelligent man like Napoleon or Professor Einstein. The ingredients are there. But thinking that "I am this blood, I am this flesh, I am..." Where is the scientist? If I am combination of these material things, blood, flesh, bone, and urine, stool... You, you just dissect your body. What you'll find? You'll find there is blood, there is flesh, there is nerves, there is intestines, there is stool, there is... Is that the ingredient of your so much intelligence? Who was telling that they're trying to make intelligent man in the scientific laboratory? Who was saying in the morning? Yes. So take these ingredients, and make an intelligent man. Is it possible? Then how they will do it? They are thinking like that, that this blood, this flesh, this bone, and this urine, and the stool can be, by careful combination, they can produce a very intelligent man. That is their intelligence. So therefore śāstra says, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke. If one is thinking this body is the man or the living entity...

This body's nothing but combination of these things. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu [SB 10.84.13]. Here, just like dehāpatya-kalatrādi. Kalatra means wife, and thinking this body, "I am..., I am this body." And thinking also that "These, my soldiers, these, my wife, children, and friends and nationals, they will save me." Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ [SB 10.84.13]. And the land where he has taken birth... Just like everyone is thinking, "I am Frenchman," "I am Englishman," "I am Indian," "I am this," "I am that." So, so "This is my land. I must decorate this land, this Paris City, very nicely. I shall bring something from Egypt and put it here. Then..." (laughter) These nonsense things are going on. Even big, big men like Napoleon and others. And what to speak of others. So... But śāstra says, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ, yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ. A little advanced than, than these fools and rascals, they are religious. What is that religion? "Let us go to the holy place." The Christians are going to the Jordan, and the Hindus are going to the Ganges or Yamunā. They think, "If I take my bath in this river, Jordan, or in this Ganges or in this Yamunā, then I become immediately perfect religious." Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma... [SB 10.84.13], yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile. Salila means water. So they go to take bath in the water. Yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile. Tīrtha means place of sanctuary. So tīrtha-buddhiḥ, yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ. Real tīrtha is to find out a Kṛṣṇa conscious person. That is the business. Yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij janeṣv abhijñeṣu. Janeṣu. Tīrtha means in the holy places many saintly persons live. So if one goes to the holy place, they must find out a holy man who is living there, and take lesson from him. And that is purification. Not that I go and take bath in the water, and I become purified.

So these classes of men, who are doing like this, that "I am this body, and this birthplace is my worshipable land, yat-tīrtha, and my, this wife and children, they are my protectors," in this way, everyone is thinking. "And whatever sinful activities I am doing, I shall take one bath in the Ganges or Yamunā or Jordan. Then I'll be purified." In this way, the people who are thinking, the śāstra says, "You are no better than the ass and the cow." This is the certificate. Sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. This class of thinking is simply for the animals.

So we should not think like animals. We should think like human beings. That is required. That thinking is "How to awaken my dormant love for God." That is required. That is human activity. That is there already. It is not artificial. Now, in this temple, you are all citizens of Paris city. Four or five years ago, you had no idea what is Kṛṣṇa. But now you are dancing, chanting in Kṛṣṇa. Why? Have I, have I given you some bribe? I brought Kṛṣṇa from India, and I am making you to dance, giving you some bribe? Is it a fact? What do you think? And what is my money? I came to Western country with seven dollars. Also I have got now money, enough money. That is your money, of course, (laughs) (laughter) But why you are dancing in Kṛṣṇa's name? What bribe I have given you? Can you answer, anyone of you?

French devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: What is that?



French devotee: Because in reality we are conscious of Kṛṣṇa without know.



Prabhupāda: What is...?



French devotee: And in your presence, and..., we take conscience.



Prabhupāda: Therefore, it is to be understood that Kṛṣṇa was within you. I have simply tried to awaken that consciousness. That's all.



French girl: (French) (asks for French translation)



French devotee: (French)



Prabhupāda: After. (Laughter) So therefore it is to be taken that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there in everyone. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya. It is not by artificial means one awakens his Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No. Kṛṣṇa is God, and God consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is there, dormant in everyone. Just like you, you love a man or woman. That is not artificial thing. That is already there. It is a gift of God. That is already there. So when the time comes when you become young, you try to love a boy or you try to love a girl. But the love is there. The propensity is there. Similarly, the love for Kṛṣṇa is there. That love for boy and girl, that is Kṛṣṇa's love. Kṛṣṇa is a boy. Rādhārāṇī is a girl. You see. But it is now covered. On account of our material association, it is covered. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be awakened as soon as you are purified. Immediately, you have Kṛṣṇa consciousness as soon as you are purified.



So our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to purify the covering, the material covering. That... What is that purification? Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. First of all, you have to purified with the sense that you are neither American nor a Frenchman nor Englishman nor Indian nor brāhmaṇa nor kṣatriya-nothing of the sort. You have to... These are all designations, outward dress. You have to become free from it. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. You'll have to forget. Actually, that is happening in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Those who have joined, they never think that "I am American," "I am Frenchman," "I am Englishman." They are always thinking that they are servant of Kṛṣṇa. This is called purification. As soon as you learn that you are neither American, nor Indian, nor this or not that... You are eternally servant of Kṛṣṇa. This is purification. The more you are fixed up on this knowledge, the more you are purified. That's all.

So how this can be done? This is the process: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]-to hear about Kṛṣṇa, to chant about Kṛṣṇa, to think about Kṛṣṇa, to worship Kṛṣṇa, to give everything to Kṛṣṇa, like that. If you practice, then you become purified. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat... [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Then you become nirmala, without any dirty things. Then when there is no dirt, then your senses... We are not going to kill your senses. It is not possible. You have got senses. Because you are living being, you must have senses. But our process is not to stop the sense actions, but to purify the sense action. So when you are purified, then, with your senses, you can engage yourself in serving Kṛṣṇa instead of serving this māyā. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4]. Just like here is also family. Here the Kṛṣṇa conscious family means they are not families like cats and dogs. They are family, making Kṛṣṇa center. They're also family. They have got husband, wife, children, but the whole attention is to Kṛṣṇa. Even a child, he is also dancing, he's also chanting. He's offering obeisances. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So this movement, we should understand very clearly that there is no question (of) artificial negation. The question is purification. As soon as you become purified, and you become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, then your life is successful. That is wanted.

Thank you very much. (end)



731107SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.4

-

Delhi, November 7, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



Translation: "Persons devoid of ātma-tattva do not inquire into the problems of life, being too attached to the fallible soldiers like the body, children and wife, etc. Although sufficiently experienced, still, they do not see their inevitable destruction."



Prabhupāda: Yes. The same word is being continued, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], "Those who are blind about ātma-tattva, the spiritual science, the knowledge of spirit soul." So these persons, those who are blind, those who are accepting this body as the self like cats and dogs, their description is given here again that deha... They are bodily, beginning from bodily cons... "I am this body." "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am this," "I am that." Deha and then apatya, children, and kalatra, wife. First of all, one deha, one body. Just like this child. His only one conception, "Yes, I am everything, this body." Gradually, when one grows, becomes youthful, there is sex desire. Therefore finding out the opposite sex, kalatra, wife, or girlfriend or boyfriend. So kalatra ādi, making the center kalatra, then ātma-sainyeṣu, we increase our attraction to this material world.



This whole material world is based on sex desire. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. Everywhere, either in cat society, dog society, human society, bird society, beast society, anywhere you go, even aquatics, fish, insects, flies, ants-everywhere you will find this attraction, sex attraction. This is the ādi-rasa. Everyone is trying to get some taste. So this is the beginning of taste. So we have got attraction, natural attraction. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam. This material world is simply attraction of this sex life. So when they are actually unite(d) in different ways... But they must unite. Either in a legal way or illegal way, they must unite. Because attraction is there. But human civilization, they have given some law, not like cats and dogs. Just like in the morning, in the street we saw, the dogs were enjoying sex life. So in the human society, that kind of sex enjoyment, although it is now actually being done in the Western countries... I have seen it. You see? In some public parks or in beach. They don't care, becoming just like cats and dogs, no human civilization. So for human civilization, there is some restriction: the allowance, marriage. That is a civilized way. And the fact is the same, but in a civilized way there is.

But civilized or uncivilized, as soon as there is sex life, then the attraction for material world immediately increase hundred times. When one remains single, the attraction is not so strong, but when they unite, the attraction becomes very strong, because to maintain a wife, you require room, apartment, gṛha, which is called gṛha. So therefore they are called gṛhastha, "one who lives in a gṛha, in a house." Everyone lives in a house. We are also living in a house, this temple. But gṛhastha means to living with wife in the house. Na gṛhaṁ gṛham ity āhur gṛhiṇī gṛham ucyate. Simply gṛhastha does not mean to live in a room or in a house, but to live with a wife. Gṛhiṇī. So then we require apartment or room or house, according to our position. Then we require some land for producing food. Now they don't require land for producing. They require something else-some slavery or some work in the factory. But formerly, everyone used to have a, possess a piece of land for producing food. Kṣetra. Gṛha-kṣetra. Then, when there is marriage, there will be children, suta. Then there will be friends also, relatives, suta āpta. Gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta. Then vitta, the central point money. So as soon as they are united, immediately these things will be required. Gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vitta. In this way the attachment for this material world increases.

Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. Moha means illusion. What is that illusion? "I am this body, and I belong to this material world. This is my society. This is my country. This is my wife. This my children." This is illusion. Why illusion? Because these are false things. Nobody is your wife, nobody is your children. They have simply assembled together by the waves of time. Just like we have seen in the waves of the river, so many straws assembled together. And again, on the waves, they are separated. One straw goes this way, another straw goes... Finished. You see? So this is position. We, by our karma-phala, by the action, reaction of our karma, we artificially assemble here in a family, in a society, in a country, in a community, in a nation, like that. And after few years, by the waves of time, everything is separated. You go somewhere, you go, you go somewhere, you go somewhere, this way... Therefore here it is said that dehāpatya-kalatra, those who are blind to understand the self, those who are not realized, self-realized, such person, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are... Because human being, human life is meant for understanding ātma-tattva. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This life is meant for understanding "What I am." But they have lost their all intelligence. They are thinking like cats and dogs: "I am this body," "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am śūdra." And they are busy with that business. Just like cats and dogs, they are busy: "I am dog," "I am cat," "I am tiger," "I am bull," "I am this," "I am that," so human society has also become like cats and dogs, the same conception, bodily conception of life. Because apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. They..., he has no knowledge of self.

The Bhagavad-gītā begins, therefore, this self-realization. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Asmin dehe, this body, contains the dehī, really the proprietor. So such person, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], they are simply busy with all these things: body and children and wife and relationships. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4]. Because, through kalatra we increase. Strī means "which expands," strī. Strī, one accepts strī, wife, means to expand his relationship. As soon as I get one strī, one family becomes my father-in-law, and in relation to, I have got my family, and she has got her family. We combine together. Then boys, children. Then get them married. Increase. Increase relationship: "He is my brother-in-law, he is my father-in-law, he is my father, he is my brother, he is brother's brother-in-law, father's father-in-law..." Just like Arjuna was seeing. Oh, Arjuna was seeing like that: "How can I kill them? They are all my... " The same. As ordinary man has got, so Arjuna was playing the ordinary man, just like. He was thinking, "Here is my brother-in-law, here is my brother, here's my nephew, here's my father-in-law, here's my grandfather. How can I kill them?" So... But they will be killed. Nobody can protect. But we are paśyann api na paśyati, that "I have my father; he was killed. He is gone, dead and gone. So I will be also dead and gone, and my son will be also dead and gone." So why we are depending on these things which will be dead and gone? Nobody will live. Nobody will live. Take big big leaders in our country or any country. They are absorbed in nationalism, cannot give up the post of prime ministership, presidentship or leadership. Even great leader like Gandhi. He was always... He got sva-rājya. I wrote him letter: "Mahatma Gandhi, you have got respect as a religious personality. If you..." (aside:) Don't bother, don't... "If you take preaching these things, what I am doing, preach Bhagavad-gītā... You are also lover of Bhagavad-gītā." No. Even after getting sva-rājya, he was implicated. Unless he was killed he would not leave it. Everyone has to leave it, voluntarily or by force, but they will not leave it voluntarily.

This is the disease, material disease. Everyone will be forced. You cannot live here forever. They are making very nice arrangement, nice house, nice kingdom, nice city, nice bank balance, nice society, nice community, nice nation. But they are missing one point, that "Any moment I shall be kicked out. Any moment." There is no guarantee. Parīkṣit Mahārāja got seven days' time, that "You shall die within seven days." We have no even one second's guarantee. This is our position. But still, we are so much attached. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu ātma-sainyeṣu [SB 2.1.4]. Everyone is thinking, "I am very comfortable at home. I have got my wife. I have got my children. I have got my bank balance. I have got so many things. I have got my nation, community. I am secure. I am secure." Why he is thinking like that? Pramatta, mad, madman. That is described.

piśācī pāile yena mati-cchanna haya

māyā-grasta jīvera haya se bhāva udaya



Ghostly haunted, every one of us. This māyā-grasta, one who is under the influence of this material energy, just like, exactly like a man who is ghostly haunted. Ghostly haunted. Perhaps some of you have seen a man ghostly haunted. He talks all nonsense. Similarly, the māyā-grasta jīva, those who are in this material-too much absorbed in the bodily concept of life, without any self-realization... Everyone is thinking like madman, that "These things will give me protection." Because he has become mad, pramatta. Pramatta. Teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanam. You are fighting with soldiers. That's all right. But if you know, "All my soldiers will die," then what is the use of your fighting? Or you take some means that your fighting will be victorious. No. They do not know. Teṣāṁ nidhanaṁ pramattaḥ, teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. Seeing every moment,



ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchantīha yamālayam

śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti kim āścaryam ataḥ param



Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was inquired, "What is the most astonishing thing in this world?" Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, he was very advanced, spiritually realized king. He immediately replied, "This is the most wonderful thing, that everyone is thinking that 'I shall live.' " Ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchanti. He is seeing. He is seeing every moment that somebody has died and he is going to the crematorium or to the somewhere else. But he is thinking that "I am sure. I am secure. I am in safety position." This is the most wonderful thing. And the same thing is repeated here: teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati, the closing the eyes. They cannot give you any protection. Suppose you are now very happily situated, say, for some years, utmost hundred years. Not that, more than that. Because your this body in this material world, especially in this age, cannot live more than hundred years or (all?) within. And people are dying nowadays sixty, seventy. Oh, eighty years old? Very old. But time will come in this age... That is stated in the Śrīmad-SB.. If one lives from twenty to thirty years, he will be considered as a very grand old man. Yes. That time is coming very soon. Of course, it will take time. Because as the Kali-yuga is increasing, people are becoming more and more pramatta, more and more animal-like. So their duration of life naturally will reduce. They are not human being. They will be mlecchas and yavanas.



So Kṛṣṇa will come at the end,

mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālaṁ

dhūmaketum iva kim api karālam

keśava dhṛta-kalki-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare



At that time Kṛṣṇa will not preach, because who will understand? All mlecchas and... Just like nowadays even also. Such a nice quarter, nobody is interested. Nobody is interested. If you ask them, "Please come here. We are discussing Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Just try to understand the self-realization, "Oh, these nonsense, what is this? We are... I shall die and everything is finished. That's all." This is the modern civilization. Even up to this time... The Kali-yuga has passed only five thousand years, and when... If the duration of the whole Kali-yuga is four lakhs, thirty-two thousands of years... Out of that, we have only passed five thousand years, since the Battle of Kurukṣetra. Now, still the balance is four lakhs and twenty-seven thousands of years. So just imagine, after five thousand years we have become so much deteriorated, and what will happen even four lakhs of years? The people will reduce to such small stature because they will not be properly fed. Just like at the present moment the stature of the body is reducing. It is reducing. One, my German Godbrother, in 1934, when he came, he was very... That Sadānanda. So he was very lean and thin. So I asked him that "You German people, I understand they are very robust. Why you are lean and thin?" So he told me that "In my childhood, in the First World War, the ration was controlled. Only children, we could get fat, butter." He showed his wristwatch: "This quantity only, once in a week." So unless people can get sufficient food, how the stature will remain? It is reducing. Now there is no rice, there is no ghee, there is no this, there is no... In this way rice will (be) completely finished. No more rice, no more wheat, no more sugar, no more milk. These are stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So if you don't get all these thing, then how your body will be developed? It will reduce just like... At that time, eranḍopi drumāyate, the castor seed trees will be considered as very big tree. Eranḍopi drumāyate.



So these things are coming gradually. But still pramatta, people are mad after that. The same thing. What is that? Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4]. They are mad. "We have to maintain the society, friendship, family, country, community." And there is fighting. There is rivalryism. Because when there will be shortage of food, shortage of everything, then there will be naturally fighting like cats and dogs, killing. People are indulging in killing even his own son, abortion. Because people are degrading, they are killing live thing. So that will be reacted. In the womb the man, the person, will be killed. Reaction. Why so many abortions are taking place nowadays? Because the child which has come into the womb of the mother, he is sinful. He has done previous life so many killings. Now he has to be killed so many times. He has to be killed so many times. As many times he has killed other poor animals. This is the law of nature. Just like in the state laws, if you kill somebody, the state law will kill him. Life for life. Similarly, God's law, how even if you kill one ant even, you will be responsible for this, and it will have to be punished. They do not know this. They do not know this. They think that "I am very well situated. I have got very good balance. I am born in a nice nation or community or society. I have got wife, my children. They will give me protection." They will not give you protection. Nobody will give you protection. You have to protect yourself. Everyone is responsible for his own work. Nobody will be responsible for your work.

Therefore in the next verse, Kṛṣṇa here, or Śukadeva Gosvāmī is asking Parīkṣit Mahārāja that "These things will not give you protection."

tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



Abhayam. This world is bhayam, always fearfulness... Everyone. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. These four things are bodily requisition: we need to eat, we need to sleep, therefore we require house or apartment or room, and we require food, and there are senses, of which the sex sense is very strong. Āhāra-nidrā, and bhaya, and we are always afraid. Therefore police is there, the government is here. These things are bodily adjustment. And if we depend on this so-called nation, community, friends, husband, wife, children, that will not give you, us, protection. The protection is here. Because Parīkṣit Mahārāja at the point of his death, his question was, "What is my duty? What is my duty? Now I am going to die." People do not know that "What is my duty. Now I was prime minister. I was this and that. That's all right. Now death is coming. It will take away all my possession immediately, whatever I have required." That the rascals, they do not know. Neither they consider. Bhagavān says that mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. The rascal atheists, they do not believe in God. That's all right. "But I will appear as death. Who cannot believe it?" Who is that bold man here who can say, "I don't believe in death"? How can you say? Is there any bold man? You can say now like madman that "I don't believe in God." That's all right. But God will appear as death. You will have to believe at that time. That you cannot avoid. Therefore they are pramatta. If I say, "I don't believe in government," then "What is the government, sir? You will do something wrong and it will be caught up, you will be arrested, and you will be punished. You believe or not believe. It doesn't matter." Similarly, if these rascals say, "I don't believe in God," so you can say like madman, but God says, "Yes, you don't believe..." Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He did not believe in God. So when Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared to kill him, he had to believe: "Here is something. Here is something."



So therefore we have to take shelter not of this family, not of this nation, not of this community or children or friends. No. They cannot give us. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām: "I am the only friend." Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram, suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. These rascals, they come as my friend. these blind leaders, who cannot give protection himself. He becomes friend. He gives me advice about nationalism and this "ism" and that "ism." But he cannot give even himself any protection. How he can give me protection? This is intelligence. This is intelligence. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī, tasmād bhārata: "You cannot depend all these foolish things. That is not possible. Now you prepare for death. It is very nice." Varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ: [SB 2.1.1] "Your question is very nice, that 'Whom shall I take shelter of? Shall I take shelter of Kṛṣṇa?' Yes." Tasmād bhārata sarvātmā. Kṛṣṇa is sarvātmā. He is situated in everyone's heart as friend. He is the real friend. He is giving me advice. He is within, conscience, which we..., or good instruction, counsel. He says that "Don't be materially attached." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam: [Bg. 18.66] "Come to Me. Just become surrendered to Me. I will give you protection. I will give you intelligence." No. I reject Him: "I don't want You. I have got my friend, I have got my nation, I have got my community, I have got my wife, I have got my children, I have got my bank balance. Why shall I take protection of You?" This is the... Paśyann api na paśyati. The rascal does not see that these things will not give you protection.

Therefore the advice is: tasmād bhārata sarvātmā harir īśvaraḥ. They do not know that sarvātmā... Although Kṛṣṇa says that "I am sarvātmā..." Kṛṣṇa says, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata [Bg. 13.3]. In the chapter, kṣetra-kṣetra-jña. Kṣetra. Idaṁ śarīraṁ kṣetram. This body is kṣetra, field of activities, and one who knows... I know, you know, everyone know that "This is my body. I am not this body." If we think deeply, if we see our finger, "my finger," "my head." It is not "I head." But they are thinking that "I head," "I body." Not "I body," "my body." This is not. So everything is clearly said, and the preliminary knowledge of spiritual life, Bhagavad-gītā... Kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi. There are two kṣetra-jña. Kṣetra-jña means the proprietor who knows about this. Idaṁ śarīraṁ kṣetram. And one who knows this, he is kṣetra-jña. So kṣetra-jña means I, you, individual soul. But another kṣetra-jña. Kṣetra-jña means I know about the pains and pleasure of my body. You know the pains and pleasure of your body, but I do not know the pains and pleasure of your body, neither you know the pains and pleasure of my body. This is individual soul. But another, Supersoul, is... That is Kṛṣṇa. Sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata. He knows your pains and pleasure, my pains and pleasure, his pains and pleasure, everyone's. Sarva-jña. Therefore, suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. He is actually, because He is present with you as friend...

This is confirmed in the Upaniṣad. Two birds are sitting on the same tree as friends. One is eating the fruit, one is simply observing. Anumantā. That is stated in the Bhag... Upadraṣṭā anumantā. Anumantā. Anumantā means you cannot touch any fruit of this world without the sanction of the Supersoul. Therefore He is anumantā. If you say, "Then if He is giving me sanction for any action, then how I am responsible?" No. He is not giving. Because you are insisting, therefore He says, "All right, do it, at your risk." He is insisting, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Simply surrender." He is insisting that. But you are insisting in a different way: "I want to steal, I want to this, I want to this." But Kṛṣṇa knows everything, that "This rascal will do. All right, do it at your risk." Anumantā upadraṣṭā. And He remains witness: "Because you have done this, now you suffer. Now you suffer."

The Christian parties, they do not believe in karma. So in our childhood, when we were student in Scottish Churches College, Calcutta, we had to attend the Bible class. So one professor, Dr. Urquhart, he said that "If I am suffering the result of my past karma, where is the witness that I have done this bad or good?" But he had no knowledge of Bhagavad-gītā. We also at that time did not know. We were not very interested. But later on, when I read Bhagavad-gītā, "Here is witness, upadraṣṭā anumantā. Here is witness." Perpetual witness. Not only of this life, but many, many lives past, He knows everything. Vedāhaṁ samatītāni vartamānāni [Bg. 7.26]. He knows everything. That is Kṛṣṇa. He knows everything, what you have done or what you want to do. Everything knows He. But in spite of all this, because Kṛṣṇa is your friend, most intimate friend, naturally... Just like father becomes friend. There is no better friend like father or mother. Naturally. They will never advise the son anything for his, I mean to say, suffering. No father will give... Even the father is a debauch, he will never advise his son that "You do this." No, no. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the father of everyone. Everyone. How He can give wrong advice? He does not give. He is the only friend. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhū... So if you take shelter of the only friend, the just friend, that will give us protection. Not anyone else. Everyone has got some self-interest.

So therefore here is the advice is, tasmād bhārata sarvātmā bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ [SB 2.1.5]. All these things are given. Sarvātmā. He is situated in everyone's heart. You haven't got to go somewhere to search Him. He is within you. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe [Bg. 18.61]. Simply you have to become sober to hear from Him. He talks with devotee. Nondevotee, He gives sanction indirectly, through the nature. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna... [Bg. 18.61]. He is sitting, but He is giving sanction through māyā. Because directly, He is not giving sanction. He doesn't want. What you are doing, He doesn't want. Just like a son is insisting father, "Father, give me two hundred rupees, ten rupees." And the father knows as soon as he gets two hundred rupees, he will go to wine shop and spoil his life. He doesn't want to give. But when he is insisting, he says his mother, "Give him two hundred rupees. Let him go to hell." This is like (that). It is like that. "Let this rascal go to hell. What can I do?"

So all these rascals, some, forgetting Kṛṣṇa, are suffering in this material world, and he is thinking that this dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu [SB 2.1.4] will give him protection. This is rascaldom. Nobody can give you protection. Only Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, tasmād bhārata. Bhārata. Bhārata means he is the descendant of King Bharata Mahārāja, under whose name this whole planet is called Bhāratavarṣa. This is Bhāratavarṣa. This planet is called Bhāratavarṣa because formerly it was ruled by Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Ṛṣabhadeva. Therefore it is called Bhārata-varṣa. So this Mahārāja Parīkṣit belonged to that dynasty, Bhārata dynasty, and he is addressed as Bhārata. Sometimes you will find Arjuna is also addressed as Bhārata, Vidura is addressed as Bhārata, because they belongs to the same family, Bhārata family. So tasmād bhārata: "My dear king, Parīkṣit Mahārāja..." Tasmād bhārata sarvātmā, sarvātmā. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa is only in Goloka Vṛndāvana. No. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhutaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is God. As you are sitting here, you are not sitting at home. That is finished. Means you are limited. But Kṛṣṇa, He is sitting everyone's heart; still, He is in Goloka. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they, another kind of fools, they think Kṛṣṇa like us. They consider that "If I am sitting here, how can I sit everywhere?" They think that "Kṛṣṇa is like me." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. These rascals, they think Kṛṣṇa like himself. Because he is sitting one place, he cannot be anywhere else, similarly, Kṛṣṇa also, if He is in India, He is not in Europe. That is their idea. Therefore Europe and America, they say sometimes that "Kṛṣṇa is Hindus' God." Why Hindus' God? He says, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ [Bg. 14.4], ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā: "I am the seed-giving father of all different forms of life." Kṛṣṇa claims that He is... Therefore, because He is the father of all living beings, therefore there is response from Europe and America. Otherwise what connection they have got? They have got their Jesus Christ or something else. But why they are attracted to Kṛṣṇa?

Because actually the father is the... Kṛṣṇa is the father not only of the human society-of the bird society, the beast society, dog society, cat society, everyone's father, sarva-yoniṣu. That is Kṛṣṇa. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa. And if you simply try to understand and little understand, then your life is successful. Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Simply by understanding even little, your life is successful. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Mahato bhayāt. This is bhaya. They do not know what is bhaya, fearfulness. They are very proud of becoming this and that, but they are not afraid of death, how much painful it is. And if you are sinful, then you will be allowed to enter in the womb of your mother and your mother will kill you. They are not afraid. They are so rascal. These risks are there. So make your life in such a way, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]- don't enter into the mother's womb. Punar janma naiti. Then? Go directly to Kṛṣṇa. That is success of life.

Thank you very much. (end)



740319SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.4

-

Vṛndāvana, March 19, 1974



Prabhupāda:



dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



Ātma-tattva, apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. This verse we have discussed. People are blind about the interest of the soul, actually, his own person. The soul is the chief within this body. Neither the mind, nor the body-they are simply covering. Just like we are covered by dress. Dress is not important. But I, the man who is putting on the dress, I am important. That we cannot see.



Everyone is busy to see the body. And the body, expansion of the body, is described here. Body, deha, then from the body there are children, apatya. And then, through the wife, body expands, strī. Strī means "which expands." In this material world the point of attraction is strī and puruṣa, man and woman, male and female. There is an attraction, natural. So the man wants woman, woman wants man, because there is attraction. And when, by that attraction, the man and woman is united, then the result is the children. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ [SB 5.5.8]. Then the attraction for this material world increases. When one is alone, he's not so much attached with the material world. But as soon as he unites with the other party, then he gets children, and the attraction increases.

The real business is that we have to withdraw our attraction for this material... That they do not know. I am a spirit soul. Being attracted by this material nature, I am now encaged within this body, and I am changing this body. Just like I am changing this body from boyhood to childhood, childhood to, from childhood to boyhood, from youthhood. In this way, I have been entangled in this transmigration of the soul. This is my problem. Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa, says, "Real problem is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]." This is not problem. Nowadays they have discovered so many problems. But actual problem-janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-they are not very much serious. Therefore they have been described here as pramattaḥ, madmen. He does not know what is the real problem, but he is very busy with the superficial problems. Therefore śāstra says that these people, blind, they do not know what is the problem. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. My real self-interest is to go back to home, back to Godhead. That is my real self-interest. They do not know. They want to live here, which is described as duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15], simply a place of miserable conditions and repetition of birth, death, old age and disease.

So apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are not very intelligent to see about the truth of ātmā, they are entangled. How it is entangle...? Now, deha-apatya. This body and the offspring, children, born out of this body through the wife, dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu ātma-sainyeṣu. Everyone is thinking that "I have got my good wife. I have got very nice children. I have got my nice society, nation," and so on, so many. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu. And he's thinking that "They are my soldiers." Here is this fight, struggle for existence. Everyone is struggling to exist, and everyone is thinking, "They are my soldiers. These, my wife, children, society, friendship, nation, they'll give me protection." But nobody can give protection. Therefore he's explained here as pramattaḥ, pāgala. Nobody can give you protection. Not only will he not be able to give protection, but they will be also finished. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api, teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanam [SB 2.1.4]. At any moment, you can be finished. Paśyann api na pa... He's seeing that "My father died. My father's father died. The uncle died. So they'll also die. I'll also die." So how, all we are dead bodies, how we can help one another? But because he's mad, he does not see. He's trying to maintain the status quo. That will not give him protection.

Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā [SB 7.5.31]. Therefore it is called durāśayā. He's thinking that "These things will give me protection." No, that is not possible. You cannot get rid of the four principles of material life, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9], by these soldiers. That is not possible. They will die, you will die. Your... Formerly, your father died. Your father's father died. Everyone will die. This is called martya-loka. Everyone will die. But we are actually hankering after existing. We do not wish to die. That is our natural propensity, because we are eternal. "Oh, why shall I wish to die?" So the solution is not depending on these so-called soldiers, but the solution is different. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



If you some way or other can reach Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, then you'll be saved. Otherwise, mām upetya kaunteya. Then you'll not have to come to this material world again simply to suffer.



This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness philosophy. This material world is called world of death. Every living being, beginning from the Brahmā... It is not that... Brahmā has got very long duration of life. We cannot even calculate Brahmā's one daytime. Forty-three lakhs of years, multiplied by one thousand, that is twelve hours of Brahmā. So he will also die. Beginning from Brahmā, whose duration of life is some thousands of millions of years, down to the microbial germs, who live for a few seconds only, he's struggling for existence. Therefore this life is a sort of fight with material nature, which imposes death upon all. This is struggle. Everyone wants to live, but... He may live for some time-for few seconds, for few minutes, or for few years, or for few millions of years. But death will come. And our struggle is how to overcome death. In the human form of life a living being is competent enough to come to an understanding of this great struggle for existence, but being too attracted to the family members, society, country, etc., he wants to win over the invincible material nature by the aid of bodily strength, children, wife, relatives, etc. Although he is sufficiently experienced in the matter by dint of past experience and previous examples of the diseased predecessors, he does not see that the countrymen are all fallible in the great struggle. One should examine the fact that the father or father's father has already died, and therefore he himself is also sure to die. And similarly his children, who are the would-be fathers of their children, will also die in due course. No one will survive in the struggle with material nature. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14].

So our real problem is how to revive our original, eternal life. That is struggle. The modern people, scientists, philosophers, they even do not know what is our original constitutional position, and... Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. I do not die, even after the destruction of this body. These things are unknown. And still, they are posing themselves as leader of the society. Therefore the śāstra says, andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ: [SB 7.5.31] "One blind man is leading several other blind men." Te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ: "They do not know that they are bound up by the laws of nature very tight, hands and legs." There is no question of freedom.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



So real life is to know what is the value of my life, how I have to attain the original position. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. And now I am getting this śarīra, or body, and I am being annihilated one after another. And I am getting one body annihilated, again getting another, next body. This great science is unknown to the modern civilization, and therefore they are considered as pramattaḥ, all madmen, hankering after some temporary happiness. Pramattaḥ. They are called pramattaḥ.



Thank you very much. (end)



720813SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.5

-

Los Angeles, August 13, 1972



Prabhupāda:



tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś ca icchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



This verse we have been discussing last week, the answer of Śukadeva Gosvāmī to Parīkṣit Mahārāja, who inquired from him: "What is my duty at the verge of my death?" This is very important point, that we have to prepare ourself for the next moment of our death. People forget it. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. Janma, the pangs of birth, the pangs of death, the pangs of disease and the pangs of old age. Anyone who is progressing in self realization, he should keep always these four things before him. He should not forget.



So Śukadeva Gosvāmī, after discussing that there are many subject matter for the materialistic persons who are unaware of self-realization... The very word used: apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], those who are looking forward for self-realization. That is the only business for human life, but our education system is so defective that there is no program for self-realization. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī recommended that we should not be bewildered by the occupation of our materialistic life. He has very clearly discussed that all of these things, they cannot give us protection. There is nice example. Just like when a fly..., a bird flies in the sky, he has to depend on his own strength. In that flying method, neither his father, neither his mother nor his children can help. If he has got sufficient strength to fly, then he is fly very smoothly. Otherwise... Take the, for example, for an aeroplane also. If it has got sufficient strength, arrangement, to fly, it will nicely fly. Otherwise, there is crash. Similarly each of us individually should be preparing for our next death. Not that we should not think that "My family, my community, my nation, my friends can help me." No. Everyone is responsible for his own activities.

So Śukadeva Gosvāmī recommended, tasmād bhārata. Parīkṣit, the King Parīkṣit, he's addressed as Bhārata. You know India is called Bhāratavarṣa. Why it is called Bhāratavarṣa? Because it is named after the King Bhārata. There was a big emperor of the world whose name was Bhārata. From that Bhārata, his descendants have come also Bhārata, and the country is also called Bhārata. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja happens to be a descendant in that family of Bhārata Mahārāja; therefore he's addressed as Bhārata. Sometimes you'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna is also addressed as Bhārata, because Arjuna was also grandfather of this Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Similarly you'll find in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Vidura is also addressed as Bhārata. Sometimes Dhṛtarāṣṭra is addressed as Bhārata. So this common family designation is very prominent still in India. Gotra, the family designation. So the old custom, he's also following, addressing him Bhārata. Tasmād bhārata sarvātmā bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ [SB 2.1.5]. He bhārata sarvātmā iti bhagavān iti sundarya. This very... Each word of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is important. This bhagavān word means all-attractive. Bhagavān... I've explained several times, bhaga means opulences, and van means one who possesses. So there are six kinds of opulences: richness, reputation, strength, beauty, wisdom and renunciation. Six kind of opulences. So anyone who possesses these six kinds of opulences in full, not partially, He's Bhagavān, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Take, for example, we are attracted. Suppose some rich man comes in this meeting, very rich man, very famous. We shall immediately be prepared to receive him, because he's attractive. If some reputed philosopher or scientist comes, we shall immediately be prepared to receive him nicely, because he's attractive. So these things are attractions: richness, beauty, education, knowledge, reputation, strength-either bodily strength or political strength or monetary strength; there are so many divisions of strength. So if one is strong, powerful, if one is beautiful, if one is wise, reputed, these things are attraction. Therefore the very word is used "Bhagavān," because God is all-attractive, Kṛṣṇa is all attractive. So he recommends that Bhagavān, that beautiful Kṛṣṇa, all-attractive, all-powerful, He should always be remembered. Smartavyaḥ śrotavyaḥ. And He should always be heard about His activities.

Kṛṣṇa descends, and He leaves behind Him so many activities. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said: paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām. Sādhūnām. Paritrāṇāya means to give protection; sādhu, those who are devotees. To give protection to the devotees. And vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: and to annihilate the demons. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya [Bg. 4.8]. Yuge yuge sambhavām. So God comes. So far destruction or annihilation of the demons is concerned, God is not required to come down, because His agents Take, for example, this material energy. It is sufficient. If God wants, this whole city of Los Angeles can be, within a second, overpowered by this water of the Pacific Ocean. Within a second. It does not take much time. Therefore for annihilating purpose God does not require to come down. But He comes down for His devotee. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared not He, He There was no necessity of His coming for killing Hiraṇyakaśipu; there were many agencies or implements to kill him. But He came to solace Prahlāda Mahārāja. He was so much harassed by his father that He came down just to put His hands, lotus hands, palms on the head of Prahlāda Mahārāja. So He comes. But the benefit, for both the demons and the devotees, are the same. That is God's mercy. Because He's absolute, if He kills somebody, he also gets the same result and as His devotee. This is absolute. Just like Pūtanā. Pūtanā was killed by Kṛṣṇa. Pūtanā planned to smear some poison on the nipples of her breast with a plan to kill Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa took it otherwise, that "She acted as My mother; therefore she should be elevated to the position, as Mother Yaśodā is also be elevated." This is God's mercy.

So God is all-good, always. Even if He kills one or even if He protects one, the ultimate result is the same. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja is advised that tasmād bhārata sarvātmā [SB 2.1.5]. Sarvātmā means He is all-pervasive. He is living in everyone's heart. He knows everyone in particular details, and, at the same time, He is personally present also, personally present. How He is personally present? Just like in this temple, He's personally present. This arcā-mūrti, it is not idol worship. You practically try to understand. If it was idol worship, idol worship, then these boys and girls, they are American boys and girls, intelligent, educated, they should not have spared so much time for worshiping one idol. No. It is God's mercy that He incarnates Himself as we can handle Him. If we want to worship His gigantic universal form, we cannot approach Him. It is not possible. But He's so kind. He comes just suitable for our, for our being handled by us. That is God's mercy. He, He's in this temple, but He, if you like to worship Him, He can live within your closet. Everyone can take advantage of God, Supreme God. There is no difficulty. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. There is no expenditure. He is agreeable to accept a little fruit, a little flower, a little water. Simply He wants your devotional love. That's all. He's not hungry. Of course, this Society is, according to our capacity, offering Kṛṣṇa the best foodstuff. Not that because He says patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ, therefore we offer Him patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ. No. We offer Him to our best capacity-the best, the best foodstuff. That should be the motto.

So here it is recommended that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beautiful, full of all opulences, and all-pervading, He should be śrotyavyaḥ. Śrotavyaḥ means He should always be heard. Therefore we are presenting so many books so that one may read. Just like I'm reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; you are hearing. This is śrotavyaḥ. The beginning of devotional service is hearing. Śrotavyaḥ. Hearing means somebody must be chanting. Therefore it is called śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. Kīrtitavya means chanting or reciting. Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Parīkṣit Mahārāja is simply hearing. And Śukadeva Gosvāmī is simply chanting. There are nine methods of devotional services:

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



Śravaṇam means hearing. Kīrtanam means chanting. Smaraṇam, memorizing. Vandanam, prayers, offering prayers. So there are different methods. Whichever method is possible by you, you can adopt and you can become perfect. Not that you have to execute all the methods. Even one method, if you perfectly do, you'll become perfect. You'll be transferred to the spiritual kingdom. So we do not say that "This religion is good," "This religion is bad." In every religion there is some form of worship out of these nine. Just like in Christian church there is offering of prayers. We also offer prayer, and that is also recommended in the list: vandanam. Vandanam means offering prayers. Muslim also, they offer prayers in the mosque.



So generally prayers offered in every religious institution. But so far we are concerned, we not only offer prayers, but also hear about Him. And what we shall hear about Him unless He has got activities? Just like you hear in the newspaper the activities of the general people. Similarly, if we have to hear something, there must some activities. That activities we find in the Vedic literatures-immense, unlimited activities. There are eighteen Purāṇas, you'll find activities of the Lord. There is Mahābhārata, you'll find activities of the Lord. There is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. We have published. It will come very soon. Kṛṣṇa... The... Full of activities of the Lord, in two volumes of four hundred pages. So simply if you read and hear the activities, either read or hear, both of them are śravaṇam. Activities of the Lord, you get liberation, simply by reading. You have got a tendency for reading book or hearing about somebody, but, generally, for our sense gratification we hear some man and woman making love affairs, and that is the subject matter of a drama or a fiction or a story. The same tendency, if you transfer for hearing about Kṛṣṇa, you get liberation. It is so nice thing. And you'll find so attractive to read about the activities of the Lord that they will... Cannot leave the book. The Nectar of Devotion and Kṛṣṇa. It is practically. If you go on reading, you'll find at times some philosophical topics, but the story is so attractive. Because God, Kṛṣṇa is so attractive, His activities are also attractive.

That is recommended here: śrotavyaḥ bhagavān hariḥ. Bhagavān hariḥ. Śrotavyaḥ and kīrtitavyaś ca. And He should be glorified, smartavyaś ca, and memorized. If you read, if you are serious, then... Actually, these are our... Of course, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person has no leisure. He's twenty-four hours engaged. So other people, they might have some leisure hours, but here, we are engaged, these devotees, in such a way that they want, instead of twenty-four hours, another three-four hours more. But that is not possible. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has recommended that this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam is so nice that if you engage yourself twenty-four hours you'll find it nice. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ.

tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api suhiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ

sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā

janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ (sic) pumān

ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ

[SB 2.1.6]



This is very important. Ante nārāyaṇa. Ante means at the end of your life. The ante nārāyaṇa. Etad, etad, etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyām. Sāṅkhya-yogābhyām. Sāṅkhya means those who are inclined to discuss about self-realization through philosophical or speculative way. They are called sāṅkhya. And yogi... You know, in your countries, yoga practice is very popular. But this yoga practice is also difficult also. Anyway, those who are interested in yoga practice, for them also. Not that only for the devotees.



It is recommended by Śukadeva Gosvāmī that those who are inclined to make progress in the matter of self-realization by philosophical speculation, for them... Philoso... Even for the scientist. Not only for the philosopher-even for the scientist. They are also called sāṅkhya-yogī. Scientists, they are also, in one way, they are yogis because they are concentrating their attention to certain type of scientific method. Therefore they are also called yogis. The karmīs, they are also called yogi. A karmī, a business man, is improving his business. Just like in your country there are..., there were many great business brain-Mr. Henry Ford, Rockefeller. So they concentrated their attention how to earn money. They are also called yogi in that way.

So here it is stated, sāṅkhya-yogābhyām sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā. It is clear, in next word is clear... Sva-dharma. Sva-dharma means a particular type of engagement for a particular type of man. Everyone has got a particular type of engagement. Suppose you are lawyer. Your particular engagement is study of law or executing legal business. So that is sva-dharma. Similarly a businessman, an engineer, a medical man. So these are particular type of occupation of a particular type of man. So here it is recommended, sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā. One who is faithfully engaged in his own business, particular type of business, janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ pumān, his human birth, his human life is successful, janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ pumān, if he's successful man, then by successfully, properly executing his particular type of business, if he can, at the end of his life, remember Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Lord, that is the success of life. It doesn't matter that you have got to chant or dance, but here it is recommended somehow or other, if you can manage to remember or memorize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, at the end of your life, that is your success. Etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā. Otherwise, your life is failure. If after Suppose you have earned millions of dollars and you have become a very successful businessman or lawyer or politician Just like in your country President Kennedy. He was killed, but we do not know, after his death, what he has become. That information there is no. But if you somehow or other you can remember about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, about His activities, about His form, about His name, anything, form, name, quality, paraphernalia, anything, if you can remember, then that is success of your life.

Because there are various examples. Just like Ajāmila. He was very sinful man in his life, but at the time of death, he called for his son, whose name was Nārāyaṇa. So as soon as he called his son, Nārāyaṇa, immediately he remembered the Supreme Personality of Godhead and he was liberated. Even from his sinful life. There are many examples. And Bhagavad-gītā also confirms. We have to accept this Vedic literature; otherwise we cannot make progress. Our process, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, our process is to accept the Vedic version. Therefore we are presenting Bhagavad-gītā as it is. We don't make any adulteration or alteration or addition. No. We accept, as it is. That is our process. And if you accept, then our time is saved and we can make progress very quickly.

So that we should do. That is our system. Ācārya upāsanam. We receive the knowledge throughout the disciplic succession of ācāryas, and we accept it and we follow it, and practically you see the result. That is our request. Ante nārāyaṇa smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Bhagavad-gītā also confirms this version: yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvam tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante, at the end of life, kalevaram Kalevaram means this body, within this body. This is another problem. Generally people, they do not understand that after giving up this body we enter another body. But this is the first instruction of self-realization in the Bhagavad-gītā. And that is actually we are experiencing. We are changing our body every moment. So similarly, at the ultimate end of this body, when this body is no more useful Because, after all, it is machine. Just like your car, your car or any other machine, if it goes for long time it becomes useless. That is the nature of anything material. In the beginning it is very nice. It is new. Just like this body, my body. When I was a baby I might have been very nice, beautiful, a child. Now it is becoming old and ugly. So this is the nature of..., this is the nature of material thing, that anything material, that will deteriorate, one after another, one after So when this body is completely deteriorated, there is no, there is no more chance of prolonging it, then we accept another body. And the example is vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. Just like we change our dress when the dress is old enough or dirty, we give it up and accept another dress. So this is going on.

Now, if at the ultimate end of this body, if we can remember Kṛṣṇa, then our life is successful. What? How is that? Now as soon as we remember Kṛṣṇa, immediately we are transferred to the spiritual world, the abode of Kṛṣṇa or Goloka Vṛndāvana. It does not take even a second's time. Spirit soul is so forceful that anywhere... The yogic success is like that. Yogic, those who are successful yogis, they, at the..., they do not die by nature's law. They control even their death. How is that? They make yoga practice, and when they think that one is perfect now, so he leaves this body and he transfers himself to any planet he likes. There is no need of sputnik. Similarly, the bhakta-yogī, he does not like to stay in any one of the planets within the material world, because he knows from the authoritative description of Bhagavad-gītā and Vedic literature. Just like you'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa says, ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] "My dear Arjuna, beginning from the Brahmaloka, the highest planetary system within this universe, down to any other, I mean to say, downwards planet, you can travel anywhere, wherever you like..." Ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ. There are fourteen status of planetary system within this universe. So we are in the middle. So ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] even if you are transferred to the Brahmaloka, you have to come down. Punaḥ. Martya-lokaṁ viśanti. Kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti [Bg. 9.21]. Just like in modern days, especially your American scientists, they are going to the moon planet. But when their stock of, that machine, is finished, immediately they come down. Similarly, you may go to the heavenly planet or to the Brahmaloka... There are very large span of life and opulence you can enjoy. But as soon as like your bank balance is finished, you have to come down. Ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16].

Therefore a devotee is not allured by any of the opulences of this material world. They are not interested. They are interested to transfer themselves in the spiritual world where, it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. That sphere, that sky, where going, nobody comes back to this sky... This is material sky, and there is spiritual sky. These informations are there. If you accept it, then it is all right. But if you..., even if you don't accept it, that is also all right, because we take Vedic version as absolute truth. So these informations are there and they have been accepted by great ācāryas. Not that we are simply accepting. Great ācāryas. Just like Vyāsadeva, Nārada, Asita, and modern age Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhvācārya, Śrī Caitanya. They are great scholars. They're great, expert in the spiritual science. They have accepted. And we accept Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His activities, by the definition of possessing all the six opulences. We don't accept anybody, an ordinary man... Just like now it is a fashion. Everybody comes and says, "I am God." No. We don't accept in that way. Arjuna was talking with Kṛṣṇa. He knew that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but, in order to convince us that in future there may not be any misunderstanding about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he requested Kṛṣṇa to show His universal form. So He showed him. So there is no doubt about, about Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So here it is recommended, ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Somehow or other, if you can remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead in any way, by His name, by His form, by His quality, by His activities, by His paraphernalia, anything, then your life is successful. Now Śukadeva Gosvāmī is speaking about his own self. Śukadeva Gosvāmī's supposed to be liberated from his birth. So he says,

prāyeṇa munayo rājan

nivṛttā vidhi-ṣedhataḥ

nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma

guṇānukathane hareḥ



Even those who are liberated persons, they are also attracted by the pastimes of the Lord. Not that only the conditioned souls should execute this order, but even one who is liberated. He's giving his personal experience. He says,



idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma

purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam

adhītavān dvāparādau

pitur dvaipāyanād aham



Śukadeva Gosvāmī is supposed to be liberated soul from the beginning of his life. That is a long story. He was sixteen years within his mother's womb. Anyway, he's accepted as a liberated soul. But still, he's attracted by the activities of the narration of the activities of the Lord, and he says that, idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma purāṇam, nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma guṇānukathane hareḥ. Idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma. This Bhāgavata, this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, brahma-sammitam... Brahma-sammitam. So "I heard it from my father, Dvaipāyana." Vyāsadeva, he composed this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and he found his son, Śukadeva Gosvāmī... He had many other sons, but this son, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, because he thought that "This body is liberated," so he taught him about the lessons of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and this is the first time... Because śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. He heard it from his father, Dvaipayana, and he is now narrating, kīrtanam. He got the chance of narrating Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam at the time of death of Parīkṣit Mahārāja.



So here he admits that idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam. Brahma-sammitam means it is actually transcendental knowledge. Brahma-sammitam, adhītavān dvāparādau. So "By the end of Dvāpara Yuga I studied it from my great father, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipayana Vyāsa." So

pariniṣṭhito 'pi nairguṇya

uttama-śloka-līlayā

gṛhīta-cetā rājarṣe

ākhyānaṁ yad adhī...



Now the question may be that "You are liberated person. Why you are attracted with the narration of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam?" So he says that pariniṣṭhito 'pi nairguṇya. "Yes, although I'm situated in the transcendental position, uttama-śloka-līlā, the narration of Kṛṣṇa..." Kṛṣṇa is called uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloka means when Kṛṣṇa is described, He's described by chosen language, not ordinary language. You'll find, those who are students of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you'll find each and every word so nice and so sublime, even from literary point of view. Therefore He's called Uttama-śloka. And His līlā, His pastimes So Śukadeva Gosvāmī admits that "Although I was situated in the liberated stage of life, still I was attracted by the activities or pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa." Pariniṣṭhito' pi nairguṇya uttama-śloka-līlayā, gṛhīta-ceta rājarṣe. "My dear King, I, I heard it wholeheartedly. It was, it is so nice, it is so sublime that it was attractive to me."



So the question is that a liberated person is never attracted with anything which is material. That is the sign of liberated person. But he was attracted by the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa. That means the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa are not material activities. Otherwise how a liberated person can be attracted? For example, Lord Caitanya. Lord Caitanya, He took sannyāsa. He was very... Sannyāsī. For a sannyāsī to talk with women, to mix with women, is very restricted. So he was very much careful about Him, about this matter. Even some of the women who were wives of His disciples and devotees, they could not come near Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They would offer their obeisances from a distant place. They were not forbidden, but that was the system. But this Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He took pleasure in hearing about the gopīs. Just try to understand. So therefore gopīs' pastime with Kṛṣṇa, they are not material. They are spiritual. Otherwise, how Caitanya Mahāprabhu was attracted?

So Kṛṣṇa and His pastimes, His name, quality, paraphernalia, entourage, everything is spiritual. That is accepted by great scholars like Śaṅkarācārya. He says: nārāyaṇa parā. "Nārāyaṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond this material world." There are many examples. In your Bible also, those who are Christians, God said, "Let there be creation." So there was creation. Now this world, this word is not vibration of this material world. In the material world, if I say, "Let there be some mango," so no. That is not possible. But in the spiritual vibration, that is possible. That is possible. So the study is that God said, "Let there be creation." So there was creation. Now this word existed before the creation, because "Let there be creation" means when God is speaking there was no creation. And the creation means this material world. Therefore this vibration is not material. So when God is saying, "Let there be creation," then He's a person. Therefore His personality is also transcendental, spiritual. Otherwise how He speaks? These things are there in the Vedic literature. Sa aikṣata: "He glanced over, and there was creation." And Bhagavad-gītā also it is said that mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10].

So Kṛṣṇa's or God's position is always transcendental. Therefore those who are impersonalists, they are not attracted with the variegatedness of this material life. They want to make it void, because they have no information of the spiritual variegatedness. But this Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he became attracted with the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are not variegatedness of this material world. It completely spiritual. And to discuss about Kṛṣṇa, to hear about Kṛṣṇa, to chant about Kṛṣṇa, to glorify about Kṛṣṇa, everything is spiritual. So if you are engaged twenty-four hours in this business you are not in this material world. You are in the spiritual world.

Thank you very much. (end)



731108SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.5

-

Delhi, November 8, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all miseries must hear about, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries."



Prabhupāda:



tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



Icchatā abhayam. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī is giving instruction to Mahārāja Parīkṣit what is to be done at the point of death. We have already discussed this point, that we must know the responsibility of our next life. Just like a child is given education for the next life, to become youthful, to get into higher education, admission. Then a youth is given higher education for better life in future. That is natural. Every one is expecting future prospect. Similarly, we, every one of us, we are changing our body exactly the same way as the child is changing his body to boyhood, the boy is changing his body to youthhood, the youth is changing his body to old body. Similarly, after old age, there is next stage is death.



So after death, what is the proposal? That they do not know. And practically we are experiencing that although I am changing body, I was a child, I was a boy, I was a young man, now I am old man, so there was past and future in every stage. Similarly, in this stage as I am remembering my past life... I can remember, you can remember... I was a child, I was a boy, I was a young man. I was doing like this. Everything I remember. Even if I forget, I had my past life and again I expect my future life. Past, present and future. Why the future should be zero? We have experienced so long, both past, present and future. Why in this old age I shall be future-less, void? There is no life after death? That is the foolishness. That we are not preparing.

Those who are not preparing, they are engaged in various topics.

śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



They have created a life of material enjoyment, and therefore they have many things to hear, śrotavyādīni. So many newspaper, magazines, books, fictions, simply for wasting time. There is no discussion in those literatures about future life. None of these literatures. Take any literature of the modern world. There is no discussion about the future life. But the future life is there. You cannot deny it. The future life is there. But there is no discussion. Therefore these rascals have been described as apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. These rascal, they do not see what is the future. They do not believe in future. Big, big professors, big, big politicians, they do not believe even that there is life after death. And why there is no life after death? We are experiencing that life after life... Just like this child's activities at the present moment will not be the same when she will get another body as young woman. That will be different activity. So according to our change of body we have got different engagements. A child talks all foolish things; nobody cares for it. But the same child, when he gets another body, if he talks foolish, then he will be called, "Oh, you are so fool. You are talking like this." Because the body has changed. So body is changing. That's a fact. But apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], one who does not know that the spirit soul is eternal and changing body, they are blind, apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. They are simply engrossed in this bodily concept of life. Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Compact, encaged in this body, encaged in society, encaged in nationalism, encaged in religion, encaged in ideas, philosophy. But there is no question of discussing about the soul. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2].



So for them, these foolish persons, those who are not seeing the actual position, constitutional position of the soul and the future of the soul, for them there are many topics, unlimited. Śrotavya, sahasrāni, hundreds and thousands. Nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2]. This śloka we have discussed. And what is their subject matter of discussion? The subject matter is that nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ [SB 2.1.3]. At night they sleep or indulge in sex life, and in daytime, divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā, and the daytime is wasted, "Where is money? Where is money." And if he gets money, "How to purchase this thing for that boy? How to purchase for my wife and for my brother?" Kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā. "Purchase this. Where is milk? Where is rice? Where is...?" In this way we are wasting time, although this human form of life is meant for Brahman realization. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. They have forgotten that. They have forgotten that.

Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī is reminding that... And they... Of course at the end of life, at the time of death, one must do it, but not only at the end of life. One must practice from the beginning of life. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja said, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha [SB 7.6.1]. This prescription given by Śukadeva Gosvāmī:

tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



This is bhāgavata-dharma. This is bhāgavata-dharma, everything in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Dharma means bhāgavata-dharma. Otherwise that is not dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means to understand God, our relationship with God, and how to work in that relation. That is dharma. Sambandha, prayojana. Sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana. Caitanya Mahāprabhu prescribes this. The whole Vedic civilization is based on this, that you must know what is your relationship with God. It doesn't matter whether you are Hindu, Muslim, Christian or Buddhist. A civilized man must have some religious process. That is all over the world. Now we are giving up. We are giving up. Everyone is giving up. Therefore dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. Dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ... When we give up the religious principle... Religious principle means to abide by the law of God. That is religion. But we do not know what is God and what is His order. We forget it. So at the present moment, dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ, it is a civilization of cats and dogs, not human beings, because they have given up dharma.



But the śāstra says that this human life is meant for understanding God, nothing else. Other things are already arranged. You are harassed by the problems of eating, sleeping, mating, but there is no such question. Eating arrangement is there. Even the birds and bees, they are confident. They have no office-going, they are not lawyers, engineers, politicians, to earn their bread, but the bread is ready for them. Even for the beast, birds, so they are confident. So this is not problem. Real problem is to understand God. And what will the benefit by understanding God? Then the problem of your birth, death, old age and disease will be solved. That is the real problem. We are undergoing repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. These problems can be solved simply by understanding what is God. This is the solution.

That is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā: janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti... [Bg. 4.9]. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti. This is the solution. Janma karma me divyam. Kṛṣṇa says, God says, that "If you try to understand Me, what is My position, why I descend, what is My activities, what is..." That is described here, śrotavya. You have to understand. How you will understand? By hearing. God has given you the ear. If you simply hear, if you simply hear... There is no question of education. It is not that one who is not educated, he will not understand what is God. He will understand, because the ear is there. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ: [SB 7.5.23] Viṣṇu, of Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you hear. Therefore we are opening so many branches, just to give people the chance of hearing. And as soon as you perfectly hear, the next position will be to glorify. Just like these European, American boys. First of all they heard. Now they are preaching. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. Because they have perfectly heard, therefore they are very enthusiastic. They are going all over the world. They are preaching. And so śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. If one has actually heard, known about God, then next stage will be he will be very much enthusiastic to speak to others. That is preaching. Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca smartavyaḥ. Smartavya means remembering. Unless you remember what is God, what is His form, what is His quality, what is His pastimes, what are His activities, what are His entourage, everything about God, if you hear... Just like if you hear Bhagavad-gītā, you understand everything, what is God. And that is our only duty.

I have seen in this Delhi near Jawarmal Street the small Muhammadan boys, they are reading Koran. That is very good. From childhood they should learn, learn about God. And that is recommendation in Bhāgavata. Prahlāda Mahārāja said that kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān [SB 7.6.1]. Kaumāra, from the beginning of life, children should be engaged. Therefore we have opened the Gurukula, Dallas. The small children, four years, five years old, they are hearing about Kṛṣṇa, about God. They are chanting about Kṛṣṇa, they are rising early in the morning, attending maṅgala-ārātrika. Anyone goes there... Even the education superintendent came to visit our temple. He was astonished that "How these children are happy. How children, they are being educated." So this is to be introduced. Kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavat..., durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma. This human form of life is durlabham. Durlabham, very rare to achieve. It is not so easily obtained. We have to pass through evolutionary process, 8,400,000 species of life, aquatics... Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. We have to pass through aquatics, animals in the water, then trees, plants, then insects, birds, beasts. After all, we get this human form of life, especially civilized form of life, with some idea of religion. If we do not utilize it... Religion means to understand God. That is religion. In religion, a godless religion, where there is no conception of God, that is not religion. That is called cheating religion. In the name of religion, but there is no conception of God. That is not religion.

Then here it is said that śrotavyaḥ bhagavān hariḥ. If you do not know who is Bhagavān, if you do not know who is Hari, if you do not know who is Īśvara, then what you will hear about Him? That is the problem. Those who are after God, they make God nirākāra. "There is no ākāra. There is no form." God is the origin of all forms, but the poor God has no form. Just see. This is the conclusion. He is the origin of all forms, yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante, from whom everything is coming out. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Everything... We have also come from God. We are also claimed as sons of God. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ [Bg. 14.4]. There are 8,400,000 species of life, and they have got forms. They are sons of God. So where is our experience that a son who has got a form, his father is impersonal, no form? Where you have got this experience? If the son has got form and the father is formless, how it can be? What is the reason? Where is the argument? But they are concluding like that. I am the son of my father, so my father has got a form. I have got a form. His father has got form. His father has got form. Even if we do not see the tenth generation, up to, whether it was form or formless, but it is supposed that he must have a form. So similarly, if you ultimately go to the supreme father, then how it is formless? No. Formless is not the actual realization of God. That is the beginning. That may be beginning. To realize the energy of God, that is formless. Just like the sun. The sunshine is formless, but the sun globe is not formless, or the person, the predominating Deity within the sunglobe, he is not formless. The sunshine is formless. So this formless realization... Just like the sun. Sun is also light. Sun is also heat. The sunshine is also light, sunshine is also heat. But this heat and light, energy of the sun, they are not actually the sun. It is only the energy.

This is described in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, that,

eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner

jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis

tathedam akhilaṁ jagat



Just like a fire is there in one place, in a particular localized place, but it expands in heat and light, similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is there. He is person. That is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is God. Although He is everywhere present by His energy, it does not mean that He is lost, He has lost His personality. No. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. He is so perfect and complete. Just like you take the example of the sun. For millions and millions of years, unlimited temperature, light and heat is coming out, but still, it is the same. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate. Similarly, God is so perfect, so complete, that unlimited number of suns and energies... We are also energy. We sons of God, we are also energy. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā:



apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

[Bg. 7.5]



Prakṛtiṁ parām. This material world is aparā-prakṛti, and prakṛti, nature or energy, this is inferior energy, the matter, dull matter. But apareyam. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4], earth, water, air, fire, they are inferior energy of the Lord. But there is another, superior nature. That is described. Apareyam. These energies, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ, earth, water, air, they are inferior. There is another superior. What is that? Jīva-bhūtām, these living entities, mahā-bāho, yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat, who are controlling now.



This Delhi city is important. Why important? Because the jīva-bhūta, the living entities, they are handling this material, cement and stone and wood and so many other material things. And they are constructing buildings. And therefore the importance of this Delhi city is there. If all the people, all the living entities, leave this Delhi city, it is not even one-farthing worth. Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. In Calcutta, in 1942, when there was bombing and all the Calcutta was vacated, a house at that time which was rented at two hundred rupees, they were asking, "Give me twenty-five rupees," because the living entities vacated. Similarly, the importance of this material world is there because we living entities are there. And we have come here. Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā. All the living entities, they have come into this material world to enjoy material enjoyment. Therefore this material world has value. Otherwise, if all the living entities go back again, back to home, back to Godhead, this matter has no value.

So we are also prakṛti. We are also energy of God. And because we are trying to utilize the resources of matter, therefore material things have got value. Otherwise, it has no value, zero. But our business is... That is stated here, that because we are now entangled with this matter... The matter is not our business. Our only business is how to get out of the matter. That is our real business. If you want that business, then the prescription is here. What is that? Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. Unless you hear, how you can understand your position? When you understand God, Kṛṣṇa, and you understand that you are part and parcel of God, or Kṛṣṇa, then you can understand your position: "Oh, we are part and parcel of God." Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person, ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇam, full of all opulences. Just like a mad son loitering in the street, when he understands with good brain that "My father is so rich, so powerful, and why I am loitering in the street like a madman? I have no food, no shelter. I am going from this door to door and begging," then he comes to his consciousness. That is called brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage. "Oh, I am, I am not this matter. I am spirit soul, part and parcel of God. Oh." That is consciousness.

This consciousness we are trying to arouse. This is the best welfare service to the people, to awaken his lost consciousness. He is foolishly thinking that "I am of the material product, and I have to adjust my things in this material world." This is the foolishness. Actual intelligence is that is Brahma-bhūta, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. Bhāgavata.: "I am part and parcel of God. God is supreme Brahman. I am, being part and parcel..." Just like part and parcel of the gold, gold mine, it may be small earring, it is also gold. Similarly, the small particle of sea water is also the same quality, salty. Similarly, we, being part and parcel of God, we have got the same qualities. Qualitatively, we are one. Why we are hankering after loving? Because there is love in Kṛṣṇa. We are worshiping here Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Originally there is love. Therefore we, being part and parcel of God, we are also trying to love. A man is trying to love another woman, woman is trying to love another man. This is natural. This is not artificial. But it is perverted in the material covering. That is the defect. When we are free from this material covering, then we are qualitatively ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12), as jolly... As Kṛṣṇa is dancing always... Kṛṣṇa you will never find... You have seen the picture of Kṛṣṇa. He is fighting with the Kāliya serpent. He is dancing. He is not afraid of the serpent. He is dancing. As He is dancing with the gopīs in rāsa-līlā, similarly, He is dancing with the snake. Because He is ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt. He is ānandamaya, always jolly. Always. You will see Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa... Just like in Kurukṣetra the fighting is going on. Kṛṣṇa is jolly. Arjuna is morose because he is living entity, but He is not morose. He is jolly. That is the nature of God. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt. This is the sūtra, in the Brahma-sūtra, that "God is ānandamaya, always jolly, always cheerful." So you can become also cheerful when you go back to home, back to Godhead. That is our problem.

Therefore how we can go there? The first thing is we must hear. Śrotavyaḥ. Just try to hear what is God, what is His kingdom, how He acts, how He is cheerful. These things are to be heard. Śravaṇam. Then as soon as you are convinced, "Oh, God is so nice," then you will be eager to demonstrate or to broadcast this news to the whole world. This is kīrtanam. This is kīrtanam.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



This is life. This is life. Otherwise, talking nonsense, taking a newspaper in the morning, and "This party has done like this, this man has declared war, that man has defeated this," these are simply waste of time, simply waste of time. If we waste our time, then we are not preparing for the next life.



Actually, human form of life is meant for preparing for the next body. Sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. If we actually serious about our life, to get free from all the problems of life, then this is the only medicine. What is that? Tasmād bhārata sarvātmā bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ, śrotavyaḥ [SB 2.1.5]. One has to hear. It is not very difficult. But people have become so rascal, so foolish, they will not hear. They will not hear. We are requesting. We have not manufactured anything. It is all authorized, authorized books. Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavata, Vedic literature. We are simply inviting them. Now where is there, I mean to say, sectarianism? If we say to you, either you are Hindu or Muslim or Christian, if we say that "Please hear about God," where is sectarianism? Where is sectarianism, "Your life is meant for...," if we preach that "Your life is meant for hearing"?

Now, we are presenting Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If you don't accept Supreme Personality of God, Kṛṣṇa, then what is your Supreme Personality of Godhead you present? Then you compare who is actually Supreme Personality of Godhead. What is the meaning of Supreme Personality of Godhead? Why you are taking? Why you are taking sectarian? Kṛṣṇa claims, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya [Bg. 14.4]. All forms of life. Not only human forms of life, even animal forms of life, vegetable forms of life, aquatics. They are all... Actually that is the fact. We are not this form. We are not this body. But according to our mentality, by nature's law we are getting a particular type of body. Actually, I am spirit soul. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]. Just like I am developing my ideas, youthful ideas. I am getting youthful body. I am developing childish ideas, getting childhood body. So as you develop, Kṛṣṇa, or God, has given you full freedom. You have come to this material world to enjoy. Now you make your plan of your enjoyment. God will give you a particular type of body and you enjoy. Just like the hog, he is enjoying. He is enjoying. What he is enjoying? Enjoying stool. It is very good for him enjoyment. But it is not for enjoyment for you. You'll..., that, "Oh, what a nasty animal it is. It is eating stool." But he is enjoying.

So this is the business of God, thankless task. Everyone wants to enjoy life in a different way, and he has to find out a particular type of body. In the human form of body you cannot eat stool. Your mouth, your hands, your legs are differently made. So for eating stool, you must have a particular type of body, mouth, taste, tongue, everything different. Then you will enjoy stool. A tiger, his body is different because he wants to enjoy fresh blood from another animal. So he has got a different type of body. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, nānā joni sadā phire kadarya bhakṣaṇa kare, kadarya bhakṣaṇa kare. We get different types of body and we eat different types of all nasty things. Nasty things. Because we have got a particular type of body. But actual human body is that, Kṛṣṇa conscious body. As Kṛṣṇa says,

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

[Bg. 9.26]



Kṛṣṇa says, "Give me patraṁ puṣpam, vegetables, flowers, grains, milk." So you can prepare hundreds and thousands of preparations from these article, and you take the remnants of foodstuffs of Kṛṣṇa, that is human life. Not to eat kadarya, kadarya, nasty things. That is not human life. So if you continue to eat all the kadaryas, then you get ultimately the body of a hog, no discrimination even for stool. That is the laws of nature.



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



Prakṛti, nature, will give you chance, "All right, you want this?" Mind... You are creating... Mind is the creating force.



So if you create a certain type of body, next life you get a body. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram, sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6]. So similarly, if we are going to create another body by thinking and feeling and willing in this life, why not get a body like Kṛṣṇa? That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Think of Kṛṣṇa. Think of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa's advice. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Kṛṣṇa wants that you come back home, but you have to get the body. How you can get the body? Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. You simply think of Kṛṣṇa. Don't think of the hog or hoglike animals. You think of Kṛṣṇa. You have to think something. Why not think Kṛṣṇa, so nice figure, no, so attractive figure? So śrotavyaḥ, and thinking. Sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. The... Hear also. Unless you hear about Kṛṣṇa, how you can become...? How your mind can be absorbed if you do not know what is Kṛṣṇa?

So Kṛṣṇa is describing Himself. Kṛṣṇa-kathā. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission is therefore kṛṣṇa-kathā. Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. This is the mission. What Kṛṣṇa says, you just preach. You become spiritual master. That is not very difficult. Everyone can become spiritual master. Kṛṣṇa's speaking is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. You simply repeat what Kṛṣṇa says. You become spiritual master. It is not very difficult. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī mām. You simply say that "You become devotee of Kṛṣṇa." Where is the difficulty? No difficulty. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhaktaḥ. You say, "You become Kṛṣṇa's bhakta." Actually, we are doing that. We are not doing any miraculous thing. People say that "Swamiji, you have done miracles." But what miracles I have done? I am simply repeating Kṛṣṇa's words. That's all. So everyone can do that. Everyone can take this matter very seriously. His life will be successful. He will make others successful. It is so nice thing.

Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, tasmād sarvātmā bhagavān. You must speak about Bhagavān. You must know what is Bhagavān, that Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. There are many Bhagavāns. That's all right. Or incarnation of Bhagavān. But Bhāgavata says, ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Particularly says that "All the incarnations are described, but at the end, the Bhāgavata points out that 'There are so many Bhagavāns.' " That's all right. Not so many. I mean not everyone. Not pantheism, not like that. Bhagavān has got innumerable incarnations. They have been described, but particularly pointing out that "Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. And Kṛṣṇa also says in Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "My dear Dhanañjaya, I am the Supreme. There is nobody superior to Me." Aham ādir hi devānām: [Bg 10.2] "I am the origin of all the devas." Devas means, principle devas, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. So Kṛṣṇa is the origin of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. And what to speak of others. Aham ādir hi devānām. And so many things there are.

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



One who understands that "Here is Supreme Personality of Godhead," He is budha, he is in knowledge. Budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ.



So that bhāva required. Unless we understand what is God, what is His nature, how He acts, what is our duty, what is our relationship, then we are nothing better than cats and dogs, simply... śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi [SB 2.1.2], simply talking, talking, talking, and reading and reading, but no understanding of God. This is useless life, cats' and dogs' life. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is saving people from becoming cats and dogs just to make them human being.

Thank you very much. (end)



740613SB.PAR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.5

-

Paris, June 13, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.) Translation: "O descendant of Bharata, one who desires to be free from all desires must hear, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries."



Prabhupāda:



tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



So who does not want abhayam? Abhayam means fearlessness. Everyone wants. Because by material nature, we have got four positions. One position is always fearful, "What will happen next?" Even the big man, President Nixon, he is also fearful, "What will happen next?" Because so many charges are being brought against him, although he is on the very exalted position, President of USA, but he has, he is also always fearful. This is the nature, material nature. Can anyone say that he is not fearful? Is it possible? Then what to speak of us. As we require to eat something... This is material existence, eating. Then after eating, rest, sleeping. Then after rest, sex indulgence. Similarly, fearfulness.



So here it is recommended, icchatām akuto 'bhayam: "One who desires to this fearfulness and they do not make any arrangement how to get out of this fearfulness, they are not human beings." Human being is always takes precaution how to save oneself. Although it is natural, everyone is fearful, but at the same time, it is the effort of the human being to see that he may be saved from the cause of fearfulness. Therefore it is said, icchatā abhayam. Abhayam means no fear. If anyone wants no more to be fearful, then for him the prescribed duty is here that tasmāt, "Therefore," bhārata, "O descendant of Mahārāja Bharata..." Parīkṣit Mahārāja belonged to the dynasty of King Bharata. King Bharata, from whose name the Bhāratavarṣa, the word Bhāratavarṣa has come. This planet is called Bhāratavarṣa. This planet, earthly planet, is called Bhāratavarṣa because it was ruled over by the King Bharata. Gradually, the original Vedic culture lost, Aryan, Aryan family... You French people, you are also Aryan family, but the culture is lost now. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is actually reviving the original Aryan culture. Bhārata. We are all inhabitants of Bhāratavarṣa, but as we lost our culture, it became divided. Now it is divided into so many countries: "This is India," "This is France," "This is Germany," "This is this," "This is this." But formerly, the whole planet was known as Bhāratavarṣa. One culture, Vedic culture, one flag. Now they have increased hundreds and thousands of flags. So actually, if you want United Nations, unity, then you must take this culture, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, again to become Bhārata. That will save the situation.

This one culture means politically, one flag; religiously, one God, Kṛṣṇa; and to understand Kṛṣṇa, one scripture, Bhagavad-gītā; and one work, one work: simply to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. So this is oneness. And if you want at least to become free from all fearful condition, then you should always memorize or remember: Whom? Sarvātmā. Sarvātmā means one who is the living force of everyone. He is called sarvātmā. There is living force. I have got living force, you have got living force, everyone. But wherefrom the living force is coming? From Kṛṣṇa. Bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg 7.10]. Sarvātmā. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of the living force. He is the supreme living force. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. This is all stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: "All these living entities, they are My part and parcel." Just like a man having many sons, he can claim that "They are all my sons," similarly, Kṛṣṇa can claim that "All living entities, they are My sons." That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



Aham, Kṛṣṇa says, that "I am the seed-giving father of all living entities." "Of all" means sarva-yoniṣu, in different forms, in different species of life.



This outward dress is different. Somebody has become ant and somebody has become elephant or bigger than that, whole fish. Another fish there is timiṅgila. That perhaps we have not seen. Whale fish, some of them have seen. It is just like as big as a big house. And still, whale fish, just like you swallow up some small nut, they are called timiṅgila. So there are so many varieties of life. We do not know. But we know from the śāstras. In the śāstra we can know. Therefore we should consult Vedic literature to have full knowledge. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi: "In the water there are 900,000 species of life." Now, who can deny it? If you deny, then I shall tell you that "Go and count." (laughs) But we can get the full knowledge from the śāstra. This is called Vedic knowledge. Everything is complete.

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

[MU 1.2.12]



So you learn from the Vedic literature. Every information is there. And all the Vedic literature is summarized in this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3]. Nigama. Nigama, the Vedic literature... Vedic literature, it is compared with desire tree. Every word used in the Vedic literature is peculiar to the ordinary man. But desire tree, they have no experience. But there is a tree which is called desire tree, kalpa-taru. What is the business of the desire tree? Now, desire tree means whatever you desire, you get from that tree. There is tree. That desire tree is there in Kṛṣṇa's loka. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa [Bs. 5.29]. There is also, in the spiritual world, there are trees, but each tree is a desire tree. And we have no experience what is desire tree. You can get anything from that tree. That is called desire. So these Vedas is considered as the desire tree, means any kind of knowledge you want, it is complete there perfectly, any kind, either spiritual or material, any department of knowledge. And that is called desire tree. All kinds of knowledge, you can achieve from the Vedic language. There is Dhanur-veda, Āyur-veda, Jyotir-veda and all kinds. Veda means knowledge. So for military art, if you want to consult Vedic literature, you will get complete information, perfect. Similarly, Jyotir-veda. Jyoti means the luminaries in the sky, the stars. You can get. We are trying to go to the moon planet and wasting our time and energy, but if you consult Vedas, you get full information of the moon planet, sun planet or any other planet. There are millions and millions of trillions of planets. You can get all, Brahmaloka, up to the topmost planet. Jyotir-veda. That is called Jyotir-veda. And the Dhanur-veda. Āyur-veda. Āyuḥ means duration of life. And nobody wants to be diseased. So that means medical science. That is also fully there.



So this is the prescription given by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, "If you want to become without any fear..." Because the material life means we are all full of fearfulness. And therefore Kṛṣṇa, the supreme father of everyone, of all living entities, in all forms, sarvātmā, He says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "I am the seed-giving father of all these living entities." Just like father impregnates the mother by giving the seed, similarly, this material world, material nature, is our... This body is also material. Similarly, this huge material cosmic manifestation is supposed to be the mother, and the father is God, or Kṛṣṇa, who impregnates this seed of the living entities, and therefore, when there is creation, they come out as children of this material world. Just like a woman is pregnant and the child comes out, similarly, this material world is impregnated by the seed-giving father. So that is a different article from this matter. Otherwise, why a woman does not become pregnant automatically? Why? Can anyone answer? Why the seed-giving father is necessary? Let women produce children automatically. No, that is not possible. Therefore, for producing all these living entities in different forms of life, the seed-giving father is required, and that is God, Kṛṣṇa. Is there any bad logic? There is confirmation in the śāstra. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā: [Bg. 14.4] "I am the seed-giving father." And is it possible to produce life without the father? Is it possible? Then why these rascal scientists say that "Now we shall produce life"? How you can do it? It is not possible. This is rascaldom. Because we are living entities, therefore even in the Christian world the Supreme Lord God is accepted as the supreme father. "O father, give us our daily bread." It is very good, accepting the Supreme Lord, the supreme father. Everyone must accept. That is human life. That is human knowledge. That is common sense knowledge, that "If I am produced by my father, so, so many living entities, wherefrom they have come? They have come from the supreme father." Sarvātmā. He is called sarvātmā. Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca.

So if you want freedom from this fearfulness or this material existence... Material existence means struggle for existence. This is material. Everyone has struggle: "I want to stay. I want to..." In your country there has been so much fight, the French Revolution and so many fighting, fighting between the Protestant and the Catholic. And your Napoleon Bonaparte, he also fought. So fighting, this is called struggle for existence. Everyone wants to exist, and he has to fight. At least, we have to fight with the winter season. If there is no fighting, so at least there must be fighting with the winter season or summer season. Without fighting, you cannot stay. Without fighting, you cannot stay. That is called struggle for existence and survival of the fittest. You must be fit. This is called material world. And spiritual world means there is no fight; simply friendship, that's all. This is spiritual world. Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha. Kuṇṭha means "anxiety," and vaikuṇṭha means "without anxiety."

So we have been put into this place of anxiety on account of our rebellious condition against God. That is the cause of all material existence. Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. We should know this, that "Why we are put into this condition of struggle for existence, always fearfulness anxiety? Why we are put into this condition? We don't want it." This is human life. When this inquiry will come to a human being, then he is human being. Why? So long this "Why?" question does not come, he is animal. The animal does not question that "Why I am put into the slaughterhouse? Why I have brought, I have been brought here to be slaughtered?" Animal. Similarly, if a human being does not understand that "I have been put into this material world for being slaughtered by the laws of material nature. Never mind I am Napoleon or an ordinary man, I will be slaughtered..." Therefore it is called martya-loka, "the universe of being slaughtered." Nobody wants. Just like the animal does not want to be slaughtered, but he is, by force, it is slaughtered. Similarly, nobody wants death, but we are forced. Even such a big man like Napoleon, he wanted to complete that arch, but he was slaughtered before his desire was fulfilled. This is material nature. You must be slaughtered before his desire was fulfilled. This is material nature. You must be slaughtered as soon as required.

Therefore it is said here that icchatā abhayam: "Anyone, if he wants fearlessness, saved from being slaughtered, then he must do this." What is that? Sarvātmā bhagavān īśvaraḥ: "The Supreme Lord who is the origin of all living entities, sarvātmā, and He is Bhagavān." Bhagavān means all-powerful, all-opulences. He can do anything and everything. That is Bhagavān. Not that imitation rascals who claim that "I am God," but he cannot do anything-not that kind of Bhagavān. Bhagavān means all-powerful. Whatever He likes, He can do. Ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa, full of six opulences. That is called Bhagavān.

aiśvaryasya samagrasya

vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva

ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itīṅganā

(Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47)



Bhagavān definition. Everything has definition. Nothing to be accepted blindly. Aiśvaryasya, richness. So Bhagavān means who has got the complete riches. He is called Bhagavān. Now, I have got some money, you have got some money, he has got some money, but nobody can claim that "I have got all the money." No, that is not possible. So one who possesses all the money, that is Bhagavān. Similarly, money, strength, beauty, intelligence, knowledge and vairāgya, when you find out such a person... You can find out some very big rich man in this material world, but you cannot say that he is the supreme richest man. That is not possible. You will find another man richer than him. You will find another rich. In this way, if you are very scholar, researching, you research. When you come to a person where you see that nobody is richer than him, that is Bhagavān. That is God. That is God.



So if you have got the energy to search out such person, that is Bhagavān. It is not difficult. The definition is there. Here there is competition. Not only Bhagavān, but īśvara. Īśvara means controller. Everyone is īśvara. I also am controlling this institution. Or somebody is controlling his office, his factory, his kingdom. Just like President Nixon, he is controlling the United States. So all of us, more or less, we are īśvara, controller. Everyone. Just like this mother, she is controlling the small child. So she is also īśvara, means she is controlling. So anyone who has controlling power... So God has given everyone a little controlling power. In that sense every one of us, īśvara. But here it is said, bhagavān īśvaraḥ: "the supreme controller." Supreme controller means we are controllers, but we are controlled by somebody else. But the Bhagavān Īśvara means He is no more controlled by anyone. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is described. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ: "The supreme controller is Kṛṣṇa." Sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1].

So īśvara and hari. Hari means if you surrender to such īśvara... You are being controlled. Foolishly, we are thinking, "I am free." How you can be free? The biggest personality in this country, Napoleon Bonaparte, he was not free. And how you can be free? This is misconception. Nobody can be free. Everyone is controlled. But we are rebelled, "No, I don't want to. I don't want to be controlled." But you will be controlled. Just like in a state, if you don't want to be controlled by the state laws, the state will force you into the prison house to be controlled. This is our position. You cannot be free. Therefore freedom is not good for us. Just like the small child. If the child is given freedom, he will simply create havoc. So it is not to be given freedom, must be controlled. Similarly, all living entities, being child of God, we must voluntarily put ourself to be controlled by God. That is perfection of life. Don't try to be falsely free. That is not possible. Just like the mother. She will never give freedom to the child, because that is not good for him. It should not be. Anyone who is weak, he must not be given freedom. That is good for him. Similarly, we are weak. God is great. God is all-powerful. We are very teeny. We have no power. Therefore our normal life is voluntarily accept the controlling power of God. That is human life. And God comes and He pleads, He requests that "My dear boy, why you are struggling here? You will never be happy." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You have manufactured so many plans to be happy, but you will never be happy. Therefore your only business is that you come under My control and you will be happy." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ: "I will give you all happiness." This is the sum and substance of Bhagavad-gītā. And anyone who agrees to be controlled, then success of life begins from that point, when he agrees. Unfortunately, at the present moment the whole world population has been taught in such a way that they do not want to be controlled. Therefore there is always chaotic condition.

So here is the solution, that if you want to be saved from this chaotic condition of life, if you want to be free from all anxieties, then your business is śrotavyaḥ: "You hear about the supreme controller, Kṛṣṇa." And for hearing about the supreme controller we have got eighty books like that. Not one, two, three, four-eighty books. So if you are actual intelligent, if you are actually scientist, if you are actually philosopher, read these books. That is called śrotavyaḥ. Hear about the supreme controller. Not that simply God is there. Just try to understand how God is there. That you will find in this literature. There is no other literature throughout the whole world. You will find here. Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. Not only hearing like dull. As soon as hear, if you are... Then you spread this knowledge. Kīrtitavyaḥ: "My dear sir, there is God. God is like this. I have heard from the authority." That is called kīrtitavyaś ca, preaching. First of all hearing. Without hearing, how you will preach? So this is called śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23], another name. Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca. And smartavyaḥ. As soon as you become expert hearer and expert, I mean, chanter, then you will remember always, smartavyaḥ, as is here. And as soon as you will always remember Kṛṣṇa, then there is no more fear, finished. That is life.

Thank you very much. (end)



740614SB.PAR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.6

-

Paris, June 14, 1974



Nitāi: "The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete knowledge of matter and spirit, by practice of mystic powers, or by perfect discharge of occupational duty, is to remember the Personality of Godhead at the end of life."



Prabhupāda: Ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. At the time of death, if you can remember Nārāyaṇa-Nārāyaṇa or Kṛṣṇa, the same thing-then your life is successful, whatever you do. In Bengal there is a proverb, it is called bhajana kara sādhana kara murte janle hoya.(?) Means you may be very big stalwart spiritualist or yogis, or there are so many big, big things, so whatever you do, that is all right. Because they say that "Everything is leading to the Supreme, this way or that way." That has been described here, sāṅkhya-yoga, karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga or dhyāna-yoga. So many things they have manufactured, that's all right. And you say that "Whatever path we may follow, ultimately we go to the same goal." That is very nice, provided if you actually go to the same goal. Otherwise, it is misleading. That is describe here, that never mind. You say that "Whatever path one may take, it leads to the same goal." We accept it. That is described here. Ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Whatever you have done may be very good, but at the time of death, if you forget Nārāyaṇa, then it's all useless, all useless.



Because that is the point, at the time of death what is your mentality. At that time, if your mentality is Nārāyaṇa, then it is successful. You will be transferred to the spiritual world and be associates with the Nārāyaṇa. You get the complete perfection. But at the time of death, if you think of your dog, then you go to become a dog. Finished. All your sāṅkhya-yoga and philosophy and yoga practice-all go to hell. You become a dog. That is wanted. So unless you practice... If... That is the point, that one has to remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of death. Then why not directly practice? This is practice. The Deity is there, the form of Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa, is there. If you always be engaged in Lord Kṛṣṇa's service, you have got the impression of Kṛṣṇa always within your heart. And if you continue it some way or other, then your life is successful. Otherwise big, big talks, nose pressing and keeping the head down, and... You can do that, waste your time in that way. But whether it is guaranteed that at the time of your death you shall remember Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa? That is wanted. Ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. The Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, the authority says.

So this Bengali proverb... So bhajana kara sādhana kara murte janla haya.(?) You are very good transcendentalist. You are practicing so many nice things. That's all right. But do you know how to die? That is the point. If you die with God consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then your life is successful. (reads:) So "Nārāyaṇa is the transcendental Personality of Godhead beyond the material creation." Nārāyaṇa is not a person. The Māyāvādīs say, "Nārāyaṇa is also person like us. So I can remember anyone. I can remember my wife, I can remember my husband or my child. Still, I am going to the same goal." No, no, no. That is not possible. Therefore it is particularly said, ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Not your other friend or other demigod or other, no. Nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ. So "Everything that is created, sustained and at the end annihilated is within the compass of mahat-tattva and material principle." Anything.

That... In another place it is said that,

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



That is also referred here that etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyām. Big, big sannyāsīs, they are discussing sāṅkhya-yoga, metaphysics. Or analyzing what is spirit, what is matter. Neti neti: "Not this." This is called sāṅkhya-yoga. And sāṅkhya-yoga, original sāṅkhya-yoga means bhakti-yoga. Because the sāṅkhya-yoga system philosophy was spoken by Kapiladeva, the son of Devahūti. That is purely bhakti-yoga. Later on, one atheist, he also assumed the name of Kapila and discussed sāṅkhya-yoga. That is materialistic analysis. The sāṅkhya-yoga system of philosophy is very much liked in Europe and Western countries because it is a system of metaphysics, analyzing the whole cosmic manifestation. There are twenty-four tattvas. Just like these five tattvas, elements, material: earth, water, air, fire, ether. Then ten senses: five senses for acquiring knowledge and five senses for enjoying. And the five, five, ten. And five elements, fifteen. Then five principles of enjoyment. They are called talk, touching, smelling, like that. Anyway, there are twenty-four elements, and mind, intelligence, ego, and the principal, soul. In this way there are twenty-four elements. The sāṅkhya yogis, they very much analyze this study. They are of the opinion that besides these twenty-four elements, there is nothing more. No. There is. The twenty-four elements, one who is combining and annihilating, that is the Supreme Lord, pradhāna, Viṣṇu.



So sāṅkhya-yoga, either you take this Kapiladeva's philosophical principle or that Kapiladeva, that's all right. But after analyzing, if you do not find out Nārāyaṇa, the creator of this material atmosphere, material elements, then it is useless laboring so much, hard, for analyzing. Just like the chemist or physicist, they are also analyzing the material elements within the laboratory. But that does not mean they are going to all be liberated at the end of life. No. Or if you want to be liberated... Because after all, you are spirit soul. You are entangled with these twenty-four elements. So your real business is how to get out of it. That is wanted. Suppose if you are a diseased fellow, or you analyze the disease. Just like in the, what is called, pathology. It is called pathology. The doctor examine your blood and he finds out, "This is infection, that is infection, this is this, this is this." That's all right. But simply by understanding the blood analysis, pathology, does not mean it is cured. The cure is different. Similarly, these sāṅkhya-yogī philosophers, they may analyze very critically. Even they can count the atoms which is composing this whole material atmosphere. But that does not mean you have understood the original force which has created all these things. That is discussed here. Etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyām. So you become a very big scientist, very big physicist, chemist. That is all right. But you must know how to remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of your death.

An interesting story has been described by our Satsvarūpa Mahārāja in the Back to Godhead: The learned scholar and the boatman. The boatman... In Bengal there are many rivers, and so people generally transport by boat service. So a learned scholar from Calcutta, say, was going home in the village on a boat, and he was very happy. So he was asking the boatman, "My dear boatman, do you know what are these stars, this astronomy, how they are working?" "No, sir, I do not know." "Oh, your life is twenty-five percent lost. You do not know anything." Then after some time, "You know the geology, how this earth, water, they are working?" "No, sir, I am poor man. What can I know?" "Oh, your fifty percent of your life is lost." Then all of a sudden there was a cloud, black cloud on the sky, and there was storm. Then at that time the boatman asked, "Sir, do you know how to swim?" "No, I do not know." "Then one hundred percent you have lost.(laughter) You are going to be drowned." He jumped and he drowned.

So this is the point. So you are trying to understand the whole analytical study of the material world. That is very good. But if you do not know how to remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of death, then you are going to be cats and dogs. That's all. Because you are very fond of dog. Especially in the Western countries, every gentleman, every lady has a dog. So what will you think at the time of death? Dog. So that is nature's law. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. You will find in the Bhagavad-gītā. At the time of death, the mental condition which you have created, that will carry you to the next body. Therefore don't create your mind doggish. Make it Kṛṣṇa conscious. And that is very nice. Then at the time of death you remember Kṛṣṇa and you will be transferred to the Kṛṣṇaloka. That is described: etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyām. Therefore it is advised, "Whatever you may be, it doesn't matter. Practice Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That will save you." Otherwise... Janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām. Janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām ante.

This janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ. Janma-lābhaḥ. Janma-lābhaḥ means getting a type of births. So there are different types of birth. The so-called scientists, physicists, they do not know why there are so many varieties of life. Why not only human being? Why there is cat, there is dog, there is rat, there is fly, and there is serpent, there is tree, there is creeper, there is fish, there is so many, 8,400,000 species of life? So they are also taking their birth by father and mother. The insect or the cats and dog or human being, the process of birth is the same, father and mother, anywhere you go. Therefore one Vaiṣṇava poet has sung, janame janame sabe pitā mātā pāya, kṛṣṇa guru nahi mile bhaja hari ei. Everywhere, either you take birth as man or cat or dog or insect, there is father, mother. Father, mother you will get in any type of birth, but not guru and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore this birth is meant for achieving guru and Kṛṣṇa. Father, mother you will get, anyone. Even you become a serpent there is father and mother. That is the way of birth. Therefore janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. Even in human society, every man is born a śūdra. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. He requires a second birth, by saṁskāra, reforming. Just like we give second birth, initiation. The second birth, the father is the spiritual master and the mother is the Vedas. As the first birth is taken by the material father and mother, similarly, second birth, dvija is possible by the spiritual master, the father and Vedic knowledge, mother. This father, mother. So that is required. That is possible in the human form of life. A cat is born by father and mother; you are also born by father... But the cat is not, dog is not eligible to take the second father and mother. That is not possible.

So if we do not take the privilege of accepting the second father and mother, then what is the difference between your birth and dog's birth? That is stated: janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām. You have got this human form of body, the best body. That is the instruction of all Vedic literature, simply stressing. But what is this material civilization? Simply working like cats and dogs. The same eating, sleeping, sex intercourse and defending. There are so many buildings in your city, Paris. Where is the culture to make the human life perfect? You have got very nice building. There is intelligence. So many nice buildings. People come to see the building. But that is not all. Simply if you utilize your intelligence... Certainly there is intelligence. But if you use your intelligence for the simply material activities, then you are not intelligent. You are a fool.

That is described here. Janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām. You must make a cultural institution where people may take education how to remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of death. That is required. Otherwise useless. What is the value? You waste your so much time to construct a very nice house, but at the time of death, you could not remember Nārāyaṇa. You remember your very nice friend, dog. Then what is the value? What is the value? They do not understand this, that there is life after death. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ: [Bg. 2.13] "As you are changing your body from childhood to boyhood, boyhood..." It is very simple philosophy. The rascal will not understand. I am changing my body. You may say "Growth or..." But it is changed. I had a childhood body; that body is different from my this present body. It is changed. Therefore I have already changed my body so many ways, so many times. And I change my body after this body is no more useful. That is going on. No more useful. That is the... The example is given. I am putting on this sweater, but when it is torn, no more useful, I get it up. I get another, new. Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya navāni gṛhṇāti naro 'parāṇi [Bg. 2.22]. Everything is clearly stated. This is dress only. This body is dress. Therefore we do not give on the bodily dress. We give stress on the soul. We do not make any distinction that "This is Hindu dress, Muslim dress, Christian dress, white dress, black dress." No, no, we have nothing to do with the dress. We have to do with the soul within the dress. He is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. He has forgotten Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he is suffering.

Therefore our movement is to revive this Kṛṣṇa consciousness and go back to home, back to Godhead. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. So it is very important movement. Those who are very intelligent, they can take to it. Or you become intelligent or not intelligent, but know, at least, unless one is pious, he cannot take to this movement. But somehow or other, if you take this movement, then your this valuable life is successful. Janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām. It is not cats' and dogs' life. It is human form of... Utilize it properly. Properly means to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, not dog conscious, cat conscious or this conscious or... No. These will not help you. Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then you will be able to remember Kṛṣṇa at the time of death and your this valuable life is properly utilized. Janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām. You have got very nice valuable body, but it will be properly utilized if you learn how to remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of death.

Thank you very much. (end)



740615SB.PAR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.7

-

Paris, June 15, 1974



Nitāi: "O King Parīkṣit, mainly the topmost transcendentalists who are above the regulative principles and restrictions take pleasure in describing the glories of the Lord."



Prabhupāda:



prāyeṇa munayo rājan

nivṛttā vidhi-ṣedhataḥ

nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma

guṇānukathane hareḥ

[SB 2.1.7]



So there is a stage which is called paramahaṁsa stage. At that time, one is not very strictly following the regulative principles. Not that they're not following, but they're above all regulative principles. But we should not imitate that, that "Now we have become paramahaṁsa and we can neglect all regulative principles." No. The paramahaṁsa stage is described here. If you simply imitate, that "Now I have become paramahaṁsa, I do not require to follow rules and regulations"... But you must prove that you are paramahaṁsa.



Therefore what is that paramahaṁsa stage? That is nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma guṇānukathane hareḥ. His only business is to glorify Kṛṣṇa. He does not do that... Not that "I have become paramahaṁsa. Let me eat and sleep." No. The symptom is that he cannot waste a moment without glorifying Kṛṣṇa. That is paramahaṁsa. At that time, you can know, that when you cannot remain even for a single moment without describing Kṛṣṇa, then you can know that you are on the paramahaṁsa stage. No attachment anything material; simply attachment for Kṛṣṇa. Then you can give up the regulative principles. Not before that. Don't imitate. Unless you come to that stage, positive stage... It is not that simply negative. Negative means you must stand on a positive platform. Therefore those who are Śūnyavādī, simply negative... The other day, some Zen Buddhist came. He said that "to become desireless." These nonsense people, they do not know it is impossible to become desireless. They are thinking... Therefore they are disturbed always. It is not possible to become desireless. You... That is negative post, nirvāṇa. That is Buddha philosophy, nirvāṇa. "Stop these material nonsense activities." But unless he has got positive activities, how he can give up this nonsense? Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. You must give good engagement. Otherwise, he'll go on committing all nonsense. Just like you, you have been given good engagement, Deity worship and so many other things. You are engaged. Therefore you have no time to divert your attention for nonsense things. Simply artificially, if you want to stop, no. The U.S. government, they tried to stop this intoxication habit, LSD, millions of dollars. Not a single man was stopped. Not a single man. And here in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as soon as they come, immediately... Why? Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate. When he understands that he is better intoxication, "Why shall I go to LSD?" That is required.

So here it is said, prāyeṇa munayo rājan, "My dear King," nivṛttā vidhi-ṣedhataḥ... Vidhi and niṣedha. They are two things. We say, "You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra," and prohibit, "No illicit sex," negative and positive. So vidhi means "do's" and niṣedha, "do not's." So this is the beginning of life. Don't try to become paramahaṁsa, munayaḥ, from the very beginning. Then you'll fall flat. That is not required. When you actually be situated nairguṇya... Nairguṇya means above the material nature. That is called nairguṇya. This material nature is called traiguṇya. Traiguṇya means three modes of material nature: goodness, passion and ignorance. So when you become above these three guṇas, then there is possibility of becoming nairguṇya.

Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna, traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. Vedas, they are dealing with these three guṇas, Vedas, giving direction according to the guṇa-the sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So one who is in the sattva-guṇa, for them, there are six purāṇas. Sattva-guṇa, tamo-guṇa, rajo-guṇa. Eighteen purāṇas there are. Some of them are for the persons who are situated on the modes of goodness, and some of them are for the persons who are in rajo-guṇa, and some of them are for persons in tamo-guṇa. Just like in the Vedic śāstras, there is also recommendation to worship goddess Kali. That is for the tamo-guṇa, not for the sattva-guṇa. For the sattva-guṇa, the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa, Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa, Brahma-vaivarta-Purāṇa, Bhāgavata-Purāṇa, according to... Because knowledge has to be given to everyone, but according to his capacity. If one is in tamo-guṇa, you cannot say..., you cannot raise him immediately to the sattva-guṇa. Tamo-guṇa is meat-eating, drinking. These are tamo-guṇa, in the darkness. So the Vedas has given chance to them, "All right, you want to eat meat? All right, you eat meat. But offering to the goddess Kālī." Means restriction. It is not required, but the rascal will not hear immediately. Therefore give him some concession, "All right, you can eat meat by offering sacrifice..., not the cow, but one lower animal which is useless, like goats." Generally, goat and the chicken. They do that.

But it is not meant for the sattva-guṇa. Sattva-guṇa's prescription is different. Rajo-guṇa's prescription is different. On the whole, we are always mixed up with the sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. That is our material position. Therefore sometimes we come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness when we are in sattva-guṇa. Again sometimes fall down. The tamo-guṇa attacks, rajo-guṇa attacks. So we have to become above these guṇas. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. Arjuna advised, Kṛṣṇa advised him that "You become above these three guṇas." So how it can be done? It can be done simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa. This is nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma guṇānukathane hareḥ. If you simply engage yourself only hearing about Kṛṣṇa, then you are nistraiguṇya. This is the process, simple, no other business.

So we have given you so many books. Don't sleep. Don't waste a single moment. Of course, you have to sleep. Reduce it as much as possible. Eating, sleeping, mating and defending-reduce it. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **. That is the example given by the Gosvāmīs. Nidrā, āhāra and vihāra. Āhāra means eating, and vihāra means sense enjoyment, and nidrā means sleeping. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau: "Conquered over." That is spiritual platform. No more sleeping, no more eating, no more sex life. That is perfection. And one who can conquer over these three things, eating, sleeping and sex life, he's fearless, automatically. There is no requirement of defense because they can meet any situation. That is paramahaṁsa stage. Nivṛttā. Munayaḥ prāyeṇa munayo rājan nivṛttā vidhi. For them, there is no regulation. Don't imitate, that "I have become..." Some of our students exhibited that "There is no need of regu... We are all paramahaṁsas." Paramahaṁsa not; rascal number one. Here is the test. When you'll not be influenced by the material qualities, rajo-guṇa, sattva-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. And the test is that nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau, that conquering over the sleeping, nidrā. First thing is mentioned here. Sleeping and eating and sense enjoyment. Śrī-caitanya-mahāprabhu-guṇānukathane.

These Gosvāmīs, they were always writing books. Guṇānukathane. Guṇa. What is the writing books? When we write these books, what is that? We are simply describing the different activities and attributes of Kṛṣṇa. Anukathane. Anu means not whimsically. Following the superior authorities. You cannot write anything which is not approved by the superior authorities. Therefore, we have to give examples, quotation from the śāstra, that "What I am speaking, it is supported by the śāstras. Not that I have inventive power-I have, I can do, I can write anything I like." That is nonsense. Anukathane. Anukathane means you must hear from the authority perfectly. Then try to write. Not that you write whimsically, whatever you like. That is not allowed. And that will not be accepted. Therefore, in the beginning, in this chapter, we learned this word, that varīyān eṣa rājan...,

varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



Ātmavit-sammataḥ: "It is approved by the realized souls." Not that whimsically I do something or you question something. No. It must be... The question must be approved by ātmavit, self-realized person, and the answer should be given by the self-realized person, ātmavit-sammataḥ. This is wanted.



So we have no independence. As in materially also, we have no independence. In... There is no independence, either materially or spiritually. But we're falsely thinking to become independent. That is called illusion, māyā. The rascals do not know that there is no independence at all, either materially or spiritually. Just like the outlaws, they have no independence, either criminally or civilly. When he's a civil citizen, good citizen, there is no independence, and when he's criminal, there is no independence. So why he's thinking that "I shall act this work criminally and become independent"? That is not possible. And because they cannot understand it, they are rascals. What he's thinking, independence, that is illusion. Where is, where is your independence? Illusion. Māyā. When you are under the strict rules and regulations of the material nature, how you are independent? Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. They think that to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, this is slave mentality. "I shall remain free." But where is your freedom, sir? That is illusion.

So there is... So long one is rascal, falsely thinking that he's independent, there must be the regulative principles, he must observe the regulative principles, vidhi-niṣedha. In this way, when he's actually situated in the transcendental platform, that is called nairguṇya-sthā\ h. Stha means situated. Tiṣṭhati iti stha: "One who stays." Not flickering. Permanently. Nairguṇya. This nairguṇya means devotional service. This is nairguṇya. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



Everything is there. So nairguṇya means one who is twenty-four hours engaged in devotional service, he's in the nairguṇya platform, no more influenced by these material qualities. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa [Bg. 14.26]. Avyabhicāreṇa means without any flaw, without any fault. Simply according to the restriction, or instruction of the śāstra and spiritual master, one is strictly following and engaged in devotional service. Then he is sa guṇān samatītyaitān [Bg. 14.26]. He can conquer or surpass over the three modes of material nature. And his stage is brahma-bhūtaḥ. Brahma-bhūyāya kalpate.



So when you are actually on the Brahman... Now, everyone can say, "I am now in the brahma-bhūtaḥ." The symptom is there. You cannot cheat. What is that? Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. If you are actually on the brahma-bhūtaḥ platform, then the symptom will be prasannātmā: Jolly, always. There will be no more moroseness. Always jolly. That is the first symptom. "Oh, I am now free from the material clutches." Because as soon as you are actually engaged in devotional service, there will be no more, I mean to say, punishment by the material nature. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śo... [Bg. 18.54]. Therefore he's always jubilant, prasannātmā. What is the meaning of prasannātmā? Prasannātmā means na śocati na kāṅkṣati. He does not desire anything, does not lament for anything. That is brahma-bhūtaḥ stage. If there is something lost, "Never mind. Kṛṣṇa desired loss. That's all right." And if there is gain, he does not jump over, "Oh, I have gained this. I have gained this." Like monkey. (laughter) No. Everything Kṛṣṇa's. I am engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. Suppose if there is some loss. So it is Kṛṣṇa's desire. And if there is some profit, it is Kṛṣṇa's money. I don't possess anything. Why shall I jump? Jump, of course, we can jump. "O Kṛṣṇa, we have gained so much thing, so many things for Kṛṣṇa." That is another... So na śocati na kāṅkṣati, samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Then he's equal to everyone. He understands that everyone is a spirit soul. Some way or other, he's entangled in this material body. So because I am now...Mad-bhakti... Prasannātmā na śocati, samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate par... Then he's fit for transcendental service to the Lord.

After being liberated from these traiguṇya, three material, one has to be situated in nistraiguṇya. Here it is stated, nairguṇya. Nairguṇya, nistraiguṇya. The same meaning. Nairguṇya-sthā ramante, enjoys life. As soon as you come to the platform of nairguṇya, without being infected by the three material qualities, then ramante, everything is pleasure. Ramante yogino 'nante. Therefore those who are yogis, who are bhaktas, bhakti-yogīs, they also enjoy life. It is not that we restrict that "Don't enjoy senses." This is not enjoyment. This is bondage. This is bondage. Suppose I am enjoying either illicit or legal sex life. I am become under bondage. Even it is legal sex life, I get children, so many things, I have got duty to the children. So either goodness or ignorance, this is bondage. This is bondage. Therefore one has to become above the traiguṇya. And that is called nairguṇya. Nairguṇya-sthā ramante. They also enjoy. What is that enjoyment? Ramante yogino 'nante. That is not limited enjoyment, for few minutes. No. Anante, eternal enjoyment. Ramante yogino 'nante. And that is satyānande, that is real ānanda. That is real bliss. When your ānanda does not stop, it continues, that is real ānanda. And the ānanda, or the pleasure, which is for few seconds or few minutes, that is not ānanda. That is illusion. Real ānanda is it will continue. It will never stop. It will never end. Therefore it is said, ramante yogino 'nante. Anante means unlimited. Ramante yogino 'nante satyānande. That is real happiness.

Iti rāma-padenāsau paraṁ brahmābhidhīyate [Cc. Madhya 9.29]. Because when we enter the platform of continuous blissfulness, ānanda, that is the connection with, that is the meaning of Rāma. The Rāma, Paraṁ Brahma. That means when one is situated in the service of the Paraṁ Brahma, then his life is successful. So here it is said, nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma guṇānukathane hareḥ. Then not a single moment is wasted without talking about Kṛṣṇa. Vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. In other, other place it is...: sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. So practice this. First of all, fix up your mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and that is called sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. So if your mind is fixed up, then other senses will act because other senses are acting under the leadership of the mind. Mind is your enemy and mind is your friend. When the mind is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that mind is your friend. And the mind, when it is engaged in other consciousness, that is your enemy. So you can create your mind-friend or enemy-according to your desire. If you fix up always... The Deity worship means to fix up your mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, always worshiping Kṛṣṇa. So therefore I am asking why there is no ankle bell. There must be ankle bell the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. So if you fix up your mind, then immediately, fix up your mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, immediately you are nairguṇya-stha, situated in the nairguṇya, transcendental platform.

In another place, it is also said,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Kṛṣṇa is situated within your heart. He's your best friend. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. He's always willing how your perfect welfare can be done. Kṛṣṇa is so nice friend. You are... I am taking the body of a hog. There is also Kṛṣṇa advising me. And when I am in the body of a human being, there also Kṛṣṇa is advising me. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. Therefore suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. He's friend not only of human being, even the hogs, dogs, cats-everyone. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. This is the science, one has to know. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. And suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati. So everyone is trying to become leader of the society, suhṛdam welfare actor, but that is impossible. Because he's a rascal, how he can become the friend? The, one's business is that he should make friendship with Kṛṣṇa and advise others also to make friendship with Kṛṣṇa. That is real leadership. That is real leadership. And the rascals, what the, he does not know what is his own benefit, and he has become a leader.



Sanātana Gosvāmī says, āpanāra hitāhita kichui nā jāni: "Sir, I was minister, and people used to say that I am very learned scholar, and this and that, but... I was also accepting, 'Oh...' But actually, since I am come in Your contact, I thought that 'What kind of leader I am? I do not know what is beneficial for me. I am such a leader. I am such a fool. I do not know my own benefit, and I want to become leader to lead others for benefit of life.' " Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. A blind man, he does not think that he's blind. How he can lead others, other blind men? But this is cheating. All these leaders, so-called rascal leaders, they are blind themselves. They do not know what is the aim of life, and they're becoming leader. And the leader, blind leader, and the blind follower, they're all going to hell. This is the position of the world.

So therefore we should be careful that don't imitate that "I am now become paramahaṁsa. I do not require to follow the rules and regulations. Let me do whatever I like." Don't do that. The test is there. Test is there, here. It is said, guṇānukathane hareḥ. When you are paramahaṁsa, then you have no other business than simply to hear about Kṛṣṇa, and chant about Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



700801SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.11

-

Los Angeles, August 1, 1970



Śrīla Prabhupāda Teaching Nṛsiṁha Prayers, (Govindam record plays)



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. Yes?



Karandhara: It's going to take a few minutes to get set up so should we just go ahead? It'll take a few minutes for the photographer to get set up, get ready.



Prabhupāda: He can take as we are going on. What is this? Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma... (pause) So when it is printed? I never saw it.



Dayānanda: From(?) New York.



Prabhupāda: Oh. Nice. Where is that slip yesterday you gave me? That mantra, nṛsiṁha-mantra? There was one extra mantra. You have got everyone, slip? This. (devotees repeat each word) Namas te, narasiṁhāya, prahlāda, āhlāda, dāyine, hiraṇyakaśipor, vakṣaḥ, śilā-ṭaṅka, nakhālaye.



namas te narasiṁhāya

prahlādāhlāda-dāyine

hiraṇyakaśipor vakṣaḥ-

śilā-ṭaṅka-nakhālaye



ito nṛsiṁhaḥ parato nṛsiṁho

yato yato yāmi tato nṛsiṁhaḥ

bahir nṛsiṁho hṛdaye nṛsiṁho

nṛsiṁham ādiṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye



(sings)



tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgaṁ

dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam

keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare

jaya jagadīśa hare, jaya jagadīśa hare



Again repeat the first mantra. (devotees repeat the first mantras and Śrīla Prabhupāda sings the second with them) The first one again repeat. (repeats) The meaning of this mantra, that I offer my humble obeisances to Lord Nṛsiṁha, who is the source of bliss to Prahlāda, but hiraṇyakaśipor vakṣaḥ. But his father Hiraṇyakaśipu, on his chest the nails of His finger is just like chisel cutting the stone. The same Personality of Godhead is prahlāda āhlāda-dāyine. Āhlāda means pleasure. For Prahlāda... Prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇāhlāda, prahlāda. A devotee is, being always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, naturally he is in blissfulness. Still more, when he meets or associates with his Lord, still more blissfulness. That is the position of the theist devotee. Whereas the atheist nondevotee, he's always feeling like a strike of the chisel, like what do you call? Stone cutting chisel. Nakha. Nakhālaye. Simply by the nails of His finger. All right. Where is that book? Now this Bhāgavatam. Yes. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. (with devotees-begins with chanting of verses S.B. 2.1.1 through 2.1.10) Then text number 11. (chanting responsively)



etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer nāmānukīrtanam

[SB 2.1.11]



Again. (chants verse with devotees) Again. (everyone repeats) Etan nirvidyamānānām. There are three classes of men. One class of men, karmīs, they are trying to enjoy the material resources. Icchatām, always desire. "I want this, I want this, I want this." And another class, they are con... or rather, what is called? Frustrated. After trying utmost, "I want this, I want this, I want this," when at the end do not get anything, he is frustrated. That is called nirvidyā. "I don't want." Or actually one is satiated or disgusted. "No more material world. I don't want it." They are called nirvidyamānānām. So the one class is trying to possess and another class is trying to renounce. "I don't want." And another class is akuto-bhayam. Akuto-bhayam. Who is akuto-bhayam? Akuto-bhayam means one who does not fear. And who does not fear? Because fearfulness is one of the items of our conditional life. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. Eating, sleeping, fearing, and mating. So who is without any fear? That means he's also liberated. He's not in the material platform, transcendental. Who is out of the limits of fearfulness.



So akuto-bhayam means the devotees. The devotees, just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, his father teased him in so many ways but he was not at all fearful. He was simply thinking of Nṛsiṁhadeva and he was fearless. So only the devotee who has fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he can be fearless. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati [SB 6.17.28]. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ means devotees who have dedicated their life to the service of Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Na kutaścana bibhyati. He does not fear in any condition of life. So here, icchatām akutaḥ. Icchatām means those who are desiring. Nirvidyamānānām means those who are not desiring, renouncing. And the other class, akuto-bhayam, fearless. And yoginām. Another class-mystic yogis. So generally, these four classes men are there. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that for all of them, either he is karmī or he is jñānī or he is yogi or he is bhakta. Karmī means fruitive worker, and jñānīs means empiric philosophers, and yogis, mystic, I mean to say, yogis, and bhaktas, and the devotees. Generally, these four classes of men.

So Śukadeva Gosvāmī gives his judgement. Nṛpa, "My dear king, for all these classes of men," nirṇītam, "it is already decided." This is Vedic conclusion. You haven't got to search out. You have to take information from the authority. So here Śukadeva Gosvāmī is authority, that "For all these classes of men this is decided conclusively." What is that? Harer nāmānukīrtanam. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Either you are jñānī, either you are yogi, either you are karmī, you desiring something or not desiring something, but you have got your objective, perfection of life. So if you want that, then chant Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare. Thank you very much.

Karandhara: We're going to pose. We're just about ready. Everyone can pose?



Prabhupāda: This is all right. Oh yes, special pose.



Karandhara: If everyone stands up and dances then we won't be able to... You can sit for just a minute longer.



Prabhupāda: So chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Sit down for a moment. Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa... Chant. Chant. (kīrtana) (end)





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 2.2: Lectures





681202SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.2.5

-

Los Angeles, December 2, 1968



Prabhupāda: (tapping microphone) Is it working?



cīrāṇi kiṁ pathi na santi diśanti bhikṣāṁ

naivāṅghripāḥ para-bhṛtaḥ sarito 'py aśuṣyan

ruddhā guhāḥ kim ajito 'vati nopasannān

kasmād bhajanti kavayo dhana-durmadāndhān

[SB 2.2.5]



This life of spiritual execution cannot be hampered by any material condition. From Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we understand that sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. That is the highest type of religious performances by which one can achieve the perfection of loving God. Yato bhaktir adhokṣaje. Bhakti means to offer transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord. Bhakti. Bhaj-dhātu sevayā(?). Bhaj. Bhaj-dhātu, it is a verb, bhaj. Bhaj means to render service just like servant renders service to the master, friend renders service to the friend, wife renders service to the husband, husband renders service to the wife. This service-rendering process is going on everywhere. Nobody is absolute that he does not render service to anyone. That is not possible. I have repeatedly explained that if somebody has no master to serve, he voluntarily accepts a cat or dog as his master to serve. The nice name is pet dog, but it is serving. The mother serves the child. So one who has no child, he takes the cat as her child and serves.



So the service mood is going on everywhere. But the highest perfection of service is when we learn to serve the Supreme Absolute Lord. That is called bhakti. And that bhakti execution of service to the Lord is ahaitukī. Just like we have got some little examples. This mother is serving the child not with any expectation. She loves to serve the child. She wants to see the child is in comfort, the child does not feel any discomfiture. That is her pleasure. There is no reason why she is loving. That is natural. Similarly, when we invoke our natural love for God, that is the highest perfection of religious principle. Ahaituky apratihatā. Apratihatā means it cannot be checked by any material condition. Just like we want to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa; this is service. This is the beginning of service, chanting the glories of the Lord, or praying the Lord, "Hare, O the energy of the Lord, Kṛṣṇa, O Lord, please engage me in Your service." This is the prayer. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, repeatedly, "Please engage me. Please engage me." But God can give you many things. Whatever you want, He is giving. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. He can give you even salvation, but very rarely He gives you the chance of serving Him.

So service is not an ordinary thing. So this is, this service is unimpaired, unchecked by any material condition. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he gives us some definition how you can be completely independent to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now our problem is eating-sleeping. Eating-sleeping. After sleeping, there is mating or fearing. These are the problems of bodily demands. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī recommends for a serious devotee, he says, cīrāṇi kiṁ pathi na santi. Cīrāṇi means worn-out, rejected garments. In your country it is very usual to find in the dustbin so many things are thrown away. So sometimes nice dress is also thrown away. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that if you have problem of dressing yourself, just pick up some old garments from the street. Cīrāṇi kiṁ pathi na santi. "All right. I get my garment. What about my food?" He said, cīrāṇi kiṁ pathi na santi diśanti bhikṣāṁ naivāṅghripāḥ para-bhṛtaḥ. Aṅghripāḥ means the living entity who eats by its leg. Just like we eat by our hand. Do you know what is that living entity who eats by the leg? Can you... Huh? No. Trees. Yes. Yes. The trees, they eat from the root. That is their eating process. You pour water on the root of the tree, and that water the whole tree sucks. That is their eating. Therefore they are called aṅghripāḥ. They drink their food, eatables, by the leg. So their qualification is para-bhṛtaḥ. Para-bhṛtaḥ means trees are meant for sustaining others. Trees. Just like a nice mango tree, it produces nice fruit, but it does not eat. It is for you. Para-bhṛtaḥ, maintains others. The tree gives shelter, the tree gives fruits. You cut trees for your purpose; it does not protest. Therefore the tree's life is dedicated for the service of others. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī says "Whether such nice living entity who has dedicated his life for others does not give you fruits?" So why you are thinking of your food problem? The food is there in the tree and the garment is on the street. Then where is my home, apartment? Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, ruddhā guhāḥ kim, "Whether the caves of the mountain are closed?" They are open for you. The caves of the mountain are open for you, the trees are there to supply you food, and people throw away old garments, that is your dress. And water? Water supply? Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, "Whether the rivers are dried up?" There is water. In this way he gives a very nice list so that you can become very independent. There is no problem for your bodily demands. But one has to practice. Formerly the saints, mendicants, sages, they used to practice like that, that not dependent on any condition. And so far God, God is within you. So you haven't got to go anywhere to search out God. God is with you, and you can be independent in this way.

So there is no problem for executing devotional service to the Lord. And that is the highest perfection of all religious principles. But we have to practice. And that is not possible in this age. This age is called Kali. It is very difficult age. People are not very much interested to the most important problem of life. They are alpāyuṣa. Prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ. People are short-living and manda. Manda means very slow for ultimate goal of life. The ultimate goal of life is to search out or is to reestablish your lost relationship with God. That is the mission of human life. Otherwise what is the difference between animal life and human life? The animal life, they are also busy for eating, sleeping, mating and defending. So if we human beings, we are also similarly busy, then what is the difference? So this sort of civilization, simply making nice arrangement for eating and sleeping and mating and defending, that is not practically human civilization. The human civilization is meant for searching out God. Na te viduḥ. They do not know, unfortunately. They have forgotten. But by good association, they can remember. Therefore this meeting of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Society's meeting is just to give people chance to associate with the Society and invoke their lost relationship with God. That is the missionary activities of this Society.

So that is the highest gift to the human society. There are so many welfare activities in the human society. People open hospitals, schools, colleges, charitable institution. They are nice. But the best contribution to the human society is to revive his lost relationship with God. Just like a rich man's son. Someway or other he has left his father's home and he's loitering here and there. Somebody finds him: "Oh, you are Mr. such and such. You are the son of such and such gentleman. He's very rich man. Why you are suffering? Come, come with me. I shall take to your father." So this is one kind of welfare activity. And another welfare activity, the same person who is loitering in the street, somebody says, "Oh, you are hungry. All right, come on. I shall give you some bread." That is also welfare activity, but this welfare activity, to get the lost son to his father, rich father, not ordinary father, that is the best service. Similarly, all living entities... As Kṛṣṇa claims in the Bhagavad-gītā... Kṛṣṇa claims,

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



In many places in the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa claims all living entities as His sons, parts and parcels. Just like your children, they are part and parcel of your body. They are not different from you. The same blood is running in his body. Similarly, our constitutional position is that the same blood of God is running in our body. We are not different in that way from God.



There are two kinds of philosophers. One class of philosopher, they say that we are one with God. Another class of philosopher says that we are different, God is different from living entity. But Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu has adjusted that we are simultaneously one and different. Just like the father and the son. The father is one with the son, but at the same time, the son is different from the father. The son cannot claim cent percent equality with the father. That is not possible. But the son's body is nondifferent from the father's body. Similarly, living entities, we are simultaneously one and different from God. One in this sense: that all the qualities that God has, the same qualities the living entity has. But the difference is God has all the qualities in fullness, and so far we are concerned, we have got all the godly qualities in minute. That is the difference. Aṇu and vibhu. Vibhu means unlimited, and aṇu means limited. So we have got opulence, fame, beauty, strength, influence, knowledge, all good qualities that God has. But God has got in full, we have got in minute quantity.

So anyway, qualitatively, we are one with God. Therefore our business is how to again unite with God qualitatively. That is the highest perfection of human life. And this chance of realization, how we can unite again with God or Kṛṣṇa, is given only in the human form of life. We are wandering in so many species of life, transmigration of the soul. Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. Just we change our dress, similarly we are changing our body every moment, and finally we are changing to other body. Not only we are changing or transmigrating from one body to another, but we are transmigrating from one planet to another. These things are all explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. How we are changing our planets also, that is explained:

ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā

madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ

jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā

adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ

[Bg. 14.18]



Those who are developing the modes of good qualities, they are gradually being promoted to the higher planetary system, heavenly planet-Satyaloka, Janaloka, Maharloka. In those planets the duration of life is very long, the possibilities of sense enjoyment is very nice. Everything thousands, thousands times better than this. This is not very difficult to understand. Just like in your country... Although within this planet the standard of living is far, far nice, better than some other countries, similarly there are hundreds and millions of planets, other planets, where the standard of living is far, far better. So we are, according to our work, we are sometimes promoted to those planets and sometimes to the lower-grade planets, adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ.



So this is going on. I do not know how long, since what time we have begun this wandering, changing. Lord Caitanya says that ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. He said that the living entities are wandering in such a way, in different species of life, in different planets, lower and higher. In this way, if he is fortunate enough, he comes in contact with a bona fide spiritual master under the grace of Lord Kṛṣṇa. That means if anyone is fortunate, he comes in contact with guru and Kṛṣṇa, a bona fide spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa. And what is the benefit? The benefit is guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. The benediction from the bona fide spiritual master and Lord is that his sense of devotional service is invoked. That is the gift. He does not give anything material opulence. Of course, if one is advanced in spiritual consciousness, material happiness is not very rare for him. That is automatically there. But the gift of Kṛṣṇa and spiritual master is to inject him. Not inject him... The devotional service, love of Godhead is there, but to invoke it. This devotional service is not artificial. In every one of you there is dormant devotional service, as I have already explained, but they are exhibited in a different way. Instead of loving God, that devotional service is diverted in loving a dog. But the love is there. Love is there. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya. It is said that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not an artificial thing that we have manufactured something, ideal thing, concocted, and we are preaching to the world that "You become Kṛṣṇa conscious." No. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there. What is that Kṛṣṇa consciousness? To love God. That is there. We are simply helping that "You try to love God; then you'll be happy." That is our mission.

Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is postgraduate position of all religions. It is not any sectarian religion. You accept Christianity-very good. You accept Muhammadanism, Islamism-very good. You accept Hinduism-that's all right. We have no quarrel with Hindus and Muslims or Christians or Buddhists. But our objective is that religion means there is connection, relationship with God. Take, for example, Christian religion. They accept God: "God created this," the beginning of Bible. That's a fact. So the God consciousness is there. "God is great," the God consciousness there. Now these Christmas holidays you have begun in your country. Throughout the whole month of December you'll observe nice festivals, festivities. Why? Where it began? God consciousness. Lord Christ he came to give you God consciousness, and in his relationship these festivities are going on. It may be degraded in another form. The beginning is God consciousness, but we have lost it. So people cannot be happy without reviving God consciousness. It may be named in a different way-"Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That means God consciousness. That is the necessity. He's trying to love somebody. That somebody's love will be perfected when he loves Kṛṣṇa or God. We are teaching that. Try to love God, and if you love God, if you love Kṛṣṇa, then automatically you love everybody. That is the perfection of love. The example is just like if you love your stomach, if you supply nice food to your stomach, that means you love all the parts of your body. If you supply foodstuff in the stomach, the energy is distributed in all parts of the body. That means you love all parts of the body. If you love the tree, you pour water on the root and the water is distributed to the branches, fruits, flowers, leaves, everywhere.

So you try to love God and you'll see that you're loving even an ant. There are many examples I can cite in the history, how a man became universal lover. I have told you many times the story of a hunter. The hunter was taking pleasure by killing animals half, and when the same hunter became a devotee, he was not prepared to kill even an ant. So this is love of Godhead. This is the science. The same hunter who was killing every day so many animals, when he became a great devotee of Lord, he was not willing-because he becomes vastly learned. To become lover of God means fully enlightened in consciousness. He sees that "Here is an ant. This living entity, a small living entity, is also part and parcel. By his own work, he has got this insignificant body as an ant. I have got this human form of body, but that does not make any difference between the soul and the soul." Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. When it becomes actually... When a man becomes actually learned, he's sama-darśī. He sees everyone on the equal level. I was seeing just this evening the Ten Commandments. Now, in the Ten Commandments, the one commandment is that "Thou shall not kill." But I am sorry to feel that killing propensity is so great in the Christian world. Why? Because there is lack of love of God. "Thou shall not kill." Now there is organized killing process. So I do not know how they are following the Christian principles. It is clearly stated, "Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not tease your neighbor." So why should I tease an animal neighbor? These defects are due to lack of love of God.

Therefore the whole problems of the world can be solved only by this movement, how to love God. This is a very sane proposal. Let anybody come before us and we shall be able to convince him that this is the only solution for all the problems of the world. You try to love God and everything will be solved. Otherwise, there is no possibility. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. These are stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ. They do not know what is the solution of world problems. What is that solution? They do not know the solution is svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum, your interest is to love God. Unfortunately, you have been misled, durāśayā, by a false hope. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ, by external energy. The leaders... Now we are preaching love of God, nobody is interested. But if we had given some political bluff that "Here will be such and such party's meeting, and it will give you heaven hand to hand," oh, people will throng. You see. Because they are cheating. Satya bole ta mare lakta(?). There is a nice poet, he says that if you tell the truth, people will come with their logs to hurt you. And chuta jagat bolai(?): and if you bluff them, they will be very nicely follower. This is the position. Actually, this is the solution. It is not that "This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement or Bhaktivedanta Swami who has started, he has concocted this idea." No. It is standard. You come to argument, to reason. This formula that your interest is to love God. You have no other interest in this human form of life. Then your problems of life will be solved. Otherwise there is no possibility. If any other person is giving you any other idea, he's simply misleading you.

That is also stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Just like a blind man is leading other blind men. What he'll do? If a blind man says, "Come on. Come along with me. I shall cross you this road." What is the benefit of this assurance? He is blind himself. Therefore in spite of so much endeavor in the United Nations for the last twenty or twenty-five years, there is no solution. Simply the flags are increasing. Instead of becoming united, the flags are increasing. I have got practical experience. Now India become independent. So India was one. Now there are two: Pakistan and India. So there was one flag; now it is two. And gradually, it will increase to four. So when I pass that United Nations building, I simply see the flags are increasing. Instead of increasing the peace movement, the flags are increasing, that's all. So this sort of bluffing blind leaders cannot make happy the human society. This is the only solution: to push on Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, love of Godhead. Everyone will be happy, the human society. Viśvaṁ pūrṇaṁ sukhāyate. Whole universe will be just like Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha means without anxieties. The material civilization means full of anxiety, full of anxiety. Nobody... Just like everyone, every animal, every bird, everyone is anxious. The bird, you give him some grains, it will eat, but it will look like this: "Oh, if somebody is not coming to kill me." Anxiety, you see. America is so great, big nation, full of anxiety: "Russia is not coming? China is not coming? Oh, the Vietnam is there." The China is also, "Oh, America is doing something. Oh. Let us see." This is going on. What is this greatness? Increasing the anxieties, that's all. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. Because they have accepted something unreal which will not give them happiness. Here is reality, love of God. You take it. Don't expect that it will be taken by all the nations, all the people. You take it individually and see how much you are happy. Individual. That is our request.

So we have no place. So we don't mind. We can sit down underneath a tree and preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Some gentleman has offered this garage. That's all right. So people are afraid to give us place, you see, because we are pushing God consciousness. That is our fault. You see? This is the position. So never mind. We can sit down anywhere and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. And I'll request you to come and join us, and you'll be happy.

Thank you very much.

Devotees: Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda. (obeisances)



Prabhupāda: Any question? We invite questions. If you have got any doubts about this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, you can ask. We shall try to reply. So there is no question? Yes?



Madhudviṣa: Prabhupāda? When the soul transmigrates from one body to another, the consciousness of that gross body, does the person retain some of the consciousness of his past lives with that transmigration?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Consciousness is a constant companion of the soul. The consciousness means there is soul. Just like this body. I am speaking, I am talking or I am feeling, this consciousness. I am conscious. Why? Because I, the soul, is present. So consciousness is the symptom of the presence of the soul. Therefore when the soul transmigrates the consciousness is also there in another body. But this consciousness, if I take God consciousness, then I go to God. And if I take dog consciousness, I go to dog. That's all. The consciousness is there. Therefore we have to purify our consciousness. Instead of dog consciousness we have to make it God consciousness. That will be our perfection of life. Otherwise, the consciousness which you carry at the time of your death, you get a similar body. There are 8,400,000 species of life, and we may think of in a varied way. That is the technique of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. At the time of, if we keep our Kṛṣṇa consciousness intact, that is our perfection of life. Otherwise we do not know what is my next life. The example is given just like air is passing. Air is very subtle matter. If it is passing on the rose flower, the flavor is carried in other place also, rose scent. And if the air is passing on the stool, the scent or the bad smell of the stool is carried to the other place. Similarly, if you make your consciousness rosy, then your next life is rose flavor. (laughs) And if you make your consciousness stool, then your next life is condemned. Yes. Yes.



Man: (indistinct) thinks if the qualities of God are contained in man but only on a minute scale, and in God all qualities are on a great scale...



Prabhupāda: Full scale, yes.



Man: Then are not also the evil qualities in man existent in God too but...



Prabhupāda: Yes. The evil qualities... What you call evil, that quality is also there in God. But God, being absolute, there is no evil; everything is good. God is good. I'll give you an example. Just like the father is sometimes angry. The quality of anger is taken as bad quality. But if the father is sometimes angry on the father (son), that is not bad. That is for his good. Therefore... This is a crude example. The qualities are there in God; otherwise how we can get the quality? If the anger quality is not there in God, how we get this quality? That is a fact. But His anger and your anger is different because you are materially contaminated. So qualities, as they are, they are not bad. But when they are saturated with the contamination of this material world, they appear to be bad. Just like a naughty child. A naughty child means that child is going to be very intelligent boy or girl in future. That is a fact. Naughtiness means that child is very intelligent. So in course of time that naughtiness will fructify into intelligence. So here all the godly qualities are misrepresented, perverted reflection. Just like love. Now our worshipable God is Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā, conjugal love perfection. The same love is descended here also, love between boy and girl, but that is perverted. The love is there. The same love is there also. Otherwise wherefrom this girl? Why a girl is attracted by a boy? Why a boy is attracted by a girl? That is natural. That is coming from God, His pleasure potency. But because that love is being manifested with the contamination of this material world, that is perverted. So every quality... That is the, I mean to say, scientific way of studying God. Whatever qualities you have got, you can understand the same qualities is there in God, but your present condition being contaminated with material contact, it is being pervertedly represented. This has to be purified. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The same thing. The same love affair, the same anger or anything, that is to be purified. Then it is godly. That's all. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to purify. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Nirmalam means purification, completely purified. When this... Suppose this anger. If this anger is applied in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is purified. It is purified. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was not becoming angry to his enemy. He was a very good man. "No, I'm not going to fight." And Kṛṣṇa was, I mean to say, encouraging him to be angry. Otherwise how could he fight? So when he fought for Kṛṣṇa, that became service. Of course, these are very intricate questions. When one studies very seriously and scientifically, this will be revealed. So on the whole one can understand that "All the qualities of God is with me. But I am now materially contaminated." Just like a diseased person. A diseased person, he wants to enjoy the facilities of healthy life, but the physician says, "No, don't. Don't." Because that will create danger. Similarly, all the qualities we have got, but because it is materially contaminated, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness process is to purify them and to bring them to the normal condition, and then it will be happy. That is the whole idea. Yes?



Viṣṇujana: How can the purification process, Prabhupāda, be carried through the average life, twenty-four hours a day?



Prabhupāda: The purification process is stated in Nārada-pañcarātra. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. You have to free yourself from the designation. Designation. The same example can be given. Just like Arjuna. He was designating himself with the Kuru family; therefore he was impure. When he gave up this designation, he identified his interest with Kṛṣṇa, he became devotee. So we have to give up this designation, "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am Christian," "I am Hindu," "I am this," "I am that"-"I am Kṛṣṇa's. I am God's. I am servant of God." And if you act in that way, then whole thing becomes purified. And if you keep your designation accidentally... Just like you are American. This is accidental. By somehow or other, you have come to accept a body from the American family. Now this will be changed. You do not know what is your next body. So this is changing. This is not my permanent settlement. But your permanent settlement is to identify yourself that "I am Kṛṣṇa's." That is your permanent settlement. So if you put yourself in that position, being freed from all designation, then your process of everything, all qualities, become purified.



sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



Hṛṣīka. Hṛṣīka means senses. So when the senses are applied for Hṛṣīkeśa-means Kṛṣṇa-then it is purified. And when the senses are applied in our designated position, that is impure. That is contaminated.



Woman: When there are several living entities within a close area of space or there are several living entities...



Prabhupāda: They are under different designations, that's all. Different living entities means under different designations. That's all. And when that designation is off, then he's Kṛṣṇa's. That's all. Actually he is Kṛṣṇa's, but under different designations he has got different bodies. So if we place ourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in spite of this designated body, still we become purified. Jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate. He's liberated even living within this material tabernacle. Īhā yasya harer dāsye. If anyone fixes his mind up to the service of Kṛṣṇa, then in whatever condition he may be, he is a liberated person. Simply we have to fix up that we shall simply execute business of Kṛṣṇa. That's all. All right. Thank you. Now chant. Who is this child? (kīrtana) Distribute from the end there, just. Yes. That's all. (end)





750305SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.2.5

-

New York, March 5, 1975



Nitāi: "Are there no torn clothes lying on the common road? Do the trees which exist for maintaining others no longer give alms in charity? Do the rivers, being dried up, no longer supply water to the thirsty? Are the caves of the mountains now closed? Or, above all, does the almighty Lord not protect the fully surrendered souls? Why then do the learned sages go to flatter those who are intoxicated by hard-earned wealth?"



Prabhupāda:



cīrāṇi kiṁ pathi na santi diśanti bhikṣāṁ

naivāṅghripāḥ para-bhṛtaḥ sarito 'py aśuṣyan

ruddhā guhāḥ kim ajito 'vati nopasannān

kasmād bhajanti kavayo dhana-durmadāndhān

[SB 2.2.5]



So Śukadeva Gosvāmī was in renounced order of life from the very beginning of his life. As soon as he came out of the womb of his mother he immediately left home. He was within the womb of his mother for sixteen years. So he was in favor of renounced order of life, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. There was no question of him following the other āśramas. Generally, for ordinary man, there are four āśramas..., eight āśramas. For social upkeep there are four āśramas, namely brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. This is for spiritual. And called social, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. This is social division. And there is spiritual division also, because we are combination of matter and spirit. I am the soul. I am living within this material body. This is actual position. I am not this body. This is the beginning of spiritual education, that "I am not this body." One who understands fully well that he's not this body, then the spiritual education begins. And so long we are in the bodily concept of life, there's no question of spirituality. Spiritual education for whom? For the human being. Also very advanced human being, not ordinary human being. At least the civilized human being.



Therefore in the human society, in the civilized human society, there is acceptance of religious principle. Maybe it is Hindu religion or Muslim religion or Christian religion or Buddha religion, but there is some religion. A civilized society is not without religion. Without religion means animal society. The animals, they have no religion. Cats and dogs they have no church, no temple, that they have to go. It is for the human beings. Therefore śāstra says that dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. If in the human society there is no culture of religion, then it is animal society. It is not human society.

So this human society should be divided into eight divisions. That is first-class human society. Just like any organization, any establishment, there are divisions of labor. The directing board, board of directors there are, then the secretarial board, then ordinary clubs, then menial, then workers. There must be division; otherwise it's chaotic. Nowhere you'll find without division it is going on very smoothly. There must be division. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. It is ordered by God that there should be four divisions for the materialistic condition of life and four divisions for spiritual upliftment. So there must be the brāhmaṇa, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]. Varṇa means four divisions of society. Varṇa means class. It has been taken now as caste; but actually class. Class is not caste. Caste, of course... Throughout the whole world there is no such thing as caste. But anyway, in India there is caste. But Kṛṣṇa says that cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam: [Bg. 4.13] "Four divisions of classes I have created-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra." Who is a brāhmaṇa? That is also described in the Bhagavad-gītā: satya, śama, dama, titikṣā, ārjava, āstikyam, jñāna, vijñāna, so many qualifications required to become a brāhmaṇa. Not that because I was born in a brāhmaṇa family... This is discussed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that to take birth in a brāhmaṇa family is not all. You must be qualified, śamo damas titikṣā. That is required. The Indian culture has failed at the present moment because instead of considering the qualifications, they accept only the birth: The birth in a brāhmaṇa family makes a man a brāhmaṇa. No. That is not the shastric injunction. Qualities. There must be qualities.

So without such division... Therefore there is no such thing as Hindu dharma. No. There is no such word in the whole Vedic literature. You won't find in the Bhagavad-gītā or Bhāgavata as Hindu dharma. There is one word as bhāgavata-dharma, but there is no such word as Hindu dharma. This Hindu dharma or Hindu... This is creation by our neighbor, Indian neighbor, the Middle-east Muhammadans. They gave the name, Indian people, as "Hindu." "Hindu" means... There is one river, Sindhu. The Muhammadans, they pronounce sa as ha. So those who were on the other side of the Sindhu River, Hindu River, they were called Hindus. But actually Vedic religion is neither for Hindus nor for Christian nor for... It is meant for the human being. Vedic literature. So in the Vedic literature... This Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, they are Vedic literature. So there is injunction for observing the rules and regulations of varṇa and āśrama, four classes and four āśrama. Āśrama means where spiritual cultivation is practiced. That is called āśrama. So brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. Cātur-varṇa and cātur-āśrama, material and spiritual. So sannyāsī is supposed to be on the topmost of the human society. Cātur-varṇa, four classes then, among the varṇas, there are four classes: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. Sannyāsa is the topmost order of human society.

So here Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he's a sannyāsī. He's renounced order from the very beginning of his life. He never entered into any āśrama or varṇa. He's paramahaṁsa. Paramahaṁsa means the topmost amongst the sannyāsīs. Sannyāsī's the topmost. Above... Within the sannyāsī the paramahaṁsa is the topmost. Sannyāsīs are also, they are called kuṭīcaka, bahūdaka, parivrājakācārya, and paramahaṁsa. Kuṭīcaka means after accepting sannyāsa order... One has to accept the sannyāsa order. After gṛhastha there is vānaprastha and then sannyāsa; brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. In the beginning we, especially the brāhmaṇas and the kṣatriyas, two classes, higher classes, they have to take sannyāsa. If not, at least the brāhmaṇas must take sannyāsa. The brāhmaṇas have got four āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. The kṣatriya have got three āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, no sannyāsa. And the vaiśya two āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha. Neither vānaprastha or sannyāsa. And the śūdras, they are simply one, gṛhastha, that's all. This is the Vedic order.

So because it is very difficult to maintain sannyāsa in this age, therefore the sannyāsa order is completely prohibited. Real sannyāsī means... Here is the description of life. What is that? Cīrāṇi kiṁ na pathi santi. They have to pick up some torn cloth lying on the street and cover it. That's all. Then this diśanti bhikṣāṁ naivāṅghripāḥ, aṅghripāḥ, aṅghri means legs, and pa means drinking. The trees drink water through the root. That is their leg. Therefore they're..., another name is aṅghripa. And aṅghri means leg. So different species of life there is different process of eating. We are eating through mouth; the trees are eating through the legs. This is God's creation. Not that the mouth is only eating. No. There are other senses, active senses, hands and legs, tongue. These are active senses. Genital, rectum, these are active senses. So aṅghripa means tree. The sannyāsī should depend completely on God. That is sannyāsa. Not that I shall go to a rich man and beg something and take money and utilize it. No. That is not required. Completely independent. Because that kind of sannyāsa is not possible at the present age, therefore, generally, sannyāsa should not be accepted. They cannot follow the prohibit.

But so far our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is there, we are not like that māyāvādī-sannyāsa. Our sannyāsīs completely devote life for serving Kṛṣṇa. Sannyāsa. Sannyāsa means sat, nyāsa. Nyāsa means to give up. And sat, oṁ tat sat, the Absolute Truth. So for the service of the Absolute, Kṛṣṇa, we give up all family life. Family life means to give up the whole world, because people are struggling hard just to maintain the family. That is also stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ

vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ

divā cārthehayā rājan

kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā

[SB 2.1.3]



This is the materialistic life. What is that? At night, nidrayā, if one can get the opportunity of sleeping twenty-four hours, he thinks he's very much gainer, especially on Sunday. (laughter) So this is materialistic (indistinct), it is gain. In Calcutta we have seen there are office peons, they take letters and peon book and... Those who have gone to Calcutta there is a Dalhousie Square, that is downtown square. They'll take the peon book and letter and come to the Dalhousie Square and lie down and sleep up to four o'clock. Then they'll return to the office, and if the master asks them, "Why you are so late?" "No, the man was not there. I could not find. What can I do? I had to wait." (laughs) But he has spent his time by sleeping. So he thinks that "I'm getting so much salary, so if I do not work, if I sleep, that is my gain, that is extra profit." So that is material life.



So material life means nidrayā hriyate naktam. At night they want to sleep as much as possible or, those who have got facility, then they utilize sex life. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca [SB 2.1.3], vyavāyena means sex. Vayaḥ, in this way wasting time. The whole twelve hours or ten hours, wasted. And during daytime, divā cārthehayā rājan, divā ca artha īhayā: "Where is money? Where is money?" Just like in your country, from early in the morning, 5:30, the road is congested. People are going to work. Why? For seeking money, money, money, money. Divā cārthehayā rājan. Then when he gets money, "Let's spend it for sense gratification, for family maintenance." So in this way materialistic person waste their time day and night. Where is time? Ask any materialistic person, 'Why don't you come to our temple, sir? Why don't you hear Bhagavad-gītā?" "We have not time."Because they're wasting time in that way. You see? So this is the materialistic life.

And spiritualistic life means that one should be trained up as brahmacārī. Then regulated life in gṛhastha, regulated life. Gṛhastha is not bad. Family life is not bad. Therefore it is called gṛhastha-āśrama. Āśrama means..., this very word is meant where the spiritual cultivation is practiced. That is called āśrama. So it may be household life, it may be renounced order of life, it may be brahmacārī, student's life, or retired life. The spiritual culture must be there. That is human civilization. If there's no spiritual culture, that is not human society. That is animal society. The cats and dog, they have no spiritual culture.

So in the spiritual culture the renounced order should be only dedicated for the service of the Supreme Lord, not for taking easy money from others and utilizing it for sense gratification. That is not renounced. This is the purpose of this verse. If somebody says that "If I do not get some money, then how I shall live?" to answer this question, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that "Why you are anxious for your maintenance? What you want for your maintenance?" "I want an apartment. I want clothing. I want food. I want water." So many things, this is necessary. Therefore he says "All right, if you want cloth, don't you find cloth, torn cloth, thrown in the street," Cīrāṇi kiṁ na pathi santi. "Don't you find?" "All right, I can collect it, pick up some cloth. That's all right. Then where is my food?" Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, naivāṅghripāḥ para-bhṛtaḥ, bhikṣāṁ na diśanti. The trees... Formerly trees mean fruit trees. They used to go to jungle means there are enough fruits. Still there are so many jungles. In Hawaii there are so many jungles, enough food. Mango, and many others-banana, pineapple, guava, so many fruits. So going to the jungle means to be free from food problem, enough food. And then water... Water is river. Therefore it is said, sarito 'py aśuṣyan. Do you think all the rivers are dried up? Enough water. Then you may say that I must require some pot to take the water. No. You take water like this. Then where shall I live? Ruddhā guhāḥ kim. Do you think all the caves of the mountains they are now closed? There are many caves. If you want at all shelter, there are already there are natural rooms, apartment. (everyone laughs) You can live there. Ruddhā guhāḥ kim. "And above all," Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, kim ajito 'vati nopasannān, na avati upasannān, upasannān means those who have surrendered. Ajita.

God's another name is ajita. A means "not," and jita means "conquered." Nobody can conquer God. That is God. God is never conquered by anyone. He conquers everyone. God is conquered by His devotee, not by the demons. The demons are conquered by God. But devotee can conquer. Ajito 'pi, jito 'pi. Although God is ajita, He becomes jita, means conquered, by His devotee. That is also stated: sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām. This process we have introduced, opening center, that is the system in spiritual, to hear. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. Śruti. Śruti means this ear, aural reception. Everyone may remain in his own position. It doesn't require to change. Just like one gentleman was asking whether, for spiritual advancement, one has to live in the temple. I said, "No. There is no such hard and fast rule that one should live in the temple." You can live anywhere, but the spiritual practices should be going on. Kṛṣṇa never says that you live in the temple or you go to the jungle or Himalaya. Never say. You'll never find in the Bhagavad-gītā that Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna that "You give up this fighting and go to the jungle or to the Himalaya and become perfect person." No. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. You follow this... "Always think of Me," man-manāḥ, mad-bhaktaḥ, "you become My devotee." Man-manā bhava mad..., mad-yājī, "Worship Me and offer your obeisances unto Me." These four things. You can do anywhere. It doesn't matter. But you do all these things. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, gṛhe vā vanete thāko hā gaurāṅga bole ḍāko. Either you remain as a gṛhastha with family, wife, children-it doesn't matter-or either you live in the forest like sannyāsī, renounced. In which ever position you prefer, you can remain. But do these things. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65].

So here Śukadeva Gosvāmī advises, this is very important work, kim ajito na avati upasannān. Ajita the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, He's maintaining everyone: yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham [Bg. 9.22]. And He'll not maintain a person who has fully surrendered to Him? No. How it can be. Suppose a gentleman is maintaining so many other children. And he does not maintain his own children? Surely he does. Therefore our principle should be we should not think about our personal maintenance. We should dedicate our life for Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa will take care. That should be the principle. Don't be harassed, thinking always "How I shall be maintained?" That is not the problem. Maintenance is no problem. Real problem is "How we shall be fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa?" That is wanted. Upasannān. [break] (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 2.3: Lectures





720519SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.1

-

Los Angeles, May 19, 1972



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. Where is Pradyumna? Where is Pradyumna? Eh?



Devotee: There he is.



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Devotees: Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Prabhupāda: All right, take it. Begin.



Pradyumna: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, (etc. leads chanting of verse and synonyms:)



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam etan nigaditaṁ

pṛṣṭavān yad bhavān mama

nṛṇāṁ yan mriyamāṇānāṁ

manuṣyeṣu manīṣiṇām

[SB 2.3.1]



Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit, as you have inquired from me as to the duty of the intelligent man who is on the threshold of death, so I have answered you."



Prabhupāda: (interrupts the chanting of the śloka) Repeat once, twice more. (chanting resumes) Next? Kīrtanānanda Mahārāja, you can.



Kīrtanānanda: Translation?



Prabhupāda: No. First of all read.



Kīrtanānanda: Chant?



Prabhupāda: Yes. (Kīrtanānanda Swami chants, Śrīla Prabhupāda corrects him) Mriyamāṇānām. Karandhara. (he chants) You... Anyone? More? (chanting resumes) Very good. Anyone else? Hṛdayānanda? (he chants verse) So, translation? Read translation? Translation? Oh, no, word meaning, yes.



Pradyumna: (reads synonyms, then:) Translation: "Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Mahārāja Parīkṣit, as you have inquired from me as to the duty of the intelligent man who is on the threshold of death, so I answered you."



Prabhupāda: Now, this is the important part of the verse, that "man who is on the threshold of death." Who can say that "I am not on the threshold of death?" Is there any man in this universe who can say that "I am not on the threshold of death." Can anyone say? Everyone is on the threshold of death. That's a fact. But such questions are made amongst them... Everyone is subject to death, and threshold, on the threshold of death. Nobody can say that "I shall live for so many years." No guarantee. Everyone is on the threshold of death. Any moment, we can die. Therefore it is said,"As sure as death." All other things may be not sure, but death is sure. Therefore, before death, one... Manīṣiṇām, manuṣyeṣu manīṣiṇām. Not ordinary man. Manīṣī. Manīṣī means thoughtful. They question, "What is to be done now, before death comes? Shall I die like cats and dogs, or shall I die like human being?" This is the question. Cats and dogs dying, nobody cares. But a human being dying, there are so many ceremonies, mourning.



Because human life is important. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, although he was on the threshold of death, he was allowed seven days time. He was cursed to death, but he was given seven days time. "You, king, you shall die within seven days-after seven days-being bitten by serpent." This is was the curse given to him. He accepted. He could counteract it. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was Vaiṣṇava. He was very powerful. But he thought that "Yes, I am offender. The brāhmaṇa boy has cursed me, I shall accept it." So, he prepared himself for death. For seven days he placed himself on the bank of the Ganges without drinking a drop of water, and for seven days continually, he heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Śukadeva Gosvāmī. That was decided. Harer nāmānukīrtanaḥ. In any circumstances of life, hearing and chanting is prescribed. So Parīkṣit... Śukadeva Gosvāmī said, "My dear King, I have explained to you what is to be done now, at the time of death." So we should take example or instruction from the behavior of Parīkṣit Mahārāja that on the threshold of death...Everyone is on the threshold of death, but the foolish persons, they do not know. Foolish person thinks that "I shall live forever." That is foolishness.

ahany ahani bhūtāni

gacchantīha yamālayam

śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti

kim āścaryam ataḥ param



Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was asked by Dharmarāja, "What is the most wonderful thing within this world?" He answered this, ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchantīha yamālayam, "Everyone, every moment, is going to the Yamarāja's place, the superintendent of death, where a man's life is scrutinizingly studied, what he has done, and..." I say man, not animal. Animal, they have no such thing wrong or right, because it is animal. But a human being must have this conscience, right or wrong. Pravṛtti, nivṛtti.



In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ janā na vidur āsurāḥ. Asura-jana, those who are demons, they do not know these two things- pravṛtti and nivṛtti-what is our duty and what is our not duty. Pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca... [Bg. 16.7]. That is modern civilization. They do not know. What is our duty to do and what is our duty not to do-they do not know. Neither any education, in this life what we should do, what we should not do. So therefore this particular word is mentioned here, manīṣiṇām. In human society, those who are specifically intelligent, for them, Caitanya-caritāmṛta kāṛacā, he says, kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei baḍa catura. Catura means very intelligent. Without being intelligent, nobody can take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But our propaganda is to educate people to become intelligent. They are foolish. They do not know the value of life. They do not know what is going to happen after death. No. Just like cats and dogs.

Therefore Upaniṣad says, Gargopaniṣad, etad viditvā yaḥ prayāti sa brāhmaṇaḥ. "One who leaves this body after knowing everything, he is brāhmaṇa." And etad aviditvā yaḥ prayāti sa kṛpaṇaḥ. "And anyone who dies without knowing the value of life, he's kṛpaṇa, miser, cripple-minded." Because he could not utilize the opportunity given to him by nature. Such nice beautiful body, you American boys and girls-nice country, good facilities, no poverty-everything is very nicely given to you. But, if in spite of all these facilities, if you don't take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you are kṛpaṇa, miser. "Miser" means one who has got money, but he cannot utilize it. He is miser. And one who knows how to utilize money... There are many merchants. They get a few thousands of dollars from their father, but due to intelligence he increases to millions of dollars. That is intelligence. And miser, or foolishness, is that "I get some money from my father, but I spend it for nothing." So this human form of life is specially meant for becoming brāhmaṇa.

We are therefore creating brāhmaṇas. We are not creating śūdras. Śūdras are already there. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. Anyone born is a śūdra. Śūdra means who has no knowledge, ignorant. He is called śūdra. Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. Śūdra is not intelligent. He cannot do anything nice, thoughtful. "Ehh, get some work, get some few dollars daily. Eat and sleep." That is śūdra. They cannot do anything independent.

A brāhmaṇa will not accept anyone's service. That is especially forbidden, that a brāhmaṇa. . . Brāhmaṇa, even if he is in difficulty, he should not accept anyone's service like a dog. Especially this word is used. A dog cannot live without master. A dog, if he hasn't got a good master is a street dog. He may be killed at any time. He has no protection. Therefore this very word is used. Śūdra means dog. He must have a master, otherwise he cannot live. So there are classes of men, śūdras. No, they must have a protection. Women must have protection, because they cannot do anything independently. To give them independence means to create some trouble. In the Manu-saṁhitā it is clearly said, na strī svātantryam arhati. Woman cannot be given independence. No. They must be protected. When they are child, up to twelve years, thirteen years, say, fifteen, sixteen years, not more than that, she must be protected by the father. And at the age of thirteen to sixteen years, she must be married. Find out some boy who can take charge, the second charge. And when she's old, the charge is given to the elderly sons. So woman is protected like that.

So śūdras also should not be given independence. They should be given protection, but no independence. Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyāḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā there is. Striyaḥ means woman, śūdra, and vaiśya-they are put into the same category. In Bhāgavata also, strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā [SB 1.4.25]. So one has to be enlightened. As the śūdra can be enlightened under good protection, similarly, a woman can also be enlightened.

There is no, I mean to say "barricade" to enlighten woman. Everyone can be enlightened. Everyone has got the light. But ordinarily the śūdra and the vaiśyas, they are not to be considered very intelligent. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. Everyone is born śūdra. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. By saṁskāra... Just like we follow. Not all of a sudden we accept anyone as brāhmaṇa. We give saṁskāra, chanting. First of all, association. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. By good association, by the association of devotees, one can understand automatically what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa. (aside:) Let him sit properly. So saṁskāra... Saṁskāra... Although the śūdras are not given any saṁskāra...Because those who are in the very lowest stage of life, it is very difficult for them to accept saṁskāra, reformatory method. But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, under the direction of Gosvāmīs and pañcarātra system, they are giving the opportunity everyone to become a brāhmaṇa.

Because without becoming brāhmaṇa, nobody can understand what is Kṛṣṇa or what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One must be on the platform of goodness. When one is fixed up on the platform of goodness, the other two qualities-namely, ignorance and passion-cannot disturb him. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18].

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Hṛdy antaḥ-sthaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is within your heart. If you kindly continue to hear about Him, as you are doing, then Kṛṣṇa will be very much pleased, "Oh, this person is now interested in me." Because nobody's interested in Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa is also silent to them. But as soon as you become interested, oh, Kṛṣṇa becomes very active, "Oh, he's trying to do something. I shall help him." In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, teṣāṁ satata-yuktānām [Bg. 10.10]. Teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānām. What is that verse? Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam. Kṛṣṇa says. He's silent for the nondevotees, but he speaks to the devotees. That is very natural. If some big man... He talks with men who are intelligent, who is businesslike. Why he wastes his time talking with some rascals and fools? So Kṛṣṇa talk, but talks to the devotee. Who are devotee? Satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam. Those who are 24-hours engaged in rendering loving devotional service to the Lord. To such person Kṛṣṇa gives intelligence, not others.



So this process of hearing from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, must be continued. That is our life. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. Śravaṇam means hearing. Kīrtanam means chanting about Lord Viṣṇu. Not for others. "Now I am hearing and chanting about Nixon." (chuckles) That will not help. Because everyone is busy in newspaper, "What Nixon said, what he is doing..." Everywhere. The politicians, they have made the minds of general people, general public, that they're very much interested what the politician says. Every day he says that he's simply speaking all nonsense; still, he's interested. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. They are called, "chewing the chewed again and again." Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām.

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



Īśa-tantryām, by the laws of material nature, one who is bound up tight, hands and legs... we are all. We cannot, I mean to say, neglect the laws of nature. If you eat little more, then you have to fast for three days. That we actually know. If you expose little to cold, then you have to pay ten dollars to the doctor fine. So they are so much bound up by the laws of nature; still, they are thinking, "I am free. I am independent. Where is God? I am God." Just see. Such foolish persons, that every moment he's being kicked on his face by the boot of material nature, and still he's saying, "I am God, I am independent."



You see? So andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Just like one blind man is speaking other blind men, "Please follow me. I shall lead you to the right path." "But you are blind yourself, and we are also blind. What will be the help?" But no, they will follow. In our country, Gandhi promised that "I shall give you independence in one year, if you follow me-non-violence, non-cooperation." People followed, but it took thirty years. But actually, that is not independence. So these politicians, especially, they mislead us. Not only politicians, the so-called yogis, so-called... So many things. Real leader is Kṛṣṇa. So if we surrender to Kṛṣṇa as Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], "Give up all other occupation, duties. Simply just surrender unto Me." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ. "Don't hesitate. Do it." Kṛṣṇa is personally canvassing. He's so kind. He comes personally. He speaks the whole truth in the Bhagavad-gītā.

He's canvassing, "Please do it." He again comes as a devotee, Lord Caitanya. Lord Caitanya is teaching how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. There is no difference between Lord Caitanya's teachings and Kṛṣṇa's teaching. The same thing. In one form, Kṛṣṇa is saying that "You surrender unto Me." And Lord Caitanya says that "You surrender to Kṛṣṇa." The fact is the same. So we are following Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We are canvassing, "Please surrender to Kṛṣṇa." So our business is not very difficult. If we follow ourselves, if we surrender to Kṛṣṇa fully and teach others also the same thing... Not that something adulteration. No. Exactly what Kṛṣṇa says. Then you become spiritual master, guru. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

yāre dekha tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



"Under My order, you become a spiritual master and deliver the people of your country." And what is that order? That yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. "Whomever you meet, you simply speak what Kṛṣṇa has said, or what is spoken about Kṛṣṇa."



That is Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So every one of you follow the instruction, as you have received. Chant sixteen rounds regularly, without fail, and follow the regulative principles, and hear about Kṛṣṇa, and preach about Kṛṣṇa. Every one of you become a spiritual master. Simple thing. No education required. Because we are hearing about Kṛṣṇa, so we can speak the same thing. What is the difficulty? If I hear from my spiritual master or from any learned man that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead," so if I say by hearing that "Kṛṣṇa is Supreme Personality of Godhead," so I haven't got to search out whether Kṛṣṇa is Personality of Godhead or not, but if I accept the authority, then I speak the real truth. This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Therefore sometimes, when people say in India, "Swamiji, you have done wonderful." And yes, I do not know. I'm not a magician. But, so far I am confident that I did not adulterate the words of Kṛṣṇa.

That's all. That's my credit. I did not like to take the position of Kṛṣṇa. I remained a servant of Kṛṣṇa, and I spoke what Kṛṣṇa said. That's all. This is my secret. So everyone can do that. There is nothing magic. The magic will act as soon as you become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. The magic will be done by Kṛṣṇa, not by me or you. He will do it. Just like a small child. Nobody can hurt him. The father will take care. He does not know. He's simply depending on father. "My father, mother." That's all. Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me, I give you protection." He's not a liar. He's not inefficient. He's strong. He's sufficiently opulent. He can do that. So believe in Kṛṣṇa's word and surrender unto Him, and don't spoil this human form of life. Death is sure. Before death, we must prepare to go back to home, back to Godhead. Thank you very much. (end)



720522SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.1-3

-

Los Angeles, May 22, 1972



Prabhupāda: Where is Pradyumna? Book? Begin.



Karandhara: Rāmeśvara?



Pradyumna: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. (leads chanting)



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam etan nigaditaṁ

pṛṣṭavān yad bhavān mama

nṛṇāṁ yan mriyamāṇānāṁ

manuṣyeṣu manīṣiṇām

[SB 2.3.1]



brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu

yajeta brahmaṇaḥ patim

indram indriya-kāmas tu

prajā-kāmaḥ prajāpatīn

[SB 2.3.2]



devīṁ māyāṁ tu śrī-kāmas

tejas-kāmo vibhāvasum

vasu-kāmo vasūn rudrān

vīrya-kāmo 'tha vīryavān

[SB 2.3.3]



Prabhupāda: So, anyone else? That's all right. So in this way, if you chant ten times, you'll get it by heart. It is not difficult. So we are giving this diacritic mark, English transliteration, only for this purpose-so that you can chant, you can vibrate these mantras. So practice. Here you hear, and in your leisure time, you practice. If you chant these mantras anywhere, you'll be honored. Sanskrit language is so nice. And direction, everything is there: purport, word meaning, and translation. So we are taking so much trouble in writing books not for simply making market. It is for you to read. Not that simply we go and sell books, and that ... If the customer says, "You read it first of all," then what you will say? You'll say, "No, I cannot read. I can sell only." (laughter) (Prabhupāda laughs.) Then what will be your position, if you say like that? "I can sell; I cannot read." Anyway, then? Word meanings? (Pradyumna reads synonyms.) So these are kāma, these material desires.



Somebody is wanting wealth, somebody is wanting beauty, somebody is wanting strength, somebody something else. All these are...the beginning from brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu. And ultimately, they want to merge into the brahmajyoti. So up to that point, everything that we want-that is material-and that is lust. Therefore it is said kāma. The...just the opposite word of kāma is prema, love.

So in the material world there cannot be prema. Prema means love. The prema is only possible in the spiritual world. Here, what is going on as love, that is not love, that is lust. A boy loves a girl, a girl loves a boy. That is not love, that is lust. As soon as there is some disturbance in lusty affair, they divorce. So therefore that is not love. So we should note it, that so-called love is bogus in this material world. Love cannot be possible. This very word love, prema, is specially reserved for Kṛṣṇa. Premā pum-artho mahān. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's preaching, that the highest perfection of life is to evoke one's dormant love for Kṛṣṇa.

The love is there. It is reserved for Kṛṣṇa, but due to our foolishness, we are distributing that love in so many ways, up to the dog. This is called illusion. We do not know where to apply love. If you see, all these words is touched with the word kāma, kāma. Kāma means lust. There is no question of love. And love ... Prema and kāma is described in Caitanya-caritāmṛta. What is prema and what is... prema and kāma. Ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā tāra bali kāma [Cc. Ādi 4.165]. Kāma. What is lust? Ātmendriya-prīti, to satisfy one's own senses. That is kāma. Here, a boy and girl love. They say "love," but no, it is not love. The boy wants to satisfy his senses, and the girl wants to satisfy her senses. That's all. Therefore, ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā. Everyone is trying to satisfy her own senses. That is kāma. Lust. And then, what is prema? Kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare prema nāma. When the same propensity is transferred for satisfying Kṛṣṇa's senses... just like gopīs.

The superexcellence of gopīs is due that they wanted to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. They dressed very nicely because they thought that "Kṛṣṇa become very pleased seeing us nicely dressed." Not that ... In this material world, a woman or a girl dress very nicely just to attract the opposite sex for his sense gratification. That's all. So everyone, all this description is given there: brahma-varcasa-kāma, vīrya-kāma, then vasu-kāma. Devīṁ māyāṁ tu śrī-kāmaḥ. Śrī. (aside) You can stand near the wall. Others may not... Śrī means beauty. In the Durgā-pūjā, Devī-pūjā, they ask... After offering Mother Durgā all sorts of paraphernalia, then they puṣpāñjali, they pray favor, dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi balaṁ dehi. Dehi dehi. Dehi means "give me." After pūjā... Therefore it is called pūjā. Pūjā, just like in business circle, if you want to take some business from a big merchant, so you satisfy him, flatter him, and sometimes invite him in hotel and give him nice dinner.

In this way, after he is satisfied, "Sir, if you kindly give me this contract." (laughter) "Or if you give me this post." The ultimate aim is his post and contract, not to satisfy the person. No. He's spending some money for his own sense gratification. Similarly, all these pūjās... The demigod pūjā, that is for his sense gratification. That's all. Kṛṣṇa, therefore, condemns this: kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānā yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. This very kāma. These words, kāma, kāmas, kāma, kāma. So Kṛṣṇa also says... So you won't find any difference between Bhagavad-gītā , or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or any Vedic literature. It is to be understood through proper channels. So all these kāmas have been condemned by Kṛṣṇa. Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānā yajante anya-devatāḥ. The persons who go to worship other demigods like Devī, Māyā, Durgā, Śiva, or Indra, Candra, so many ... There are 33, I mean to say, crores. One crore equal to?

Devotee: Ten million.



Prabhupāda: Ten million, and thirty-three. Just see. There are so many demigods, and so many desires also. So they are not prohibited. Everything is there in the Bhāgavata, that "If you want this particular..." Kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ yajanta iha devatāḥ. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: "Those who want quick success in fulfilling some material desires, they worship the demigods." The Māyāvādī, Shankarites, they have made a hodgepodge. They have made so much blunder in understanding the Vedic conclusion. Misleading, simply. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has especially warned that "Anyone who hears about the Māyāvāda commentation, he's doomed. He's gone forever, lost." He will have no understanding, either this way or that. The Vedas, they give us information of the demigods, but they are not imagination. And neither Kṛṣṇa is imagination. The Bhāgavata is giving this direction; Bhāgavata means Vyāsadeva is giving direction that "If you want this profit, then worship this demigod."



So he's playing childish, foolish things? He's giving some wrong information? Imagination? What business he has got to do that? But these Māyāvādī rascals will say that "the demigods are also māyā, Kṛṣṇa is also māyā, everything is māyā." Therefore we call them Māyāvādī, everything māyā. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti is māyā. They say it is good for raising oneself to the platform of impersonalism. Their process is that you, if you want to go higher platform, you take one staircase and get on it, and then throw it away. Because you don't require to come down again. That is their philosophy. So you take any means, the Ramakrishna Mission also says like that. Yata mata tata patha. "You can worship brahma-varcasa, you can worship Devī-māyā; you can worship Vasūn; you can worship Rudra; you can worship anyone; ultimately, you become one with the Supreme." Most misguiding. Here it is... But if you want this particular thing, then you worship this. In the Bhagavad-gītā also, it is confirmed, yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25].

Demigod worshipers will go to the demigods. There are different planets, 33 crores of demigods, and there are thirty-three crores of planets also. The moon planet, according to Vedic literature, that is also one of the planets belonging to the demigod Candra. It is one of the higher planets. So this is the list. If you want something particular... if you want to merge into the effulgence, brahmajyoti, then you worship... Yajeta brahmaṇaḥ patim. Brahmaṇaḥ. Brahmaṇaḥ means also Vedas, śabda-brahma. Tene brahma hṛdā, in the Bhāgavata, beginning. Brahma means this sound, transcendental sound of knowledge. That is Veda. So there is Upaniṣad. So Upaniṣad, they generally, those who are scholars in Upaniṣad, they want to become one with the... So that is not a very difficult thing. Anyone can do that. There is a process, but we Vaiṣṇavas, we do not accept that suicidal policy. We want to keep our individuality, not merge. We don't want to finish our identity.

Our real identity is eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. So we want to keep that identity, and we want to serve Him eternally. Eternally means, now we are in this material world, we are being trained up how to serve Kṛṣṇa. This Deity worship-this is training. The same thing will continue when you go to Vaikuṇṭha or Vṛndāvana. The same way we shall personally serve. Here, Kṛṣṇa... This is also personally. But due to my imperfectness, I cannot see Kṛṣṇa in His actual spiritual form, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has assumed a form which you can approach. It is for your facility. And Kṛṣṇa, in any form He appears, He is transcendental. Either this form or that form. Nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.133]. Everything. That is Kṛṣṇa's specialty. He can appear... Just like if you have got a photograph of some of your friend, so you cannot derive the benefit of directly meeting him. But in Kṛṣṇa's form, if you have a Kṛṣṇa's photograph, it is as good as Kṛṣṇa.

That is the difference. You can get the same benefit from the photograph picture of Kṛṣṇa as you get benefit by directly meeting Him. Therefore, meeting this photograph Deity of Kṛṣṇa is as good as Kṛṣṇa. Advaya-jñāna, nonduality. Here in this material world there is duality, but in the spiritual world, there is no such duality. Brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu yajeta brahmaṇaḥ patim, indram, indram indriya-kāmaḥ. Indriya means senses. Those who are too much lusty satisfy simply... The most important indriya is the genital, sex. So for them, it is recommended that "You worship Indra." Indra, the demigod, he is number one sexually inclined demigod. He has got eyes, eyes over all his body. Śata-cakṣuṁṣi. These eyes were originally vagina. He was cursed by Gautama Muni that "You are so fond of vagina that I curse you that you get all over your body vagina only." Then, when he surrendered, he began to cry that "It will be very much, I mean to say, abominable for me."

Then he asked, offered, that "These vagina may be turned into eyes." Therefore his body is full of eyes. Śata-cakṣuṁṣi. So those who are too much lusty, lover of the vagina, they may worship Indra. This is the recommendation. Everything is there. If you want vagina instead of Kṛṣṇa, all right, do it. You have it. So unfortunately, if our student falls a victim of vagina instead of Kṛṣṇa, that is very regrettable. Then better he worship, instead of Kṛṣṇa, let him worship Indra. That is the Bhāgavata direction. Indram indriya-kāmas tu prajā-kāmaḥ prajāpatīn. Prajā, many children, dynasty. Just like aristocratic family. One is working very hard to establish a family. In England, it is very prominent, "Lord family, Duke family." And where the rascal is going himself, he does not know. But he's establishing a family, Lord family. Prajā-kāmaḥ. People want that son, grandson, great grandson, his son, his son, the family will be filled up with so many ... In India especially, the karmīs, they want like that.

Śry-aiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ. Śrī, beauty, beautiful women. Śrī, aiśvarya, wealth, and prajā. Prajā means many children. They are spending their whole time earning money, amass money, huge bank balance. Then his sons are married, the same thing. He begotten so many children by sex. So he's giving indulgence to his sons, "All right, you also take this sex indulgence and produce many children." Prajepsavaḥ. And then, grandchildren are also, "You also take another. You also produce children." So they are called prajepsavaḥ. They want, they are happy to see that he has got many children. Just like Dhṛtarāṣṭra. He has got... He had hundred sons, and the hundred sons had another hundred sons. So he was after "How this kingdom should be mine, sons' land?" That is the cause of Kurukṣetra war. So prajepsavaḥ, prajā-kāmaḥ. So...so there are so many kāmas, desires. Different people, different kāma. Therefore they are all hṛta-jñānāḥ. Anyone who is impeded by this kāmas, they are less interested [intelligent].

Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Hṛta-jñāna means one who has lost intelligence. They are captivated by this kind of lusty things. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Prajā-kāmaḥ, those who want children, great-grandchildren... In Bengali there is a proverb, nāti nāti svarge vati(?). Nāti means grandson, and grandson's grandson. Therefore, "I am living, my son is living, my grandson is living, his son is living, his son is living," in this way, up to seventh generation, if one sees, then immediately he goes to heaven. These are the conception of the materialistic person, that "If I can see a grandson of a grandson, then my life is successful." (laughter) And he's working hard for that purpose. They are called prajā-kāmaḥ. Prajā means many sons in the family. That is considered very aristocrat. Prajā-kāmaḥ prajāpatīn. Devīṁ māyāṁ tu śrī-kāmaḥ. Śrī means beauty. If you want to become very beautiful, either man or woman, then you worship Durgā. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktiḥ.

Tejas-kāmo vibhāvasum. Vibhāvasum. There are Vasus, eight kinds of Vasus. So you can worship one of the Vasus. If you want to be very influential person, like Mr. Nixon, then you worship Vibhāvasum. Vasu-kāmo vasūn rudrān. Vasu means "wealth." If you want wealth, riches. So list is there, but Kṛṣṇa says, "This will not make you happy, My dear friend. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. You kick off all this nonsense! You just surrender unto Me." That is Kṛṣṇa's instruction. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Because He's the Supreme, He's giving supreme advice. But there are other persons. To regulate them... Because... These they are called yajñas. Saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā. There is little touch of devotion, indirectly. Because if you want to worship Indra, you must worship at the same time Nārāyaṇa. That is the system. Nārāyaṇa-śilā will be there. Because the benediction you want from the particular type of demigod, he cannot give independently.

When he takes permission from Nārāyaṇa, that "He is after this benediction from me, and he's worshiping me. So shall I give him this benediction?" So with His order ... Because, after all, īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1], everything means Kṛṣṇa's property. How? Suppose somebody is cashier in our institution. He's getting a thousands of dollars in his custody. So he cannot distribute without being sanctioned. That is not good. So he must take the superior sanction, that "Shall I give him?" Similarly, all these demigods, they cannot give you anything directly. With the permission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead ... Mayaiva vihitān hi tān. That benefit which they derive from the demigod, that is ordained by Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa says. When the demigod appeals to Kṛṣṇa that "This person is hankering after this thing, and he's worshiping me," so just to keep the position of the demigod, Kṛṣṇa says "All right, give him." Because the demigods are servant of Kṛṣṇa. So one has approached the servant of Kṛṣṇa.

To keep the position of the servant, Kṛṣṇa orders, "Yes, you give." Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu took benediction from Brahmā. So many things. "I shall not die at daytime, I shall not die at night, I shall not die on land, I shall not die on water." In this way, all definitions by negation. Brahmā said, "Yes." Now, to keep the words of Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa is so kind... Brahmā is servant. He appeared in such a way that all the prayers of Hiraṇyakaśipu was not touched. Hiraṇyakaśipu said that "I shall not die by any man or any animal or any demigod." So He appeared in Nṛsiṁha-mūrti, who is neither animal nor man nor demigod. You cannot define. Then Hiraṇyakaśipu prayed for that "I shall not die in daytime, at night." Yes. So Hiraṇyakaśipu was killed in the sandhyā, between the junction of day and night. Just in the evening. You cannot say it is day, neither it is night. In this way, Kṛṣṇa kept all the words of Brahmā, and still killed him. That is Kṛṣṇa.

That is Kṛṣṇa. That you may be very intelligent to avoid Kṛṣṇa or the laws of Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is more intelligent. He will also cheat you. Because you wanted to cheat Him, so He will also cheat you in such a way that (is) beyond your imagination. Yes. That is Kṛṣṇa. You cannot excel Kṛṣṇa. You have to be always under Him, even your cheating process. This is Kṛṣṇa. So take shelter of Kṛṣṇa and be happy. Thank you. (end)



720524SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.1-4

-

Los Angeles, May 24, 1972



Prabhupāda: In this space there should be one paint (?) for Rādhārāṇī. (pause) Hmm. You can...



Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



annādya-kāmas tv aditiṁ

svarga-kāmo 'diteḥ sutān

viśvān devān rājya-kāmaḥ

sādhyān saṁsādhako viśām

[SB 2.3.2-7]



Prabhupāda: Translation?



Pradyumna: Translation: "One who wants a large stock of grains should worship Aditi. One who desires a worldly kingdom should worship Viśvadeva, and one who wants to be popular with the general mass of population should worship the Sādhya demigod."



Prabhupāda: So these are the problems. We have to cease (?). Exactly like that. Just like government departments. If you want to have this, you have to go to a particular department-building department, water department, so many... electric department... many departments. Tax department, income tax department, support tax department.



vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām

[Bg. 2.41]



So there are many statements in the Bhagavad-gītā that... In Indian villages still, there are different wells. One well is meant for washing dishes. Another well is meant for taking bath. Another well is meant for washing cloth. Another well is meant for drinking water. So Kṛṣṇa says, "There are different wells for different purposes, but when you go to the river, all the purposes will be served." You can wash your dishes, you can wash your cloth, you can take bath, and then you take drinking water. Similarly, all these desires... Of course, a devotee has no material desire. Unless one is free from all these material desires... These are all material desires. Somebody wants to be powerful, somebody wants wealth, somebody wants to have beautiful wife, somebody wants to possess grains and worldly kingdom... There is no limit of our desires. And there are different departments also. You can fulfill your desires. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25].



So this is kindness, mercy of Kṛṣṇa, that He has given you facility if you want to fulfill your desire. But all of them are kāma. In each and every line, the word is used, kāma. We have marked it. Here, just like annādya-kāmas tv aditim. Annādya. Anna means grains. There are different types of grains. That is all wanted. Annādya-kāmas tu. Kāma. But you won't find here a meat-eater. No, that is not at all... That is aboriginal. That is not for a human being. Anna. You can desire anna, grains. You can desire to become king. You can desire to have nice wife. These are natural. But there is not a single sentence here you will find they are desiring to eat meat, egg, flesh. No. That is beyond human jurisdiction. They are not meant for human being. So these are the different departments if you want to take facility of quickly getting some benefit... Yajanta iha devatāḥ. Kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ yajanta iha devatāḥ. For particular type of fulfillment of your desire, you can worship the particular type of demigods.

This is recommended in the śāstra for the less intelligent class of men. Still, it may be questioned that "Why Vedas have-if the ultimate goal is to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead-why the Vedas have prescribed different demigod worship?" Yes, that is replied in the Bhagavad-gītā, tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām. Those who are less intelligent, for them, not for the first-class intelligent. Those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, they are first-class intelligent. They don't want anything beyond Kṛṣṇa. That's all. They don't want to know anything except Kṛṣṇa. The advantage is that if you can know Kṛṣṇa, then you know everything. And if you get Kṛṣṇa, you get everything. Therefore this conclusion cannot be perceived by less intelligent class of men. Exactly like that. If one is intelligent, he goes to the river from the village, and he takes there bath. River water is never contaminated because constantly the wave is flowing. Suppose you contaminate a certain portion, but it does not stand, it flows down immediately.

Immediately, moment after moment, you are getting pure water. Especially in India. In India there are so many nice rivers, Ganges, Yamunā, Godāvarī, Kāverī, Kṛṣṇā, Sindh. There are many rivers, all very nice water. In the Western countries I have seen only one river very nice, in Montreal. What is that river? St. Lawrence, yes. All other rivers I have seen, they are very unclean, especially in Moscow, Hamburg. Oh, it is so dirty. So in India the rivers are very clean, and people take pleasure in taking bath in rivers. If there is river, nobody will take bath at home. They will go all to the river. And it is very refreshing. That you know. So this example is very nice, that if you go to the river, then your all purposes are served. But in the village, they are restricted that "This well is for this purpose, this well is this purpose." It may be crowded. You have to wait for the opportunity. But the river is open. You can go there and have your business done very nicely.

That will be summarized in the last verse:

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.10]



That is the conclusion. Here Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is recommending different demigods for different purposes because there are all classes of men. So to take immediate effect, they worship demigods. Kṣipram, very soon. Generally, people do not go to worship Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu, because you cannot ask from Kṛṣṇa anything which is not good for you. Suppose you pray to Kṛṣṇa on the seaside, "Kṛṣṇa, give me a good fish. I want to catch." Kṛṣṇa will never fulfill your desire. That is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Because Kṛṣṇa will not give you facility for possessing anything which will ultimately cause your falldown. Kṛṣṇa knows that "If he catches a fish, then he will have to become a fish again to be caught by the same fish. So why shall I give the facility?" So therefore our policy is not to ask anything from Kṛṣṇa. He knows what is good for me; simply I have to surrender unto Him. That's all. Why shall I bother Him, "Give me this, give me that, give me that"? Na dhanaṁ na janam.



Here, strī-kāma, beautiful wife, kāma, one who wants, devīm, he should worship goddess Durgā. This is recommended here. But it is kāma. But those who are devotees, they have no kāma. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Anya. Anya means other than Kṛṣṇa's service. They have made all, everything zero. We don't want all these things. We simply want to serve Kṛṣṇa. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Jñāna means knowledge. Karma means fruitive activities. Uncovered by or untouched by fruitive activities and jñāna. Just like in Vṛndāvana. All the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they never tried to know Kṛṣṇa, whether He is God. That was not their business. Jñānam, the jñānīs, they want to know. Just like Brahmā wanted to test whether Kṛṣṇa is God or not. Indra wanted to test whether... The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they never did it. They think, "Kṛṣṇa is our very intimate friend, my beloved son, my lover, my master." Everyone's concentrated love for Kṛṣṇa in different mellows.

That's all. Even when Kṛṣṇa played wonderful thing, so they simply thought, "Oh, He might be a demigod." You see. So they never tried to analyze Kṛṣṇa, but their love for Kṛṣṇa, there is no comparison. So that is wanted. Jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. "Whether Kṛṣṇa is God or not, let me test." You can test, but pure love means whatever Kṛṣṇa may be, He is my lovable object: mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ. We have no other business than to love Kṛṣṇa, whatever He may be. He may be God or He may be whatever He may be. That is called anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Then what is the business? If everything is śūnyam... Śūnyam means zero. No, we are not zero. We are positive. What is that? Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Simply cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness favorably: "How I can become a lover of Kṛṣṇa?" That is wanted. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā. This is first-class devotion service. Of course, we should know Kṛṣṇa; otherwise, it may be we may neglect Him.

Just like we are trying to explain what is Deity. But if one has got unflinching love for the Deity, he doesn't require to understand the Deity through the śāstra. Spontaneous love. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu showed, as soon as He entered the Deity room, fainted, "Here is My Lord." That is first-class position of devotee... Without any other consideration. Enhance your love for Kṛṣṇa without any condition. That is required. So these worship of different demigods are recommended in the scripture, not to mislead him, but to lead him gradually to the higher stage, to lead him to the higher stage. Because the demigods are considered different limbs of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te 'pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam



Just like if you want to serve me... There is a routine work how to serve superior. Now, if you touch my hair, you are touching me, but that is not the service. You see. Service means there is routine work. You should touch my feet. Similarly, anywhere you go, it is Kṛṣṇa, because without Kṛṣṇa there is no other existence. So to worship the demigod, indirectly worshiping Kṛṣṇa, but avidhi-pūrvakam, without regulative principles. Yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam. The same example: if you want to touch me, so the regulative principle is that you have to touch the lotus feet of your spiritual master, not that you touch his head and do like that. You can say, "I am touching you." Oh, that's not the way. You have to touch according to the regulative principles. Similarly, those who are nonsense: "All right, you touch the hair of your spiritual master. If you cannot touch the lotus feet, then you touch..." Giving a chance to come in touch. So this demigod worship, it is an example given.



Demigod worship is recommended in the Vedas. At least, they should gradually understand "Who is this demigod? Why we are worshiping him? Wherefrom he has got this power?" Then, when one can understand that this Indra, Candra, and Sūrya, and Diti, Aditi, and fire, Lord Śiva, they are all different departmental heads of Kṛṣṇa's government... The real king is Kṛṣṇa. To understand that. Not that... Then one could derive all the benefits from one department. No. The different departments are recommended: "If you want this, you have to... If you want this, you have to..." In the conclusion it will be said that "Whatever you want, you go to Kṛṣṇa." Your all desires will be fulfilled. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. Akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ [SB 2.3.10]. (pause) What is the time now?

Devotee: 8:30



Prabhupāda: So next, another verse you can read.

Pradyumna: Āyuṣ-kāmo 'śvinau devau ... (devotees repeat) puṣṭi-kāma ilāṁ yajet... One who desires to be absorbed in the impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence should worship the master of the Vedas [Lord Brahmā or Bṛhaspati, the learned priest], one who desires powerful sex should worship the heavenly King, Indra, and one who desires good progeny should worship the great progenitors called the Prajāpatis. One who desires good fortune should worship Durgādevī, the superintendent of the material world. One desiring to be very powerful should worship fire, and one who aspires only after money should worship the Vasus. One should worship the Rudra incarnations of Lord Śiva if he wants to be a great hero. One who wants a large stock of grains should worship Aditi. One who desires to attain the heavenly planets should worship the sons of Aditi. One who desires a worldly kingdom should worship Viśvadeva, and one who wants to be popular with the general mass of population should worship the Sādhya demigod. One who desires a long span of life should worship the demigods known as the Aśvinī-kumāras, and a person desiring a strongly built body should worship the earth. One who desires stability in his post should worship the horizon and the earth combined. One who desires to be beautiful should worship the beautiful residents of the Gandharva planet, and one who desires a good wife should worship the Apsarās and the Urvaśī society girls of the heavenly kingdom. One who desires domination over others should worship Lord Brahmā, the head of the universe. One who desires tangible fame should worship the Personality of Godhead, and one who desires a good bank balance should worship the demigod Varuṇa. If one desires to be a greatly learned man he should worship Lord Śiva, and if one desires a good marital relation he should worship the chaste goddess Umā, the wife of Lord Śiva.





Purport: There are different modes of worship for different persons desiring success in particular subjects. The conditioned soul living within the purview of the material world cannot be an expert in every type of materially enjoyable asset, but one can have considerable influence over a particular matter by worshiping a particular demigod, as mentioned above. Rāvaṇa was made a very powerful man by worshiping Lord Śiva, and he used to offer severed heads to please Lord Śiva. He became so powerful by the grace of Lord Śiva that all the demigods were afraid of him, until he at last challenged the Personality of Godhead Śrī Rāmacandra and thus ruined himself. In other words, all such persons who aspire after gaining some or all of the material objects of enjoyment, or the gross materialistic persons, are on the whole less intelligent, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.20). It is said there that those who are bereft of all good sense, or those whose intelligence is withdrawn by the deluding energy of māyā, aspire to achieve all sorts of material enjoyment in life by pleasing the various demigods, or by advancing in material civilization under the heading of scientific progress. The real problem of life in the material world is to solve the question of birth, death, old age and disease. No one wants to change his birthright, no one wants to meet death, no one wants to be old or invalid, and no one wants diseases. But these problems are solved neither by the grace of any demigod nor by the so-called advancement of material science. In the Bhagavad-gītā, as well as in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, such less intelligent persons have been described as devoid of all good sense. Śukadeva Gosvāmī said that out of the 8,400,000 species of living entities, the human form of life is rare and valuable, and out of those rare human beings those who are conscious of the material problems are rarer still, and the still more rare persons are those who are conscious of the value of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which contains the messages of the Lord and His pure devotees. Death is inevitable for everyone, intelligent or foolish. But Parīkṣit Mahārāja has been addressed by the Gosvāmī as the manīṣī, or the man of highly developed mind, because at the time of death he left all material enjoyment and completely surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord by hearing His messages from the right person, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. But aspirations for material enjoyment by endeavoring persons are condemned. Such aspirations are something like the intoxication of the degraded human society. Intelligent persons should try to avoid these aspirations and seek instead the permanent life by returning home, back to Godhead.





Prabhupāda: You can read the śloka number 8 also. Dharmārtha uttama-ślokaṁ tantuḥ tanvan pitṝn yajet. (Pradyumna leads chanting of text 8.)



Devotee: Jaya Śrī Guru.



Prabhupāda: Have kīrtana.



Devotees: All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. (devotees offer obeisances)



Prabhupāda: Vibration of this mantra will purify. Even if we do not understand the meaning, try to vibrate the mantra.



(end)



720520SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.2-3

-

Los Angeles, May 20, 1972



Prabhupāda: So kīrtana has finished or kīrtana has to be... Where is... (devotees chanting japa)



Pradyumna: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya... (3 times) (leads chanting of verse and synonyms)



brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu

yajeta brahmaṇaḥ patim

indram indriya-kāmas tu

prajā-kāmaḥ prajāpatīn

[SB 2.3.2-7]



Prabhupāda: So, I think last verse we did not read the purport. You read the purport of the last verse.



evam etan nigaditaṁ

pṛṣṭavān yad bhavān mama

nṛṇāṁ yan mriyamāṇānāṁ

manuṣyeṣu manīṣiṇām



Read the purport.



Pradyumna: "Purport: In the human society, all over the world, there are millions and billions of men and women, and almost all of them are less intelligent because they have very little knowledge of the spirit soul."



Prabhupāda: This is our challenge, that the, there are millions and trillions of men and women all over the world, but they're not at all intelligent. This is our challenge. So, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement may be taken by others as crazy, or we challenge that "You are all crazy men." Therefore we have got a little book, "Who is Crazy?" Because they're thinking that "These shaven-headed boys and girls are crazy," but actually they are crazy. Because they have no intelligence. Why? They do not know what is spirit soul. This is the animal consciousness. Dogs, cats, they think that the body, they are the body.



yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Go-khara. Go means cow, and khara means ass. A person who is in bodily conscious, "I am this body." So 99.9% of the whole population of the world, they're like this, "I am this body," "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am African," "I am this..."



And they're fighting just like cats and dogs, they fight, "I am cat, you are dog. You are dog, I am cat." That's all. So this challenge, that "You are all rascals," it is a very strong word, but actually that is the fact. That is the fact. It is a revolutionary movement. We are challenging everyone that "You are all set of asses and cows and animals, because you have no knowledge beyond this body." Therefore it is said... In this purport, I have especially mentioned. "Because they have little knowledge of spirit soul, all of them are not intelligent." I have spoken with big, big professors. In Moscow, that gentleman, Professor Kotovsky, he said, "Swamiji, after death, there is nothing. Everything is finished." And he's one of the big professors in the country. So this is the defect of modern civilization, that the whole society is being governed by cats and dogs, actually. So how there can be any peace and prosperity? It is not possible. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ.

Blind man leading other blind men. If one has eyes to see, he can lead hundreds and thousands of men, "Please come along with me. I shall cross the road." But if the man leading, he is himself blind, how he can lead others? Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. So Bhāgavata, there is no comparison. There cannot be. It is transcendental science. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Īśa-tantryām, these blind leaders, they are bound up by the laws of material nature, and they are giving advice. What advice they can give? Then? Go on.

Pradyumna: "Almost all of them have a wrong conception of life, for they identify themselves with the gross and subtle material bodies, which they are not in fact."



Prabhupāda: This is their, I mean to say, less intelligence. Everyone thinks that "I am this body." Or little further off, one thinks, "No, I am not this body. I am mind." There are two bodies, one gross body made of these physical elements: earth, water, air, fire, sky, and another... Just like shirt and coat. You have got your coat, and within the coat there is shirt, and within the shirt, you are. This is gross example. Similarly, we have got this gross body and when the gross body is finished, then I keep myself in this mental body. That is called ghostly body. The ghostly body means one who is living in the subtle body. Ghost is a fact; it is not fictitious. So the subtle body carries me to another gross body. That is called transmigration of the soul. I must have some vehicle. The subtle body... Gross body is finished. That is gone. Now, the subtle body is there; therefore my mentality will create another gross body. If I am dog mentality, then I'll create another body, dog's body. And if I am God mentality, then I'll create another body like God.



This is the process. So, everyone has got full liberty how, what kind of body he's going to get next. So if you keep yourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that consciousness, subtle body, then you are sure to get next life, if not in Vaikuṇṭha, at least you get a high standard life. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ. Bhraṣṭaḥ means fallen, fallen. Suppose we are executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and some of our students are going away. So that is called bhraṣṭa, fallen. They could not continue. So one who could not continue by his ill luck, he is also not loser because he is... That slight Kṛṣṇa consciousness will help him to get another human form of body. That is guaranteed. Ordinary men, they do not know what kind of body they are going to get. They're in darkness. But it will be decided at the time of his death according to the mentality. God is so kind, whatever you want, He is giving you. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11].

"Whatever you want, you take." He has given you full liberty. Because we have come to this material world to enjoy. Enjoy means sense gratification. And sense gratification standard is according to the body. A king's body, his sense gratification, and a hog's body, his sense gratification, they are different. Because the bodies are different. A king cannot take anything which is not very nicely prepared, and a hog is satisfied with stool. Why? A different body. Deha-yogena dehinām. There are... The whole thing is sense gratification. Here, anyone who has come... Indriyārtha artha-vādinaḥ. Their only aim is sense gratification. That's all. Anyone. Beginning from Brahmā down to the ant. Material life means a desire for sense gratification. They're fallen because they wanted to gratify their senses. They cannot remain in Vaikuṇṭha world. In the Vaikuṇṭha world, only the one, the Supreme Lord, His senses should be satisfied not anyone's else. That is called bhakti.

The process is sense gratification, but if you want your sense gratification, that is material. And if you want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa's sense gratification, then you are spiritual. So anyone who wants to gratify his senses, personal, he is pushed here, in this material world. Now, according to different karma, you create your field... Just like ordinarily, everyone is working in Los Angeles, hard, day and night, but somebody's poor man, somebody's rich man. Why? According to karma. One is intelligent enough. He can do things very nicely. He's getting more money. So field is open for everyone. It is not, the government is giving a special facility for somebody, and he's becoming rich, and another man is forbidden to use the government facilities, therefore he's becoming poor. No. It is not that. Government is giving facility everyone equally. You become educated, you become high-court judge. And if you become criminal, then go to jail. So similarly, God, He's equal to everyone.

Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu [Bg. 9.29]. There is no discrimination. How He can be God? God has not made all these different types of bodies. You have made; we have made. I want to become a dog, God has given me facility, "Take this dog's body." Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni... [Bg. 3.27]. He immediately orders material nature, "Give him a dog's body." That's all. If I want to have a tiger's body, nature will give me tiger's body, "Take, tiger's body." So it depends on my work, sva-karmabhiḥ. But either I'll have a tiger's body, or dog's body, or a Brahmā's body, or ant's body, all of us are fallen, patita. Patita. Patita means fallen. Because this is not the proper life; you'll have to change. Sometimes you are Brahmā, sometimes you are hog. Up and down. Up and down. Therefore, one who is intelligent, he has no more... Āra nā koriho mane āśā. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, "No more desires. Simply surrender to Kṛṣṇa." If you go on desiring... You can desire. You are full at liberty. But desire means you have to accept different types of bodies.

It is... You cannot make any permanent settlement. That is not possible. And That is also your fault. Because... Suppose you are posted now in a high post, Mr. Nixon, but you cannot keep the standard. You'll commit some sins. Next life, you'll have to become something else. This is going on. Kabhu svarge kabhu naya. Therefore the karmīs, they are all non-intelligence. Their intelligence is not... The only intelligent person is he who has completely surrendered to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and engaged in his service. He's the only intelligent. And all are rascals. That's all. This is our conclusion. Anyone, let come. We shall prove it. Let anyone come, either the karmīs, jñānīs, yogis, anyone. We shall prove that "You are rascal #1." This is our challenge. If he's a sane man, he'll understand that he's a rascal. Otherwise, he will fight, unnecessarily. Therefore we do not say directly such harsh words, that "You are rascal." But we should know at least that they are all rascals.

At least we should know. They have no intelligence. Because they are entangled. Just see this list. Here is, brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu. Brahma-varcasa means those who are desiring to become one with the effulgence, to merge into the effulgence of the Lord. Varcasa. Varcasa means the effulgence of Kṛṣṇa. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. Just like the sun and the sunshine. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Brahma, and His effulgence is called brahmajyoti. So these jñānīs, they are desiring to merge into the Brahman effulgence. Therefore, it is called brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu. And kāma means desire. Therefore, they are still desiring. They are fed up with these ordinary desires. Ordinarily, they are desiring, "I shall become rich man. I shall become minister. I shall become this, I shall become that." And they are also desiring to merge into the effulgence of Kṛṣṇa. That is also desire, kāma. The word is explicitly said, kāma. Kāma means desire.

That is also sense gratification. To become one with God, it is also sense gratification. When he fails to become the greatest personality, he then desires, "Now let me become one with God." One with God means he thinks that he will be equally expert as the supreme enjoyer. Because God is supreme enjoyer. Bhoktā. So he could not enjoy life separately; now he wants to mix with the body of God. Therefore... That enjoyment is there. The propensity for enjoying is there. He failed to enjoy keeping himself separate, so he wants to mix with God. Just like the politicians. Whenever there is some political movement, they take some part. Their idea is that "If I become somehow or other a little prominent, important, I'll have a minister's post." That's all. It is a fact. They do not care for country's welfare. No. There is no such question. Their only ambition is, "Let me mix with this political party. It's growing... Just like in our country, there are so many parties.

Recently, Indira Gandhi's party became powerful. So all other men, giving resignation from other party, they took into the party of Indira Gandhi. So it is like that, merging into the existence of the powerful. So the frustrated karmīs, frustrated karmīs, when they do not find any happiness even by becoming the greatest or the topmost person, he wants to become one with God. Therefore it is said, brahma-varcasa-kāmas tu. Brahma-varcasa means effulgence. But it is kāma. That is not akāma. But a devotee is akāma, there is no kāma. He has no personal desires. His desire is only to remain eternal servant of God. That's all. That is his position. That is not desire. That is his actual position. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Kāmaye, this kāma. I no more desire for riches. Karmīs-they want money. Na dhanaṁ na janam, or they want many men to follow. Followers, they create party by political agitation.

So na dhanaṁ na janam. And another desire is to have very nice, beautiful wife. These are the material desires, to have enough money, enough followers, nice wife. "Bas. My life is now fulfilled." But Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, denies all these nonsense. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye. "I don't want all these things." So just try to understand the position of Kṛṣṇa conscious person. They have nothing to do with all this nonsense. Then what is our position? Void? Because "No, no, not this, not this, not this." Then it come to zero? No. Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. The positive, bhakti. Not zero. We make all this nonsense zero, but we come to the positive fact. The fact is "I am eternal servant of God." So that is fact. I have forgotten now; therefore I am desiring so many things. So come to the fact. Come to the fact. Actually, they are in fact. Just like, what is called outlaws. Outlaws, they say, you don't care for government, but what is the loss of the government by such declaration?

That outlaw is put into the prison house and he's captivated and give all sorts of trouble. That... The outlaw's gain is to put himself into trouble. That's all. The government does not lose anything by the so-called declaration of the outlaws, that "I don't care for the government." That is the idea. Similarly, those who are declaring, "What is God? We don't care for God. I am God. I am everything," so they are creating their own hell. That's all. God has nothing to lose, nothing to gain. "You go to hell, according to your..." But because we are part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa, He's not very happy because these rascals are going to hell. Therefore He comes: "My dear boys, why you are going to hell in this way? Please surrender and come home." (laughter) But these rascals will not hear. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. "Eh! Why shall I surrender to Kṛṣṇa? He's an ordinary man. I am also as good as Kṛṣṇa." That's all. Therefore they're less intelligent.

They have no intelligence. Then? Go on.

Pradyumna: "They may be situated in different high and low positions in the estimation of human society, but one should know definitely that unless one inquires about his own self beyond the body and the mind, all his activities in human life are total failures."



Prabhupāda: That's all. If he does not care to know what he is, what is his position... But he cannot know it because he has already accepted "I am this body." The body will be finished. Either it will be burned or buried in the ground, or some animal will eat me. That's all. So with that, everything will be finished. So therefore, with this understanding, whatever he is doing, it is simply failure. Because the basic principle of understanding is wrong. He does not know that "I am creating my next field of work." That he does not know. So, Bhagavad-gītā informs us, idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya [Bg. 13.2]. What is called? The field. This body is called field. What is that śloka? Can you remember? Idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya kṣetram ity abhidhīyate Kṣetra [Bg. 13.2]. Kṣetra means field. Field. Just like you work, you play, on the field. So the... You are not the field. You are not the field. Because you are walking on the field or you are playing on the field, it does not mean you are field.



But these nonsense, these rascals, they take it, "I'm playing on this field; therefore I am field." No. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says particularly, idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya kṣetram ity abhidhīyate [Bg. 13.2]. Kṣetra. It is field. Just like "a field of activities," we say. So every individual soul is given a chance of field of activities. So this is a field. Now you can act. This field, this body, human body, is very nice field. Here, by acting, you can understand your real position. Other field, the dog's field... He has got a body, but that body is not very good to understand himself. So idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya kṣetram ity abhidhīyate [Bg. 13.2]. So one who does not know that "This body is my field of activities, I am not this body,"... Therefore, without knowing the real fact that he is not body, he is simply working; that means it is failure. Parābhavaḥ. The Sanskrit word is called parābhavaḥ. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jātaḥ. Every one of us is born abodha.

A means not, and bodha means knowledge. Without any knowledge. That's a fact. If you are born with knowledge, then there was no need of sending the children to school. There was no need. He is born. No. Everyone is born rascal. That is to be understood. And therefore he has to be trained. So if the training is simply how to eat more, how to sleep more, how to have sex life more, and how to defend more, that is animal training. But if the training is how to know God, how to know your relationship with God, that is real training. That chance is in the human form of body. So if a human being does not take this chance, this facility, then his all activities are failure. Simply for nothing he's wasting time. Failure. Then?

Pradyumna: "Therefore, out of thousands and thousands of men, one may inquire about his spirit self and thus consult the revealed scriptures like Vedānta-sūtras, Bhagavad-gītā, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam."



Prabhupāda: Yes. The information is there. Simply, the inquiry should be there. The Vedānta-sūtra therefore, the first aphorism, athāto brahma jijñāsā. Jijñāsā means inquiry. "Now it is the opportunity for inquiring about the self." "Now" means this human form of body. A dog cannot. So therefore, Vedānta-sūtra begins, athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the opportunity. But unfortunately, people are not given the opportunity, facility. School, college, they are simply giving "More become mechanics," how to deal with instruments, iron instruments. Big, big institutions for technological understanding. And where is this technology? Why a dead man is dead man? Why don't you give some mechanical power so that he can come out again? Where is that technology? You know the technology... When a motorcar is stopped, you know the technology how to start it again. But you do not know this technology. When this motorcar, this body motorcar will stop, you have no technology to start it again.



Then where is the perfection of your technological institute? You are missing the real point. Therefore abodha-jātaḥ, everything is failure, all technology failure. Failure, simply failure. What is the use of? You do not know real technology. Therefore it is failure. But the informations are there. If we are intelligent enough, then we can take that "What is this? Why a dead man cannot be revived into life again? Then what is the fact?" But nobody wants to die; he wants to continue. Why he becomes old? Old means warning and, of the... Just like the, what is that, yellow light. "Now please prepare for the red light." So this is coming... You stop this. Technology. Where is your technology? But the information is there. Bhagavad-gītā. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Then as you have changed so many bodies, from your mother's womb up to the point of death, so you are going to change another body. Therefore any sane man will say "Oh, then what is that body?

What kind of body I am going to get?" And that is intelligent. That is intelligence. And, if he does not know, he dies like cats and dogs, then he spoils his whole life, human form of life. This is going on. Have saṅkīrtana. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720525SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.8, and Initiations

-

Los Angeles, May 25, 1972



Prabhupāda: So where is Pradyumna?



Devotee: He's typing.



Prabhupāda: Why? One śloka. Yes, you can... Anyone can chant. (japa) (pause) One verse.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



dharmārtha uttama-ślokaṁ

tantuḥ tanvan pitṝn yajet

rakṣā-kāmaḥ puṇya-janān

ojas-kāmo marud-gaṇān

[SB 2.3.8]



Prabhupāda: Where are those books? These small books? (pause) My spectacles? Nobody's here? Where is Nanda Kumāra? Sleeping? As soon as there is opportunity, sleep. (laughter) (japa) Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **, one has to conquer over sleeping, eating, and sense enjoyment. Nidrā, nidrā means sleeping. Āhāra means eating or collecting more, collecting. Eating, sleeping, and vihāra, sense gratification. Vijitau, the Gosvāmīs, they conquered over this.



Devotee: He said he's making the kacaurīs.



Prabhupāda: Hm. Rājya-kāmo manūn devān nirṛtiṁ tv abhicaran yajet, kāma-kāmo yajet som ... No, not this. Dharmārtha uttama-ślokam (devotees chant responsively) tantuḥ tanvan pitṝn yajet, rakṣā-kāmaḥ puṇya-janān, ojas-kāmo marud-gaṇān Hm. Repeat, repeat again. (devotees chant śloka) So, word meaning?



Pradyumna: Translation: "One should worship Lord Viṣṇu or His devotee for spiritual advancement of knowledge, and for protection of heredity and advancement of the dynasty one should worship the different demigods."



Prabhupāda: Hm. Other line is not translated. Hm. Then?



Pradyumna: Purport?



Prabhupāda: Hm.



Pradyumna: "The path of religion entails making progress on the path of spiritual advancement, ultimately reviving the eternal relation with Lord Viṣṇu in His impersonal effulgence, localized Paramātmā feature, and ultimately in His personal feature by spiritual advancement of knowledge. And one who wants to establish a good dynasty and be happy in the progress of temporary bodily relations should take shelter of the pitās and the demigods in other pious planets. Such different classes of worshipers of different demigods may ultimately reach the respective planets within the universe, but he who reaches the spiritual planets in the brahmajyoti achieves the highest perfection."



Prabhupāda: Yes. So, now. (devotees chant japa) (break in tape)... the word is abhyantaram, the word is abhyantaram... Antara means internal. (break in tape)



Jayahari: So the translation to this mantra: "Unpurified or purified, or even having passed through all situations, one who remembers the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead is cleansed without and within." So speaking from our own situation, we can understand that we've been brought up in a very degrading culture that right from the beginning is teaching propaganda how one must forget God. So Prabhupāda has so kindly given us a process to cleanse the mind. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. We want to clear our mind again so we can see things as they are. So this human form of life is very rare opportunity, and it is rare because out of so many species of life we have been given the opportunity to again remember God. [break] (CB interference is heard coming through the speaker.) (japa)



Prabhupāda: Where is found, this name?



Devotee: List of names.



Prabhupāda: So you know the rules and regulations? The regulations?



Lāla Kṛṣṇa: No meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Lāla Kṛṣṇa.



Lāla Kṛṣṇa: Bāla?



Prabhupāda: Lāla. Or Bāla Kṛṣṇa? Lāla Kṛṣṇa is name. You can give them. Next.



Devotee: Roger? (Raghu-nandana)



Prabhupāda: You know the rules and regulations? What are they?



Raghu-nandana: No meat-eating... (inaudible)...



Prabhupāda: Hm. How many rounds you will chant?



Raghu-nandana: Sixteen rounds a day.



Prabhupāda: Minimum, minimum. So your name is Raghu-nandana dāsa. Raghu-nandana is Lord Rāmacandra's another name.



Devotee: Cassandria?



Prabhupāda: What is her name?



Devotee: Kasamapriyā dāsī?



Prabhupāda: Kusuma.



Devotee: Kusuma-priyā dāsī.



Prabhupāda: So you know the rules and regulations?



Kusuma-priyā: (inaudible)



Prabhupāda: So your name is Kusuma-priyā. Kusuma-priyā, "the best of the flowers."



Devotee: Pam? (Pāṇḍurāṇī.)



Prabhupāda: Pāṇḍurāṇī?



Devotee: Pāṇḍurāṇī.



Prabhupāda: So, what are the rules?



Pāṇḍurāṇī: No meat-eating, no intoxication, no illicit sex, no gambling.



Prabhupāda: How many rounds you shall chant?



Pāṇḍurāṇī: Sixteen.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Pāṇḍurāṇī, "Queen of the Pāṇḍus." That means Draupadī.



Devotee: John?



Prabhupāda: Draupadī had five husbands. (laughter)



Devotee: Dharma-kṣetra.



Prabhupāda: What are the rules?



Dharma-kṣetra: No eating of meat, fish or eggs, no gambling, no intoxication, and no illicit sex.



Prabhupāda: Dharma-kṣetra dāsa. Dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ [Bg. 1.1]. Dharma-kṣetra, "the field of religious activities."



Devotee: Patricia. Pātrī, Pātrī dāsī, Pātrī.



Prabhupāda: Pātrī. Pātrī. What are the rules?



Pātrī: No meat-eating, no intoxication, no gambling or speculation, and no illicit sex.



Prabhupāda: Thank you. So your name is Pātrī dāsī. Su-pātrī. Pātrī means a good reservoir. Everything good is there.



Devotee: Mary? Mañjuālī? Mañjuālī?



Prabhupāda: So what are the rules?



Mañjulālī: No meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling... (inaudible)



Prabhupāda: Thank you. So, Mañjuālī. Your name is Mañjuālī, one of the gopīs. Thank you. There is another. Come on.



Devotee: Pārvatī.



Prabhupāda: Pārvatī. So what are the rules?



Pārvatī: (inaudible)



Prabhupāda: Yes. So your name is Pārvatī. Pārvatī, "the daughter of Himalayas and wife of Lord Śiva." (devotees offer obeisances)



Jayahari: So what time is ārati? (kīrtana)



(end)



720526SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.9

-

Los Angeles, May 26, 1972





Prabhupāda: Where are the books? The small books. Where is the problem? Have you got (?) Come on.



Pradyumna: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya (etc., leads chanting of verse:)



rājya-kāmo manūn devān

nirṛtiṁ tv abhicaran yajet

kāma-kāmo yajet somam

akāmaḥ puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.9]



Translation: "One who desires domination over a kingdom or an empire should worship the Manus. One who desires victory over an enemy should worship the demons, and one who desires sense gratification should worship the moon. But one who desires nothing of material enjoyment should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead."



Prabhupāda: This is significant. Those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, they have no material desires. Finished. Brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam. Upaśama, upaśama means completely finished, don't want. They can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Otherwise, without being akāma ... Akāma means no material desires. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], completely. If we have got least desire for material enjoyment, Kṛṣṇa will give us chance again to accept a body which will satisfy the senses. Deha-yogena dehinām. For our sense gratification, a particular type of body is offered. By the order of Kṛṣṇa, through the agency of material nature. Just like father gives the seed, and the mother gives the body, similarly, Kṛṣṇa, the supreme father, He is the giver of the seed, living entity, and according to the living entity's desire, the material nature gives the body. Therefore material nature is mother, and Kṛṣṇa is the supreme father. Tasmin garbhaṁ dadāmy aham. Garbhaṁ dadāmy aham: "I give the seed, garbha, pregnancy."



So we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and He... According to my desire, He puts me into circumstances, material circumstances; I get a particular type of body. This is the secret of different types of body and transmigration of the body. The foolish scientists, they do not know this science. They are trying to create living entity in the laboratories. It is impossible. Just like if a woman wants to create a child independently, it is impossible. There must be contact with a man who must give the seed, then a woman can produce a child. Similarly, these rascals who are trying to produce life by material combination, through the material agency, they are all rascals. They do not know even the ordinary law. By combination of matter you cannot produce any living entity. That is not possible. Living entity, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa must give the seed. Tasmin garbhaṁ dadāmy aham. The creation, the yoni... Yathā yoni, yathā bījaṁ yathā yoni. This is natural.

So to get this body means I have got material desires. This body. This is the philosophy. Anyone who has got this material body, beginning from Brahmā... He is considered the first creature within this universe, most intelligent, most learned, but still, because he has got this material body, he's not akāma, without any material desires. He has got material desire. He wanted to become the supreme head of one universe. Just like we try to become supreme head of a family, then of a society, then of a nation, of a community. Then I desire to be head, also... Go on, go on, increasing. To lord it over. So, so long there will be desire to lord it over, then we have to accept a body. It doesn't matter what kind of body. It may be Brahmā's body, it may be cat's body, it may be man's body, it may be bird's body, it may be beast's body. That will depend on my desire. But if I have got any desire, material desire to fulfill, then I must be prepared for accept next body, another.

So if one wants to finish this business, accepting... And accepting a material body means to become subjected to the laws of material nature. You get a material body, and if you want that "I shall not die," it is impossible. It is not good. Then you must die. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. You get a material body and again you give it up, and again you get it. This is going on. Therefore, Caitanya Mahāprabhu said,

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



In this way, all the living entities, beginning from Brahmā down to the microscopic germ, everyone is rotating in different species of life, in different planets, in different position. Innumerable. As the living entities are innumerable, so varieties of bodies are also innumerable. Not innumerable, they are counted, 8,400,000 species of life. This is Vedic knowledge. Exactly giving the number. Exactly. 8,400,000. It doesn't say 9,000,000, or 500,000. No. Exact.



Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi. In the aquatics, there are 900,000 species of life. Now, if you have got your science, now go and see. This is Vedic knowledge. Perfect, without any doubt. Sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. And the plants and trees, they are 2,000,000 species of life. So, ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. We are transmigrating from one species of life, one species of life, another, another, another, another... They cannot explain why there are so many varieties of life. The varieties of life is there because we have desire, kāma. "I want this." "All right, take this." Kṛṣṇa is immediately prepared. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. "If you want, you can take it." But Kṛṣṇa says, ultimately, that "You'll never be happy in this way. Therefore you give up this business. Simply surrender unto Me." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. So that is called akāma. So here it is said that akāmaḥ yajet puruṣaṁ param. If you want to be akāma, devoid of all material desires, then surrender to Kṛṣṇa.

That will save you from this business of rotating from one sort of body to another sort of body. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. To come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not very easy thing. It is by the grace of guru. Guru-kṛṣṇa. And grace of Kṛṣṇa. Combined together. One who sincerely wants to stop this business of repeated birth and death... But they do not understand that this is a suffering. They say, "Ah, let it happen." When they forget what is the suffering of birth. Birth, as I have many times explained... Nowadays, it is so much suffering that a child is born within the womb, and there is abortion, killed. "Kill him." But they do not understand the suffering, that one chance given that it will get a body and come out and maybe able to come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that opportunity... he's being killed within the womb. But these rascals, they do not know what is the suffering. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9].

Kṛṣṇa says the sufferings of birth... They do not understand, such fools, that what is the suffering of birth. Even if you are not killed, you have to remain compact in a vat, airtight. And the worms, they are biting. So many things. Suffocated. That is one thing. But if he can live at least for ten months, the mother does not kill, abortion, then it has got a chance to come out. Otherwise, there is no chance to come out ever. He dies within the womb, again transferred to another womb, and again it is killed. So those who are too much sinful, those who are causing these abortions, they will get this sort of life. They will never see light. One womb, killed; another womb, killed; another womb, killed; another womb, killed. This is so sinful, this abortion. And the modern civilization and the priestly order, they are passing: "If the mother selects... otherwise, there is no objection, abortion." Such foolish world is going on. You see? There are so many subtle laws of nature.

They do not know anything. And they are claiming to be educated scientist and Vedantists philosopher. All nonsense. All nonsense. Therefore it is said, akāmaḥ puruṣaṁ param. Give up your kāma, lusty desires, or any material desires, and surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Then that is life successful. Otherwise, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. Take once birth... These are all desires. And the so big list. "If you want this, then you can worship this." Why it is recommended that you worship these demigods? Because if one goes for fulfilling the desire to a demigod, there is connection of Viṣṇu. Because any yajña you perform, demigod, there must be Viṣṇu first. The mantra says that "With the sanction of Viṣṇu's order, you get this facility." So by worshiping the demigod, if he's sensible man, one day he will come to know that "Above the demigods there is Viṣṇu. So why I am worshiping this demigods? Why not Viṣṇu?" Suppose if I get some facility from somebody, and if I see that this man is taking sanction from another superior man.

So my intelligence should be, "Why not go direct to the superior man? Why I am flattering this man?" That is sense. So therefore demigod worship is recommended in Vedas, that one day he may come to his intelligence that "Why demigod? Why not God, personally, directly?" Therefore, it is not that it is encouragement, it is encouragement(?). Just like, you know amongst the Hindus, the flesh-eaters, they're recommended that "If you want to eat meat, then you sacrifice one goat before the goddess Kālī." And Goddess Kālī is worshiped once in a month, on the dark moon day, at night. And there are mantras. The mantras say that... Within the ear of the animal it is said that, "You are sacrificing your life before the deity; so next life, immediately, you get a human form of life. And when you get a human form of life, you'll have the right to kill this man also." This is the mantra. Now, if you are a sane man, understand that "I am killing this goat at the risk of my life in next birth.

So why I am going to take such responsibility? Better stop it." So, it is for discouraging. If I say directly, "Don't eat meat," he'll protest, "Why shall I not? It is our food. I must eat." Therefore, instead of directly prohibiting, the śāstra says, "Yes, yes, you can eat. But by sacrificing it before Goddess Kālī." That means condition, restriction.

Similarly, marriage. Marriage-what is the meaning of marriage? Everyone can have sex without marriage. So what it means, marriage? Marriage means restriction. That's all. That you have sex, but a particular selected woman, man. That's... No more. That's all. That is marriage. So all the Vedic rules are there... Śāstra says: loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā. Why this demigod worship, marriage, these are prescribed? They are prescribed to stop it, not to encourage it. But the foolish persons, they say, "Well, it is in the śāstra. Why shall I not do?" Therefore Lord Buddha, when he appeared, he wanted to stop this animal killing, but because these rascals will show the evidence that "Here is sanctioned by the Vedas to kill an animal before Goddess Kālī. Why you stop?" Therefore he said, "I don't care for your Vedas." Because his only idea was to stop this animal killing. Ahiṁsā.

So we should know, whenever there is sanction in the śāstra for meat-eating, for sex intercourse, or for drinking, it is not for encouraging; it is for prohibiting, restricting. So the next question should (be), "Why it is restricted?" Restricted means so long you'll be addicted to this habit, you'll have to accept a body. So one who cannot stop it immediately, he's restricted. "All right, you want to do it. All right. Go to this demigod." That is the list. If you want this, all right, go to this demigod." Means somehow or other, this lusty person is being brought before a demigod to understand that this is not good. This is implicating. Therefore it is said akāma. If you become completely free from all material desires, or if you want that position, then come to Kṛṣṇa. No other demigod. If you actually want freedom from this material bondage, then Kṛṣṇa...

Kṛṣṇa also assures, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. These are all pāpa, sinful. Either you take the body of a Brahmā or an ant or cat or dog. All sinful. Only the person who has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness seriously, he's pious. Akāma. The next verse will be akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā [SB 2.3.10]. Thank you very

much. (devotees offer obeisances.) Kīrtana. (end)



720528SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.10

-

Los Angeles, May 28, 1972





Prabhupāda: What is the time now?



Devotees: Seven minutes after seven.



Prabhupāda: So make it correct. Come on. (to all the devotees, loud) Who has made the caraṇāmṛta? Eh? Who has made caraṇāmṛta?



Devotee: She is not here, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Who is he? Who is she? I want to know.



Devotee: Tell her to come out of the kitchen ... (devotees chant japa.)



Prabhupāda: Why you have no responsibility? You have added salt instead of sugar. Why?



Girl devotee: I didn't read the-



Prabhupāda: No. You shouldn't make anymore. One responsible should make it. Somebody, give him charge. This is great mistake. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Where is Pradyumna? Chant.



Pradyumna: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya (etc., leads chanting of verse and reads synonyms)



akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.10]



Translation: "A person who has broader intelligence, who may be full of all material desire or may be without any material desire, and who also desires liberation, by all means must worship the Supreme Whole Personality of Godhead."



Prabhupāda: So this is our conclusion. There are three classes of men, human beings. Not with hands and legs. Actually human being, those who know what is the purpose of life. The purpose of life, the first basic principle of our life, is that we have come here, in this material world, for becoming master, lording it over the material nature. Although we cannot do it, that is our desire. They are called sarva-kāmaḥ. There is no limit of desires. Anyone, you find out ordinarily, in this world, you ask him, "What is your ultimate desire?" There is no limit. Therefore he's called sarva-kāmaḥ. Pralayāntam upāśritam. Till the time of death, there is desire. A dying man, he is also desiring. I have seen it practically. One gentleman in Allahabad, he was contemporary, of our age. He was dying at the age of fifty-four years, and he was crying, and he was requesting the doctor... He was very rich man. "My dear doctor, can you not give me at least four years life so I could finish my program?" The nonsense, what is your program? You see? I have seen it. (aside) Don't move leg like that. So therefore they are called sarva-kāmaḥ. There is no end. He does not know... He's going to die, and he thinks that doctor can prolong his life. Is it possible to prolong life? Not for a second even. When you are destined to die, you must die. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. This death is Kṛṣṇa. You cannot defy Kṛṣṇa; that is not possible. Kṛṣṇa says, mṛtyur aham, sarva-haraś ca. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja's father. He was so proud, and he was confident, "Now I have taken benediction from Brahmā. I'll live forever." So he was very much proud. Just like karmīs, they also think, "When there will be disease and there will be point of death, I shall take care very nicely. There are so many good physicians. I shall call them, and they will give me life." So this is demonic. You cannot protect yourself by so-called science, physician, or power. It is not possible. Because the death is Kṛṣṇa.



Rāvaṇa, Hiraṇyakaśipu, all, many demons, they thought it that "We shall live forever." So anyone who is thinking like that, he's a demon. He cannot stop death. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. Kṛṣṇa...If you don't give to Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will appear just like Nṛsiṁhadeva, and He will take away everything from you and kill you. That's all. Now who can challenge? Who is there who can challenge Kṛṣṇa? No, nobody can. That is Kṛṣṇa. So the sarva-kāmaḥ ... So up to the end of life ... All these politicians, we have seen. Gandhi, in our country. Jarwahal Nehru. He was attacked, heart attack, several times, and doctor says, "Within a week, you'll have to go away." Still, he was going to the hillside to recoup his health. And when he was on the point of death, he was brought to New Delhi and died. So up to the point of death he was thinking that "I must remain a prime minister; otherwise the whole thing will be lost. In my absence, if I am not on the seat, then everything will be lost."

This is māyā. Gandhi was thinking like that. He agitated his political movement against the British rule. So Britishers went away. I requested him that "Now you have got sva-rājya, and you are so respectable in the world. You take this propaganda, to preach Bhagavad-gītā." No. He'll still stick to these politics. Unless he was killed. He was killed, you know. So this is the propensity, sarva-kāmaḥ. There is no end of their desire, no end. They are called sarva-kāmaḥ. So here it is recommended: akāmaḥ... Just the opposite. Akāmaḥ, niṣkiñcana. They have finished all these nonsense, material desires. Vaiṣṇava. Just like you have taken sannyāsa. It is supposed that you have finished all your material desires. This is called akāmaḥ, just the opposite. And the other side: sarva-kāmaḥ. There is no end of desire, material desire. So Vyāsadeva recommends, "All right, you may be sakāmaḥ..." Sakāmaḥ means without end of any desires. Full of desires... (break in tape)... and between this there is another... (break in tape)... mokṣa-kāmaḥ. So sakāmaḥ, sarva-kāmaḥ-karmīs, those who are working very hard, just like animals.

Animals are meant for working hard, but now, men are being educated to work like animals. And there is no end. So they are called karmīs. Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa has designated these animals, these karmī animals, who are working very, very hard, just like hogs and dog... they have been described in the Bhagavad-gītā as mūḍhāḥ. Mūḍhāḥ, rascal, foolish. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained why they are mūḍhāḥ. These karmīs, they want some eating, sleeping, mating. But why so much hard work? Now, eating, sleeping, mating... Just see the birds; they are free. They don't work at night, at least. But human beings, day and night. Night also, night duty. "I shall get some more money." So there is no end. How they can be happy? They are simply thinking of, that "I shall work very hard, and I shall get money and enjoy my senses."

Then where is the question of happiness? The karmīs cannot have happiness, because their method is to work hard. How they can be happy? Similarly, jñānīs, mokṣa-kāmaḥ. After being disgusted that "I worked so hard throughout my whole life. I could not get peace. Therefore it is false." Jagan mithyā. Mithyā means false. This is Śaṅkarācārya philosophy. Jagan mithyā. Mithyā means false. Brahma satyam. "Now let me search out where is Brahma and become one with him." That is also another labor. Speculating. They have to interpret all these Vedic literature to make God dead, void, impersonal, nullified. So they have to gather their arguments. That is another labor, hard labor. So they are also working hard. Yogis, they want to show some magic: "I can walk on the water. I can fly in the air without any airship. I can go this planet, that planet." Yogis can do that. They have got this magical power. "I can create immediately gold." And if you can show these magical feats, immediately you get so many...

But that kind of yogi also very rare to be found, and now, in your country, yogi means who can show some gymnastics, that's all. So they are also working hard. Because they have got kāma. The yogi, he wants to be very popular by showing magic. Because general people, they cannot walk on the water. But if somebody can walk on the water, oh, millions of people immediately go to the Pacific Ocean to see. So therefore they want siddhi. Actually, there are yogis in Siddhaloka, without any flying machine, they can go from one planet to another. Durvāsā Muni, he went. Within a year, he came back. He went to Vaikuṇṭha planet. Yogi, great yogi. He saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, but he was not excused. He went to beg pardon so that he may be saved from the sudarśana-cakra. So he went to Lord Śiva, Lord Brahmā, and all big, big demigods: "Please save me. The sudarśana-cakra is after me." So everyone said, "We are unable to do anything. You can go to Lord Viṣṇu." So he went to Lord Viṣṇu, he saw Him, he talked with Him. And Lord Viṣṇu also said that "I cannot do anything. You must go to Ambarīṣa Mahārāja and fall down on his feet and beg his pardon. Then you can be saved." So this is the position.

And Ambarīṣa Mahārāja was a devotee. He did not know anything. He was simply depending on Kṛṣṇa. So just see who is powerful, that... Even the yogis are not so powerful as the devotees. Why? Because devotee's fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. Fully surrendered means "If Kṛṣṇa likes, He will save me; otherwise, I don't try for myself. I have to simply serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all." And Kṛṣṇa takes charge of your saving. And when Kṛṣṇa wants to kill... Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Ordinary... not ordinary, but a simple boy, and how much torturing was going on upon him by his father! But he was saved by Kṛṣṇa. Ultimately, when it was intolerable, then He appeared and killed the rascal. So therefore devotees are akāmaḥ.

They don't have any desires. Even in greatest danger, they do not ask Kṛṣṇa. That is pure devotion, anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. So Caitanya-caritāmṛta says that

kṛṣṇa-bhakta-niṣkāma, ataeva 'śānta'

bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī-sakali 'aśānta'

[Cc. Madhya 19.149]



Śānta means peaceful. Who is peaceful? Only kṛṣṇa-bhakta, devotee of Kṛṣṇa. He is peaceful. Others? No. They cannot be peaceful. Why? Now, there is demand. The karmī is wanting to lord it over this material world. The jñānī is wanting to become one with God. The yogi is wanting some wonderful power. So there is wanting. It may be of different category, but there is demand. But akāmaḥ, he has no demand. That's all. He doesn't want anything from Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching is: na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. "I don't want. I don't want money, I don't want followers, I don't want nice wife." These things are wanted by the materialists. A devotee simply wants "Give me the chance of serving You."



That's all. Hare Kṛṣṇa. "Hare, Rādhārāṇī; Kṛṣṇa, Lord, You are both present here. Kindly give me the chance to serve You." That's all. This is akāmaḥ. So akāmaḥ, they have no other business, simply to serve Kṛṣṇa. Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. "My dear Lord, I don't want anything. But give me this facility, that I may be engaged in Your service." That's all. (pause) So Bhāgavata recommends that "Even though you are a fool number one, you are demanding from Kṛṣṇa, sarva-kāmaḥ, or mokṣa-kāmaḥ, still, you worship Kṛṣṇa. Don't go to other demigods." Because... we have seen the list of demigods. If you want... The prescription is there, "If you want this, you worship this deity. If you want this, you worship this deity." But they are all kāma. In the Bhagavad-gītā these kāmīs, these lusty persons, have been condemned. Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Hṛta-jñānāḥ, lost of all intelligence. That means rascal. In good language it is hṛta-jñānaḥ, one who has lost his intelligence.

So hṛta-jñānāḥ is explained by Viśvanātha Cakravartī: naṣṭa-buddhayaḥ. Naṣṭa-buddhayaḥ, no intelligence. No intelligence. So why no intelligence? Now, that is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: antavat tu phalaṁ teṣām [Bg. 7.23]. The benediction they get from the demigods... Just like it is recommended, we have read it, that if you want beautiful wife, you worship Umā. If you want very strong sexual powers, then you worship Indra. So the prescription is there. But they are foolish. Why foolish? Suppose you get very beautiful wife and very strong sex power, then how long you will enjoy it? Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣām. It will end. Five years, ten years. Even in living condition, if you have become old, seventy years, eighty years old, then what you will do with beautiful wife? There will be no more sex power. Vṛddhasya taruṇī-bhāryā. Vṛddhasya ... These are useless. When one has become old, to have a young wife is troublesome for him. So therefore we should not desire anything material.

They're all temporary. It will finish. It will finish. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta, the same Caitanya... Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja says, kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei baḍa catura. Anyone who takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, takes the shelter of Kṛṣṇa, he is the perfect intelligent man. He is the perf... So here it is recommended that "You fools, you rascals..." Akāmaḥ sarva-kāmaḥ, eh, sarva, not akāmaḥ. Sarva-kāmaḥ, mokṣa-kāmaḥ. "You are all rascals." Therefore Vyāsadeva is advising "All right, even though you are rascal, you are full of desires, you are full of becoming one with the Supreme, still, you worship," yajeta puruṣaṁ param, "the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still, you do that." That is the recommendation. Don't go to others. Now, the question is that bhakti means anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. One must be free from all kinds of desires. That is pure bhakti. Now, it is recommended here that sarva-kāmaḥ, mokṣa-kāmaḥ, "Those who are desiring for all material opulences, those who are desiring for becoming liberated..."

So they are not anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. They have desires. So how they can be bhakta? How they can be devotee? Because devotee is pure, he has no... Akāmaḥ. Why it is recommended? The recommendation is there also for demigods. That is freedom. The śāstra is giving you all freedom. "If you like, you do this." But ultimately gives this instruction... Just like Kṛṣṇa. He has spoken so many things, jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, karma-yoga. But at the end He says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śara... [Bg. 18.66]. "You give up all this nonsense, simply surrender unto Me." That is the ultimate instruction. So that means śāstra gives you freedom, at the same time gives you chance. Śāstra is not... Just like we are free, and the state laws are there, and we are free to violate it or to abide by it. Similarly, all the śāstras, everything is there. And the freedom is also there. Not, I mean to say, the ultimate freedom, but there is freedom, small freedom. We can make our choice.

Here, also, the same thing. Vyāsadeva is giving list, that "If you want this, you worship this demigod." Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. But if you are intelligent, udāra-dhīḥ... Udāra-dhīḥ, very intelligent. Then, in spite of, despite all your desires, you become Kṛṣṇa conscious. You go to Kṛṣṇa. Puruṣaṁ param. Who is puruṣaṁ param? Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna accepted: paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. All paramam, Supreme. Puruṣam, "You are the Supreme Person." The same thing. Puruṣaṁ param. The Brahma-saṁhitā: īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. This param, supreme, superlative, is Kṛṣṇa, in every respect. He's the supreme power, puruṣottamam. Uttamam. Nobody greater than Kṛṣṇa. So here it is recommended that "Even if you have got desire..." All kinds of desire. There are varieties of desire. Even you want jñāna-siddhi, yoga-siddhi, karma-siddhi, or dhyāna-siddhi, simply go to Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Yat karoṣi, yaj juhoṣi.

Kṛṣṇa also says. Yat karoṣi. You want to do something. This is all activities. Either you are karmī, jñānī, or yogi, there are activities. The meditation, so-called meditation, that is also another activity, mental activity. So why it is recommended like that, that how...? They are not devotees. They are sarva-kāmaḥ. If they go to worship Kṛṣṇa, that is, there is facility. Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja, he was sarva-kāmaḥ. He wanted material happiness. He was insulted by his step-mother. He determined that "I shall have such kingdom which even my father also did not enjoy. My father's wife has insulted me. I shall show him." This kind of determination was there, that "I shall show him." So it was sarva-kāmaḥ. When Nārada approached Dhruva Mahārāja and informed him, "My dear boy, you are a prince, you are so delicate. You cannot accept these troubles of living in the jungle. It is very, very difficult. Great, great sages, they could not. You better go home. And when you get old, when time will be ripe, you can come. Now you go home."

So he was a son of kṣatriya. He was so determined. He said, "My dear sir, I thank you for your instruction. But I'm so rascal, I cannot accept." Just see. "I am kṣatriya. Your, this brahminical instruction will not be accepted by me. So if you can give me any mantra by which I can see the Supreme Lord, just talk of that. I want to see Him." Then Nārada Muni saw, "Oh, he's so determined, he's not going back." Then he gave him: oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. "Chant this." And he saw Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, within six months. He was so determined. But when Kṛṣṇa offered him, "Now, you ask Me whatever you like. You can take from Me. You have undergone such severe austerities. You can take." So he was sorry. "Oh..." Now, svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]. "My dear Lord, I have no more any desire. I don't want anything. I have got everything. Not only everything, more than everything. I have seen You. So I don't want anything."

You see? This chance is there. Even with your kāma, desires, you execute devotional service, make connection with the Supreme Lord. A time will come, you'll become akāmaḥ, no more... A time will come. Therefore it is recommended. Not that sarva-kāmaḥ goes to Kṛṣṇa and simply bothers Him, "Give me this, give me this." No. Let him talk like that, "Give me this, give me that." Kṛṣṇa will see to that. But devotional service, if he comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa seriously, then time will come, he will become akāmaḥ. Therefore it is recommended. Not that it is advised that you go to Kṛṣṇa and ask all nonsense from Him. That is not pure devotion. Pure devotion is akāmaḥ. Nothing. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jaga... [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. So it is recommended here only that a devotee, even he's foolish in the beginning, to ask from Kṛṣṇa all material facilities. Still, when he's engaged in devotional... when he comes to the perfectional stage, or when he comes in contact with a pure devotee, he gives up all this nonsense, and as a pure devotee, he simply engages himself without any return, without any profit, in the service of the Lord.

Thank you very much. (devotees offer obeisances) Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720529SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.11-12

-

Los Angeles, May 29, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse and reads synonyms)



etāvān eva yajatām

iha niḥśreyasodayaḥ

bhagavaty acalo bhāvo

yad bhāgavata-saṅgataḥ

[SB 2.3.11]



Prabhupāda: This is the important factor. Now, translation?



Pradyumna: "All the different kinds of worshipers of multi-demigods can attain the highest perfectional benediction, which is spontaneous attraction unflinchingly fixed upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by the association of the pure devotee of the Lord."



Prabhupāda: This is the secret, association of the pure devotee of the Lord. Without association of pure devotee of Lord, nobody can come to the stage, unflinching faith and devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I think last purport we did not read? Read it.



Pradyumna: No, we didn't read the last one. "Purport. The Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is described in the Bhagavad-gītā as the Puruṣottama, or the Supreme Personality. It is He only who can award liberation to the impersonalists by absorbing such aspirants in the brahmajyoti, the bodily rays of the Lord. The brahmajyoti is not separate from the Lord, as the glowing sun ray is not independent of the sun disc. Therefore one who desires to merge into the supreme impersonal brahmajyoti must also worship the Lord by bhakti-yoga, as recommended here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhakti-yoga is especially stressed here as the means of all perfection. In the previous chapters it has been stated that bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal of both karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga, and in the same way in this chapter it is emphatically declared that bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal of the different varieties of worship of the different demigods. Bhakti-yoga, thus being the supreme means of self-realization, is recommended here. Everyone must therefore seriously take up the methods of bhakti-yoga, even though one aspires for material enjoyment or liberation from material bondage.



Akāmaḥ is one who has no material desire. A living being, naturally being the part and parcel of the supreme whole puruṣaṁ pūrṇam, has as his natural function to serve the Supreme Being, just as the parts and parcels of the body, or the limbs of the body, are naturally meant to serve the complete body. Desireless means, therefore, not to be inert like the stone, but to be conscious of one's actual position and thus desire satisfaction only from the Supreme Lord. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has explained this desirelessness as bhajanīya parama-puruṣa-sukha-mātra-sva-sukhatvam in his Sandarbha. This means that one should feel happy only by experiencing the happiness of the Supreme Lord. This intuition of the living being is sometimes manifested even during the conditioned stage of a living being in the material world, and such intuition is expressed in the manner of altruism, philanthropy, socialism, communism, etc., by the undeveloped minds of less intelligent persons.

In the mundane field such an outlook of doing good to others in the form of society, community, family, country, or humanity is a partial manifestation of the same original feelings in which a pure living entity feels happiness by the happiness of the Supreme Lord. Such superb feelings were exhibited by the damsels of Vrajabhūmi for the happiness of the Lord. The gopīs loved the Lord without any return, and this is the perfect exhibition of the akāma spirit. Kāma spirit, or the desire for one's own satisfaction, is fully exhibited in the material world, whereas the spirit of akāma is fully exhibited in the spiritual world.

Thoughts of becoming one with the Lord, or being merged in the brahmajyoti, can also be exhibitions of kāma spirit if they are desires for one's own satisfaction to be free from the material miseries. A pure devotee does not want liberation..."

Prabhupāda: Prahlāda Mahārāja said that "I don't want my liberation alone. Unless I deliver all these fools who are rotting in this material world, I do not want my personal liberation." This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they are going to Himalayas or some secluded place for personal benefit. But a Vaiṣṇava, he has no desire for personal benefit. The personal benefit is already there in Vaiṣṇava because he's in touch with the Supreme Lord by his service. Prahlāda Mahārāja said,



naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās

tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ

śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-

māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān

[SB 7.9.43]



"My dear Lord, I am not anxious for myself. Because I have got the thing. I have no problem how to cross over the nescience or how to go to Vaikuṇṭha or to become liberated. These problems are solved." Why? How you have solved? Now, tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. "Because I am engaged always in glorifying your activities, so my problem is solved."



Then what is your problem? The problem is śoce. "I am lamenting," śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ, "those who are averse to You. Being averse to You, they are working so hard," māyā-sukhāya, "for so-called happiness, these rascals. So I am simply lamenting for them." This is our Vaiṣṇava philosophy. One who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, he has no problem. But his only problem is how to deliver the rascals who are simply working hard forgetting Kṛṣṇa. That is the problem. Go on. "A pure devotee does not want liberation ..."

Pradyumna: (continues reading to end of purport to text 10)



Prabhupāda: Next?



Pradyumna: All living entities in different statuses of life within the material creation, beginning from the first demigod, Brahmā, down to the small ant, are conditioned under the law of material nature, or the external energy of the Supreme Lord. The living entity in his pure state is conscious of the fact that he is a part and parcel of the Lord, but when he is thrown into the material world on account of his desire to lord it over material energy, he becomes conditioned by the three modes of material nature and thus struggles for existence for the highest benefit. This struggle for existence is something like following the will-o'-the-wisp under the spell of material enjoyment. All plans for material enjoyment, either by worship of different demigods as described in the previous verses of this chapter or by modernized advancement of scientific knowledge without the help of God or demigod, are illusory only, for despite all such plans for happiness, the conditioned living being within the compass of material creation can never solve the problems of life, namely birth, death, old age and disease. The history of the universe is full of such planmakers, and many kings and emperors come and go, leaving a planmaking story only. But the prime problems of life remain unsolved despite all endeavors by such planmakers.





Actually human life is meant for making a solution to the problems of life. One can never solve such problems by satisfying the different demigods, by different modes of worship, or by so-called scientific advancement in knowledge without the help of God or the demigods. Apart from the gross materialists, who care very little either for God or for the demigods, the Vedas recommend worship of different demigods for different benefits, and so the demigods are neither false nor imaginary. The demigods are as factual as we are, but they are much more powerful due to their being engaged in the direct service of the Lord in managing different departments in the universal government. The Bhagavad-gītā affirms this, and the different planets of the demigods are mentioned there, including the one of the supreme demigod, Lord Brahmā. The gross materialists do not believe in the existence of God or the demigods. Nor do they believe that different planets are dominated by different demigods. They are creating a great commotion about reaching the closest celestial body, Candraloka, or the moon, but even after much mechanical research they have only very scanty information of this moon, and in spite of much false advertisement for selling land on the moon, the puffed-up scientists or gross materialists cannot live there, and what to speak of reaching the other planets, which they are unable even to count. However, the followers of the Vedas have a different method of acquiring knowledge. They accept the statements of the Vedic literatures as authority in toto, as we have already discussed in Canto One, and therefore they have full and reasonable knowledge of God and demigods and of their different residential planets situated within the compass of the material world and beyond the limit of the material sky. The most authentic Vedic literature, accepted by the great Indian ācāryas like Śaṅkara, Rāmānuja, Madhva, Viṣṇu Svāmī, Nimbārka and Caitanya and studied by all important personalities of the world, is the Bhagavad-gītā, in which the worship of the demigods and their respective residential planets are mentioned. The Bhagavad-gītā (9.25) affirms:



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām





"The worshipers of demigods reach the respective planets of the demigods, and the worshipers of forefathers reach the planets of the forefathers. The gross materialist remains in the different material planets, but the devotees of the Lord reach the kingdom of God."



We also have information from the Bhagavad-gītā that all the planets within the material world, including Brahmaloka, are but temporarily situated, and after a fixed period they are all annihilated. Therefore the demigods and their followers are all annihilated at the period of devastation, but one who reaches the kingdom of God gets a permanent share in eternal life. That is the verdict of Vedic literature. The worshipers of the demigods have one facility more than the unbelievers due to their being convinced of the Vedic version, by which they can get information of the benefit of worshiping the Supreme Lord in the association of the devotees of the Lord. The gross materialist, however, without any faith in the Vedic version, remains eternally in darkness, driven by a false conviction on the basis of imperfect experimental knowledge, or so-called material science, which can never reach into the realm of transcendental knowledge.



Therefore unless the gross materialists or the worshipers of the temporary demigods come in contact with a transcendentalist like the pure devotee of the Lord, their attempts are simply a waste of energy. Only by the grace of the divine personalities, the pure devotees of the Lord, can one achieve pure devotion, which is the highest perfection of human life. Only a pure devotee of the Lord can show one the right way of progressive life. Otherwise both the materialistic way of life, without any information of God or the demigods, and the life engaged in the worship of demigods, in pursuit of temporary material enjoyments, are different phases of phantasmagoria. They are nicely explained in the Bhagavad-gītā also, but the Bhagavad-gītā can be understood in the association of pure devotees only, and not by the interpretations of politicians or dry philosophical speculators.



Prabhupāda: So, next?



Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



jñānaṁ yad āpratinivṛtta-guṇormi-cakram

ātma-prasāda uta yatra guṇeṣv asaṅgaḥ

kaivalya-sammata-pathas tv atha bhakti-yogaḥ

ko nirvṛto hari-kathāsu ratiṁ na kuryāt

[SB 2.3.12]



Prabhupāda: (interrupting, correcting Pradyumna's pronunciation) In the text, it is yadā. So why it is divided in that way "yad ā"? The text is yadā. Yadā means "when." Jñānaṁ yadā pratinivṛtta-guṇormi-cakram. Read it.



Pradyumna: (continues chanting, then devotees chant verse)



Prabhupāda:



jñānaṁ yadā pratinivṛtta-guṇormi-cakram

ātma-prasāda uta yatra guṇeṣv asaṅgaḥ

kaivalya-sammata-pathas tv atha bhakti-yogaḥ

ko nirvṛto hari-kathāsu ratiṁ na kuryāt

[SB 2.3.12]



Word meaning? (synonyms read) Jñānaṁ yadā pratinivṛtta-guṇormi-cakram. Knowledge, progressive knowledge, so, when it comes to the real standard, yadā, jñānaṁ yadā, when the knowledge or speculative empiric knowledge, pratinivṛtta-guṇormi-cakram, no more affected by the waves of these modes of nature ... Our present conditioned stage is due to our being carried away by the waves of material nature. We are being carried away. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has translated in his song, keno māyār bośe, jāccho bhese', Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi. "Why you are being carried away by the waves of māyā, and sometimes drowned and sometimes on the surface? Why you are taking so much trouble?" Jīv kṛṣṇa-dās, e biśwās, korle to' ār duḥkho nāi. As soon as you take it... It is a fact, but you are misled. It is a fact that you are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, but artificially you are thinking that you are master. You are master, you are God, you are enjoyer, you are this, you are that.



That is artificial. So real knowledge means when one is not any more disturbed by the influence of the modes of material nature. The modes of material nature is working. Somebody is influenced by passion, somebody is influenced by ignorance, and somebody is influenced by goodness also. That is also one nature. If, on the platform of goodness, if one stops, then he's also bound, he's also conditioned. "I am very learned man; I know what is Brahman," or "I am living very nice peaceful life." These are the products of jñāna. But if we remain compact within the boundary of such knowledge and do not make further progress, then that is also bondage. That is also bondage. Therefore one must come to the sense where these waves of material nature cannot act. That is real knowledge. Therefore it is said, jñānaṁ yadā pratinivṛtta-guṇormi. Urmi means waves. Cakram, in the whirlpool of the waves of the ocean of nescience... Just like they are taking pleasure in swimming with the waves.

It is voluntarily taking shelter of the ocean, and they like being tossed by the waves. And sometimes they are drowned also. That is our position. We have come to enjoy this ocean of material nescience, and there is tossing, and we are thinking we are enjoying. So when one comes to the knowledge that "This is not my platform of enjoyment. Let me go to the land," then he's safe. Then he's safe. Otherwise, he may think that he's enjoying, but he's actually being tossed by the waves of this ocean. And this is knowledge. Jñānaṁ yadā pratinivṛtta. Ātma-prasāda uta yatra guṇeṣv asaṅgaḥ. Ātma-prasāda. I am eternal part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. I may be very minute part, but because I am now attached to the complete machine, now I am safe. This example I have given so many times. A big machine and a small screw, part of it. When it is detached from the machine, it has no value. But when it is again attached to the machine, even it is very insignificant, small, it has got value.

Similarly, ātma-prasāda uta yatra guṇeṣv asaṅgaḥ. Asaṅgaḥ, no more connection with this material nature. But I have my connection with Kṛṣṇa. It may be little, very. I may be very minute, but that, I mean to say, connection is very valuable. I have given many times this example that a car running at a speed of 60 miles, and a cycle is running at the rate of 10 miles, but as soon as the cyclist catches the car, the cyclist also runs in the 60 miles. So similarly, instead of trying to satisfy our senses independently, if we join with Kṛṣṇa in His rāsa dance, as cowherd boys, gopīs, we join with Kṛṣṇa, then you get the same pleasure as Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Don't try to enjoy independently. Just like here, in this temple. Every one of us trying to enjoy life in connection with Kṛṣṇa. As soon as we are disconnected with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this kind of foodstuff or this kind of living, simple living, will not satisfy you. You'll be tossed by the waves of material nature.

As others are being... They are also eating; we are also eating. But in our eating, we have got full satisfaction. And they have no satisfaction. They are eating sometimes here, sometimes there, this restaurant, that restaurant, this place... So many advertisements. So as soon as we dovetail our activities with Kṛṣṇa, or Kṛṣṇa's activities, that is perfection. Jñānaṁ yadā apratihatā ahaituky apratihatā. That is real activity. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. The activities which... yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, which is meant for rendering service to the Lord, apratihatā, without being checked. Here (it) is said yadā... Apratihatā. Or apratihatā. Both ways, you can take. That is kaivalyam. Kaivalya means oneness. When I forget myself... The same example: the screw is no longer a screw; it is the whole machine. It is the whole machine. So similarly, kaivalya means oneness. There is no other anything. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma, everything Brahman.

This stage can be achieved when one is engaged, dovetailed in the service of the Lord. Therefore the last line says, ko nirvṛto hari-kathāsu ratiṁ na kuryāt. This is the highest perfectional stage of life. So anyone, one who, anyone who wants blissful life... What is nirvṛtaḥ? Hm? What is the meaning of nirvṛtaḥ?

Śrutaśravā: "Absorbed in."



Prabhupāda: Absorbed in. So anyone who wants to be in transcendental pleasure, absorbed in transcendental pleasure, how he will decline to hear the hari-kathā, transcendental messages of Hari, Supreme Personality of Godhead? Hari-kathā. Hari-kathāsu. This is hari-kathā. In our temple, whatever we discuss, that is hari-kathā or kṛṣṇa-kathā. Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Hari-kathā. Now read...no. Time is up.



Pradyumna: Translation?



Prabhupāda: No, we can read tomorrow. Have kīrtana. (devotees offer obeisances.) Begin. Chant. (end)





720530SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.13-14

-

Los Angeles, May 30, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



śaunaka uvāca

ity abhivyāhṛtaṁ rājā

niśamya bharatarṣabhaḥ

kim anyat pṛṣṭavān bhūyo

vaiyāsakim ṛṣiṁ kavim

[SB 2.3.13]



Prabhupāda: (interrupts the chanting of the verse to correct) It should be pronounced like "it yabhi vyāhṛtaṁ rājā." It yabhi vyāhṛtaṁ rājā. It yabhi vyāhṛtaṁ rājā niśamya bharatarṣabhaḥ. Like that. Go on. (chanting continues) That's all. Now, word meaning. (synonyms are read)



Pradyumna: Translation: "Śaunaka said: The son of Vyāsadeva, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, was a highly learned sage and was able to describe things in a poetic manner. What did Mahārāja Parīkṣit again inquire from him after hearing all that he said?"



Prabhupāda: So Vaiṣṇava, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, is learned and poet. So these are the qualifications of Vaiṣṇava. As you know, there are twenty-six qualifications mentioned in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, and one of the qualifications is kavi, poet. Every Vaiṣṇava in our disciplic succession, all the Vaiṣṇavas... In the later ages, within 200 years... During Caitanya Mahāprabhu's time, there were Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, Vaiṣṇava, Locana dāsa Ṭhākura, Kavi-karṇapūra. They were all big poets. Later on, Vidyāpati, Caṇḍīdāsa. No, Caṇḍīdāsa before Lord Caitanya. Jayadeva. He also, before Lord Caitanya. All big, big kavis. The Jayadeva kavi's, this pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedam **. So a Vaiṣṇava devotee of the Lord is expected to have all good qualities. The more you become advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all the good qualities that were covered by the cloud of māyā will come out. Good qualities are already there. Just like Kṛṣṇa has got sixty-four good qualities in full, and we are minute particles of Kṛṣṇa; therefore we have got also those good qualities in minute particles. But these good qualities are now covered. Just like fire is covered by the ashes. So it does not act. Although there is fire, but when it is covered with ashes, it does not act. So we are fire. Kṛṣṇa is fire; we are also fire, in quality. There is a very... There is a big fire, blazing fire, and the sparks. The sparks are also fire. Therefore we sometimes desire to imitate Kṛṣṇa. Because we have got these qualities in minute quantity, so we think that "I am God, I have become." But we do not know the quantitative difference. That we forget. We can say we are God, but teeny God, not the Supreme. Spark. Fire, blazing fire, and the spark. Now, this quality, fire, this also becomes almost unseen when we are in this material world. Just like if the fire sparks fall down out of the blazing fire, it becomes extinguished. So in order to ignite again our fiery quality, we must go back to the original fire. Then the fiery quality, the brilliant fiery quality, will again be exhibited.



This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So when we are in the process of going back to home, back to Godhead, out of so many qualities, twenty-six qualities becomes very... At least, they become manifest. And out of the twenty-six qualities, one quality is to become a poet. Poet is. Nobody can become poet unless he is poet. So kavi. And ṛṣi. Ṛṣi, muni, ṛṣi, those who are philosophers, learned scholars, they are called muni, ṛṣi. So? Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "A pure devotee of the Lord automatically develops all godly qualities, and some of the prominent features of those qualities are as follows: He is kind, peaceful, truthful, equable, faultless, magnanimous, mild, clean, nonpossessive, a well-wisher to all, satisfied, surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, without hankering, simple, fixed, self-controlled, a balanced eater, sane, mannerly, prideless, grave, sympathetic, friendly, poetic, expert, and silent. Out of these twenty-six prominent features..."



Prabhupāda: So with the advancement of our spiritual consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we should verify "Whether these qualifications are becoming manifest in my person." Just like when you eat, you understand that you are getting strength, or your appetite is being satisfied. Nobody can... Nobody requires to ask certificate. You can understand, yourself. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. If we are advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then our detachment for material things will, attachment for material things will decrease. This is one side. Viraktir anyatra syāt. Just like our students, they have become averse to so many things. You are all young boys and girls. So many young boys and girls are going to restaurant, to cinema, and so many other things, but you have become detached; you have no more attraction. So one side... Progress of bhakti means one side we shall be detached and another side we shall increase our attachment. So these are the qualifications.



The first qualification is kind. Just like these sannyāsīs. Our Rūpānuga Gosvāmī. He has got a nice child, wife, nice wife. But, being kind to the humanity, he has accepted sannyāsa. This is kindness. No homely comfort. This is kindness. Lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, they were ministers. Ministers. Not ordinary men. And therefore their association was most aristocratic. Maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīm. Maṇḍala-pati means big, big man, who have got many followers, leaders of the society. So, he gave up that association, tuccha-vat, "Eh, what is this nonsense?" Gave up, Rūpa Gosvāmī. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. Tuccha means very insignificant, "What is this?" Then what did they do? What he became? Bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. You have seen Rūpa Gosvāmī's picture. Only a little cloth. Kanthā. Kanthā means handmade quilt. All rejected cloth, they are put together and sewn; it is called kanthā. They utilize even rejected cloth. That is called kanthā.

So this Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, accepted this mendicant life although they were ministers, very rich men. Not only Rūpa Gosvāmī, all the Gosvāmīs. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was the only son of his father and uncle, and in those days the income was twelve lakhs, twelve hundred thousands of rupees. Almost king. So for being compassionate with these poor fellows, who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa and working simply unnecessarily so hard to get some bread... That's all. Mūḍha. So by becoming kind upon them, they took this mendicant order. Therefore kindness. And peaceful. Vaiṣṇava is never turbulent. But the demons, they create disturbance. Vaiṣṇava is peaceful. Peaceful, truthful. Truthful. A Vaiṣṇava knows the ultimate truth, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he's truthful. And equable. He has no distinction "Oh, here is a man, here is an animal. The animal has no soul, the man has soul."

They have no such conclusion. Every living entity has soul. As Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya [Bg. 14.4]. So he's kind not only to the human society. These philanthropists, altruists, nationalists, "this-ists, that-ists." This... They are partial. First of all, they may be kind... They are not kind. They are all selfish. But even though they are kind, they are kind to their own men. Not even outsiders. Not to the outsiders. In your country, they'll throw away grains. But there are so many hungry people; why they should not give? Produce more, if you have got land. You have got men. And they are not producing, they are (not?) engaging. The men are becoming hippies and they're lying idle, without any production. God has given so much land. Produce. Distribute prasādam. This is kindness.

But because they are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, they cannot be kind. Faultless. You cannot find any fault of the devotee. Faultless. Magnanimous. Thinking of all living entities. There is no distinction, "Oh, I am American, I shall think for the Americans." "I am Indian, I shall think for..." No. Magnanimous. And the most magnanimous is Lord Caitanya. Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. Magnanimous. Giving kṛṣṇa-prema, which is very rare. Kṛṣṇa says, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. It is very difficult to understand what is Kṛṣṇa, and Lord Caitanya is distributing Kṛṣṇa like anything. Therefore mahā-vadānyāya, magnanimous. Mild. Mild and meek. Clean. Always cleanliness. Because you have surpassed the stage of brahminical life. Therefore, must be very clean. By taking bath, by washing cloth, keeping the kitchen very clean, everything clean. Temple... Tan-mandira-mārjanādau. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau **. The temple should be bright always, clean. Then nonpossessive. Materialistic persons, they are trying to possess more, more, more. A Vaiṣṇava, simply what is absolutely necessary, must have.

Just like we don't keep any furniture in our hou... What is the use of furniture? We can lie down on the floor. So many things, materialistic persons they possess. But we try to simplify matters, plain living. Well-wisher to all. Well-wisher. Just like we are advising our all students that "Save your country. They are becoming hippies. It is not... Future is very gloom. Try to save them." So Vaiṣṇava will always think like that, how people will be happy. Sarve sukhino bhavantu. Vaiṣṇava desire is not exploitation. Vaiṣṇava desire is that "How others will be happy, how they will understand Kṛṣṇa, how they will get happiness in this life and next life." This is Vaiṣṇava. Satisfied, in any condition. Not that "I must have all these things; then I'll be satisfied. Otherwise, I'm going from the temple." (laughter.) No, this is not Vaiṣṇava qualification. You must live with the devotees, even if you are not satisfied. Any condition, you should be satisfied. Because as soon as you leave the company, you become again rogues, again demons.

At least you'll be saved if you keep with the company of the devotees. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. If you give up the company, then you again become rogues and demons. Therefore you must be satisfied, in whatever condition. "Whatever Kṛṣṇa has given, that's all right." Satisfied. Surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. And that satisfaction can be achieved only when one is fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. If I have surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa has taken my charge, Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66], then why shall I bother myself? If I am thinking, "I am suffering," it is also Kṛṣṇa's grace. We should take like that. Even in my consideration, I am in a position which is apparently suffering, we must accept as Kṛṣṇa's grace: "All right, I have surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. If Kṛṣṇa is giving me suffering, that's all right." That is surrender. "Oh, I have surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, and now Kṛṣṇa is giving me suffering? Oh, leave Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That is not surrender.

Surrender means in any condition you'll remain surrendered. That is

surrender. Not that I put my own condition, and if you satisfy me, then I shall... That is business. That is not surrender. Surrender means in any condition, fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. Without hankering. What is hankering? Why shall I be hankering? I know, Kṛṣṇa will give me all protection. So then why shall I hanker? Without hankering. Simple. No duplicity. Simple. The worldly men, they are duplicatous (?), speaking something, cheater. That is the, one of the qualification of the materialistic man. He must be cheater. There are four defects: commit mistakes, to be illusioned, to become cheater, and imperfect senses. This is called material life, conditioned life. He must commit mistakes. However a great philosopher... We are talking about the philosophers. So many contradictory things they say. Because he's an ordinary man. How he can say the right thing? It is not possible. The right thing can be said only by liberated person.

Therefore we take advice from the liberated person. Just like we are understanding all this from Vyāsadeva, from Śukadeva Gosvāmī. They are liberated. We are not reading some Mr. John R. Mead's (?) book. No. Liberated soul. So that should be our source of knowledge. Mannerly, prideless, grave. Grave means don't talk nonsense. Don't talk nonsense. Don't waste time. If you have got time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, but don't talk nonsense. Grave, that is called gravity. Grave, sympathetic. We should be very much sympathetic. If some of our fellow men fall sick, we must take care of him, give help him. Because, after all, we have got this body. Sometimes we may fall sick. So one, we should be sympathetic. And friendly. Everyone friend. As Kṛṣṇa is friend of everyone, suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29], so if we are Kṛṣṇa's representative, how I can be enemy of anyone else? I must be friendly. Friendly. Poet. And expert. And silent. Silent worker, not advertising. Silent. These are the qualifications of Vaiṣṇava. So we must try to follow; not imitate, but follow. Follow, that is nice. Then?

Pradyumna: "Out of these twenty-six prominent features of a devotee, as described by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja in his Caitanya-caritāmṛta, the qualification of being poetic is especially mentioned herein in relation to Śukadeva Gosvāmī. The presentation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by his recitation is the highest poetic contribution. He was a self-realized learned sage. In other words, he was a poet amongst the sages. "



Prabhupāda: So? Next verse?



Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



etac chuśrūṣatāṁ vidvan

sūta no 'rhasi bhāṣitum

kathā hari-kathodarkāḥ

satāṁ syuḥ sadasi dhruvam

[SB 2.3.14]



Prabhupāda: That's all. Have kīrtana. ( devotees offer obeisances) Begin... (end)





720531SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.14-15

-

Los Angeles, May 31, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



etac chuśrūṣatāṁ vidvan

sūta no 'rhasi bhāṣitum

kathā hari-kathodarkāḥ

satāṁ syuḥ sadasi dhruvam

[SB 2.3.14]



Translation: "O learned Sūta Gosvāmī! Please continue to explain such topics to us because we are all eager to hear. Besides that, topics which result in the discussion of the Lord Hari should certainly be discussed in the assembly of devotees."



Prabhupāda: What is this? You stop all this. Hear attentively. Don't divert your attention in that way. Then?



Pradyumna: As we have already quoted above from the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu of Rūpa Gosvāmī, even mundane things, if dovetailed in the service of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are accepted as transcendental. For example, the epics or the histories of Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata, which are specifically recommended for the less intelligent classes (women, śūdras and unworthy sons of the higher castes), are also accepted as Vedic literature because they are compiled in connection with the activities of the Lord. Mahābhārata is accepted as the fifth division of the Vedas after its first four divisions, namely Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva. The less intelligent do not accept Mahābhārata as part of the Vedas, but great sages and authorities accept it as the fifth division of the Vedas. Bhagavad-gītā is also part of the Mahābhārata, and it is full of the Lord's instruction for the less intelligent class of men. Some less intelligent men say that Bhagavad-gītā is not meant for householders, but such foolish men forget that Bhagavad-gītā was explained to Arjuna, a gṛhastha (family man), and spoken by the Lord in His role as a gṛhastha. So Bhagavad-gītā, although containing the high philosophy of the Vedic wisdom, is for the beginners in the transcendental science, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is for graduates and postgraduates in the transcendental science. Therefore literatures like Mahābhārata, the, purāṇas and similar other literatures which are full of the pastimes of the Lord, are all transcendental literatures, and they should be discussed with full confidence in the society of great devotees.





The difficulty is that such literatures, when discussed by professional men, appear to be mundane literature like histories or epics because there are so many historical facts and figures. It is said here, therefore, that such literatures should be discussed in the assembly of devotees. Unless they are discussed by devotees, such literatures cannot be relished by the higher class of men. So the conclusion is that the Lord is not impersonal in the ultimate issue. He is the Supreme Person, and He has His different activities. He is the leader of all living entities, and He descends at His will and by His personal energy to reclaim the fallen souls. Thus He plays exactly like the social, political or religious leaders. Because such roles ultimately culminate in the discussion of topics of the Lord, all such preliminary topics are also transcendental. That is the way of spiritualizing the civic activities of human society. Men have inclinations for studying history and many other mundane literatures-stories, fiction, dramas, magazines, newspapers, etc.-so let them be dovetailed with the transcendental service of the Lord, and all of them will turn to the topics relished by all devotees. The propaganda that the Lord is impersonal, that He has no activity and that He is a dumb stone without any name and form has encouraged people to become godless, faithless demons, and the more they deviate from the transcendental activities of the Lord, the more they become accustomed to mundane activities that only clear their path to hell instead of return them home, back to Godhead.* Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins from the history of the Pāṇḍavas (with necessary politics and social activities), and yet Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is said to be the Pāramahaṁsa-saṁhitā, or the Vedic literature meant for the topmost transcendentalist, and it describes paraṁ jñānam, the highest transcendental knowledge. pure devotees of the Lord are all paramahaṁsas, and they are like the swans, who know the art of sucking milk out of a mixture of milk and water.



Prabhupāda: Yes. In our childhood, we saw every village, every town, the transcendental knowledge. Any common man could speak about Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata, Lord Kṛṣṇa. And system was-still there are, but practically closed now-that in the evening, in the village, everyone should assemble in a place to hear messages from Mahābhārata, Rāmāyaṇa, especially, because these two books can be understood by common man. Not... Vedānta philosophy was discussed. So my maternal uncles was in the suburb of Calcutta, about ten miles from our house. So sometimes when we used to go there, so in the evening after taking their meals, by eight o'clock, they would go to a place, assemble, and hear about Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata, Bhāgavata. And they should discuss while coming home, and they should go, they would go to bed thinking that memory. So they'll sleep also Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata. Yes, and dream also Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata. You see? This was the system. Sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6].



If you think of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours, then you'll become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, and your life is successful. Don't allow anything. This requires little practice, abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena cetasā nānya-gāminā [Bg. 8.8]. I should not allow my mind to go, to think of any other subject than Kṛṣṇa. Now we have got so many books. So whenever you find time... You must find time. There is so much time. So read all these books or chant. But when you are hungry, you take prasādam. When you are sleepy, take a snap. Not very much, just to refresh. And go on, either chanting the beads or reading the books or talking about Kṛṣṇa. In this way, always remain in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇuḥ. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to remember Viṣṇu always, twenty-four hours. Some way or other. Type for Kṛṣṇa, write for Kṛṣṇa, go outside for Kṛṣṇa, saṅkīrtana party, sell book for Kṛṣṇa, bring money for Kṛṣṇa, spend for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Everything Kṛṣṇa.

This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find. Tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca. We require some satisfaction and some enjoyment, because that is our nature. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Spirit soul. God is also blissful, and we part and parcel of God, we are also blissful. We want simply ānanda, pleasure. That is our nature. But that ānanda, pleasure, you cannot enjoy independently. That is not possible. You must enjoy with Kṛṣṇa. That is called rāsa-līlā. Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, they assemble together. Similarly, we are part and parcel ... Just like part and parcel of big machine. They are assembled, then it works. If the part and parcel are scattered, oh, then it has no meaning. It is simply scrap of iron, that's all. But when they are assembled together, that is meaning. Similarly, we are all part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. So we must assemble together. Central Kṛṣṇa. Central Kṛṣṇa. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is...

Just like in this house, we are living. And (in) the next house, they are also living. So what is the difference? The difference is here, Kṛṣṇa is center. That's all. Therefore it is temple. And the next door, a house. That is the difference between house, ordinary house, and temple. There is no difference. It is also made of bricks and stones and wood, that is also made of bricks and stones. They are also live, they also cook, they also eat. Everything is the same, practical. But the difference is there is no Kṛṣṇa, here is Kṛṣṇa. That is the difference. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So when I walk on the street and go anywhere, I simply think how these nice bungalows, house, but still, they're not satisfied. It is "For Sale." Why? There is no Kṛṣṇa. Aprāṇasyeva dehasya maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam. Just like a body, beautiful body, lying down on the street, dead. Nobody cares. Because the life is not there. The spirit soul is not there. Nobody cares. Similarly, bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ.

Big nation. You Americans, you are big nation. But bhagavad-bhakti ... There is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Jāti, big nation. Jāti means big nation. Bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya jātiḥ japaḥ, their activities, tapaḥ, tapasya... They are trying to invent so many nice things, scientifically, mechanically. Or invented machine. Everything. Jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ. Activities, very methodical. On the road there is light arrangement. Everything is all right. But if it is less Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then it is... What is that? Aprāṇasyeva dehasya maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam. Just like a dead body, if you decorate. A body, dead body, and you apply pomade and nice dress and scent. What is the meaning? Loka-rañjanam. Loka-rañjanam means you may please some of the people, "Oh, how you are decorating a dead body." But it has no meaning. It is useless waste of time. Similarly very nice arrangement, big nation, politics, everything, minus Kṛṣṇa consciousness is like that.

Aprāṇasyeva dehasya maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam. Therefore your young men, young girls, they have become frustrated, in spite of all this arrangement, nice arrangement. There is no comparison of your country's arrangement. I am traveling all over the world. Such nice roads, such every... Everything nice. But why they are becoming frustrated and confused? Due to this aprāṇasya. There is no life. So life is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So if you actually feel for your country, for your community, for your people, just spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They're dying. You spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They'll come again to life, and everything will be actually beautiful. That is my request. I came to your country with this mission, that "The American people, they are feeling frustration. If they take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they'll be happy, and others will be follow their example." So now, some of you, my advanced students, you have understood the philosophy. Some of you have taken sannyāsa.

So go town to town, village to village. Preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Bring them to life so this frustration will be stopped. The leaders of the society, the politicians, they should take care where they are going. So it is said, kathā hari-kathodarkāḥ satāṁ syuḥ sadasi dhruvam. Therefore if we discuss this hari-kathā... We are discussing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, hari-kathā. So kathā, hari-kathā, udarkāḥ satāṁ syuḥ sadasi dhruvam. If it is discussed among devotees, then one can understand. This book, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, has value amongst the devotees. And to others, they may purchase. They see that "What is this? Sanskrit verse, something written. Scrap of paper." You see. Just like this newspaper, for us, is scrap of paper. We don't care for it. But they keep it very carefully on their chest, "Oh, it is so nice." Newspaper in the Western countries is so popular.

One gentleman told me a story that one Christian priest went to preach Christian religion in Sheffield. Sheffield, where is it? In England? So the workers, laborers, he was preaching amongst them that "Lord Jesus Christ will save you. If you don't take shelter of Lord Jesus Christ, then you'll go to hell." So first of all he, "Who is Jesus Christ? What is his number?" That means he, they thought, "Jesus Christ must be one of the workers, and every worker has a number, so what is his number?" So "No, Jesus Christ, he's son of God. So he has no number. He's not worker." Then "What is hell?" Then described, "Hell is very damp, very dark," and so on, so on. So they were silent. Because they are working in the mines. It is always dark and damp. (laughter) (Prabhupāda laughs) So what is the difference between hell and this, what is called, mine? They were silent. But when the priest said, "There is no newspaper," "Oh, horrible!" (laughter) There is no newspaper. Therefore, in your country, so many big, big, I mean to say, bunch of newspapers, they are distributed. So if for Los Angeles City, which is nothing but a point in this world...

There are so many cities, but there are so many newspapers. Not only one edition; two, three editions. If they can give so many news from this one point, now, how much news we have got? That is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from spiritual world. But there is no customer. That is the difficulty. Otherwise, so valuable instruction, so much information, all fact, dhruvam. Dhruvam means fact, not fictitious. So there would have been many, many customers. And because there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no culture, these literatures, they are not appreciated. So what is next? Another verse.

Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



sa vai bhāgavato rājā

pāṇḍaveyo mahā-rathaḥ

bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ krīḍan

kṛṣṇa-krīḍāṁ ya ādade

[SB 2.3.15]



Prabhupāda: (about chanting) Very good. Nice.



sa vai bhāgavato rājā

pāṇḍaveyo mahā-rathaḥ

bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ krīḍan

kṛṣṇa-krīḍāṁ ya ādade

[SB 2.3.15]



So Parīkṣit Mahārāja's, these are the qualifications. Sa vai bhāgavato rājā, not ordinary rājā. Rājā means king. Bhāgavataḥ. Bhāgavata means great devotee. First-class devotee, bhāgavata. Pāṇḍaveya. How he became bhāgavata? Because son and grandson, all in the dynasty of the Pāṇḍavas. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was the grandson of Arjuna. So Arjuna was Kṛṣṇa's friend, he was bhāgavata. So unfortunately, Arjuna's son died in the Battle of Kurukṣetra. He was also bhāgavata. He was Subhadrā's son. Arjuna... Kṛṣṇa's sister Subhadrā, who is sitting here with Jagannātha. So Subhadrā's son was Abhimanyu, but he died in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Sixteen years old. But fortunately, his wife Uttarā was pregnant. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was within the womb of Uttarā, so he was saved. All others died. Pāṇḍaveyaḥ, coming in the dynasty of the Pāṇḍavas.



Therefore bhāgavataḥ. Mahā-rathaḥ. At the same time, he could fight thousands of warriors, mahā-ratha. A kṣatriya who alone can fight with another thousand kṣatriyas, he's called mahā-ratha. So it does not mean to become bhāgavata means, to become devotee, one has to stop all other activities. No. Here it is called, mahā-ratha. Mahā-ratha means a great commander. So a great commander can also become bhāgavata, a great merchant can also become bhāgavata, and a great brāhmaṇa, learned scholar, he can also become bhāgavata. There is no restriction. Not that simply one who is Vedantist, who is a very learned scholar, he can become bhāgavata. No. The social system was so nice that everyone could become bhāgavata. The brāhmaṇa could become bhāgavata, a kṣatriya could become bhāgavata, a vaiśya could become bhāgavata, or a śūdra could also become bhāgavata. Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyāḥ. Kṛṣṇa says personally, "Never mind whether he's woman or a śūdra or a vaiśya, te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim, "all of them can go back to home, back to Godhead."

How? Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. "Simply he has to take shelter of Me seriously. That's all. Never mind what he is." Te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. So this Parīkṣit Mahārāja, in his childhood he was bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ krīḍan. He was playing with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That is the advantage of getting birth in a Vaiṣṇava family. Just like some of our children, they are playing with Jagannātha, they are playing with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. In India that Sarasvatī, Śyāmasundara's daughter, she offers ārati and brings the ārati for me. I take. Yes. So learning. Just as child, mother is offering obeisances, and the child is doing. We used to do that. We got this opportunity of good father and mother. We were trained up. Similarly, you can also train up your children. Then your becoming father and mother is perfect. Otherwise, the dogs and cats and hogs, they also beget children. They're more expert. A hog can beget children twice in a year, and each time, more than one dozen.

So you cannot compete with that. It is not possible. Sometimes you beget two children twice, but that is not competition. The competition is that you make your children God conscious. Give them. They're playing with Kṛṣṇa. At our New Vrindaban, Dvārakādhīśa, he was given by his father toys. I was present. And he did not touch the toys. He said, "It is māyā." (laughter.) Yes. "It is māyā." So everything should be taught from childhood. That is Prahlāda Mahārāja's instruction. Kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha [SB 7.6.1]. So in the, from the very beginning there is no teaching, there is no God consciousness; then what will be the result? You may send in a very decorated university, but the result will be hippies. That's all. You cannot expect anything more. You cannot expect. So teach them from the very beginning how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then you'll find nice population, beautiful population, peaceful atmosphere, social condition very nice, systematic, everyone is happy.

And with, in happiness, they're all chanting, Kṛṣṇa conscious. Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, every house there is dingling of bells, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa." (laughter) Make Vaikuṇṭha. That is my request. Teach from the very beginning of life. Just like, bāla-krīḍa. Bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ krīḍan. By playing, he's becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. So in our Dallas you go. Make all these, save all these children, those who have come to your shelter. It is the duty of the father and mother.

It is the duty of guardian to save the dependents from the impending danger of death, repeated birth and death. So if you cannot save these children, then it is useless. Save them. So we have got our center in Dallas. All children should go, and the advanced girls, they should go there and take care. Just produce a new generation, just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Produce a new generation. Bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ, from the very childhood, thinking of Kṛṣṇa, playing of Kṛṣṇa, eating of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa... Then he cannot become otherwise. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja, he was child, five-years-old child, he was teaching his class fellows. So they refused that "Prahlāda, why you are bothering with this? When we shall get old, we shall think of this Kṛṣṇa." "No," he insisted. "No. Kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha, durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma... [SB 7.6.1]. You cannot get again such opportunity. So you immediately begin. Immediately you try to become Kṛṣṇa conscious." All right, kīrtana. (devotees offer obeisances) (end)



720601SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.15

-

Los Angeles, June 1, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sa vai bhāgavato rājā

pāṇḍaveyo mahā-rathaḥ

bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ krīḍan

kṛṣṇa-krīḍāṁ ya ādade

[SB 2.3.15]



Translation: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the grandson of the Pāṇḍavas, was from his very childhood a great devotee of the Lord. Even while playing with dolls, he used to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa by imitating the worship of the family Deity."



Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇa-krīḍām. Bāla-krīḍanakaiḥ krīḍan kṛṣṇa-krīḍāṁ ya ādade. This is the facility of taking birth in a Vaiṣṇava family. Children, simply by playing with Kṛṣṇa, they become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Some way or other, if somebody comes in contact with Kṛṣṇa, then his life becomes successful. So this kṛṣṇa-yoga, bhakti-yoga, can be practiced even by a child without interfering with his natural propensities. A child naturally wants to play, so he can play with Kṛṣṇa Deity. We had the opportunity of doing that. My father was worshiping Kṛṣṇa Deity. So I wanted to imitate him, and he gave me small Deity. That Deity is still worshiped. My sister and myself, whatever we were eating, we were offering exactly the same arcana. And father used to encourage. This Ratha-yātrā and Rādhā-Go.(?) Kṛṣṇa temple which we are propagating, it was, from the very beginning of our life, was initiated by our parents. So anyone can initiate his child to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness understanding from the very beginning.



Without any education, without any knowledge. There is no need of high-grade knowledge or education to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is already there in everyone's heart. As it is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, kṛṣṇa-bhakti nitya-siddha. Nitya-siddha. It is eternally a fact. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti nitya-siddha. Nitya means eternally, and siddha... It is not to be realized, it is already there. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya. It is not that one has to learn it artificially by some gymnastic. No. Natural. Just like the children here, they are also dancing with their parents. They are offering flower, trying to imitate how to chant. Naturally. And they are very much pleased. So similarly, in our Dallas school, if these things are introduced, kṛṣṇa-krīḍa ... I have already suggested how they can be engaged in kṛṣṇa-krīḍa. So some way or other, they should be engaged in kṛṣṇa-krīḍa. It doesn't matter whether one understands it or not understands it.

It is just like touchstone or infection. You know or do not know, it will act. Because kṛṣṇa-bhakti, love for Kṛṣṇa, is there in everyone's heart. If it is not so, how you all young boys and girls are taking very seriously? It is a question of two, three years, or less than that, our students are joining, but they are becoming first-class kṛṣṇa-bhaktas, devotees. Even in India, they also are surprised that how these Europeans and Americans are coming to such nice Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not only Europeans, Americans, but Africans also. This is the proof that love for Kṛṣṇa is there in everyone's heart. That is stated by Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti nitya-siddha. Eternally, it is a fact. Simply it has to be awakened. Just like attraction for the opposite sex. A girl or a boy. That is natural. It is not unnatural. It has... Nobody goes to a school and colleges how to love, how to be attracted by young man. No. It doesn't require any education.

The natural instinct is already there. When the boy and the girl are grown up, naturally the attraction is there, spontaneous. Similarly, he has to be, they have to be brought up in the proper situation. In India, therefore, early marriage is recommended, according to śāstra. According to Vedic civilization, a girl, before attaining puberty, must be married. There are so many injunctions about that. And the responsibility is of the father, or, in the absence of father, the elderly members or brothers. It is called kanyā-dāya. Kanyā-dāya means it is the obligation. You cannot avoid it. You can avoid the marriage of your son, but you cannot avoid the marriage of your daughter. That is Vedic injunction. Of course, when the marriage of daughter is there, there must be one boy. That is understood. But special care is taken for daughter's marriage, some way or other. If he has no money, he begs from friends and gets his daughter married. This is system. Because there is time.

It will be hankering. There will be hankering for sex. So if there is ready husband, then the girl is sent. That is the psychology. So our point is that as this hankering after sex or the opposite sex is natural, it doesn't require to be educated, similarly, kṛṣṇa-bhakti is also natural. It is not that because we have established this temple and people are here... Of course, there is practice, but that practice is also very simple. Simply you have to hear. That's all. It doesn't require any gymnastic. Just like in other yogic process, haṭha-yoga, you have to learn so many things: yama, niyama, dhyāna, dhāraṇā, āsana, prāṇāyāma, so many things. But here there is no need. Simply sit down and hear about Kṛṣṇa. That's all. But that hearing must be from a person who is realized. Then it will act. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti nitya-siddha sādhya kabhu naya, śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte. By hearing, the more your heart will be cleansed of all material infection, you will understand what is Kṛṣṇa.

In dirty heart you cannot. Therefore to cleanse the heart it is required that you regularly hear. Therefore we are holding this class, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa or about Kṛṣṇa. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that we must hear about Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours. Not that a particular time I hear and then stop. Don't stop. Mold your life in such a way that you... Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. From the very beginning of life, taught kṛṣṇa-krīḍam. Read purport.

Pradyumna: "In the Bhagavad-gītā (6.41) it is stated that even a person who has failed in the proper discharge of yoga practice is given a chance to take birth in the house of devout brāhmaṇas or in the houses of rich men like kṣatriya kings or rich merchants. But Mahārāja Parīkṣit was more than that because he was a great devotee of the Lord since his previous birth, and as such he took his birth in an imperial family of the Kurus, and especially that of the Pāṇḍavas. So from the very beginning of his childhood he had the chance of knowing intimately the devotional service of Lord Kṛṣṇa in his own family. The Pāṇḍavas, all being devotees of the Lord, certainly venerated family Deities in the royal palace for worship. Children who appear in such families fortunately..."



Prabhupāda: People still, in India, those who are rich men, they have got their family temple Deities. One temple is there in Kanpur. The family members, they are very rich. The rule is that if the family members do not come in the temple to offer obeisances to the Deity, they'll be fined. The mother, the head of the family... Mother is still living. She has imposed this law, that "Any of my children or grandchildren, if he or she does not visit the temple, then according to this rule, this fine should be realized from them." So if somebody misses to go in the temple one day, the priest presents the bill: "Sir, you have been fined five rupees." (Laughter) So they pay. Yes. So we should also enforce that rule. Anyone who is not attending maṅgala-ārati should be fined. (laughter) And the fine should be that he must sell one Kṛṣṇa book. (laughter) Is that all right?



Devotees: Jaya!



Prabhupāda: Yes. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Children who appear in such families fortunately generally imitate such worship of the Deities, even in the way..."



Prabhupāda: Children's nature is to imitate, because they have to learn. So nature has given them the propensity to imitate. So the first imitation begins from the parents. So if the parent is nice Kṛṣṇa devotee, naturally the children become devotees. That is the opportunity of taking birth in a Vaiṣṇava family. So you are all Vaiṣṇavas. If your children do not become Vaiṣṇava in the future, then it is a great, I meant to say, fault on your part. So you should be very cautious, careful, that children are not going astray, they are becoming actually Kṛṣṇa conscious. That means you have to imitate, er, you have to be devotee, and they will imitate. By imitation, imitation, imitation, they will come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then they will never give it up. Go on.



Pradyumna: "By the grace of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, we had the chance of being born in a Vaiṣṇava family, and in our childhood we imitated the worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa by imitating our father, and our father encouraged us in all respects to observe all functions such as Ratha-yātrā and Dola-yātrā ceremonies, and he used to spend money liberally for distributing prasāda to us children and our friends. Our spiritual master, who also took his birth in a Vaiṣṇava family, got all inspirations from his great Vaiṣṇava father Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda. That is the way of all lucky Vaiṣṇava families. The celebrated Mira Bhai was a staunch devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa as the great lifter of Govardhana Hill. The life history of many such devotees is almost the same because there is always symmetry between the early lives of all great devotees of the Lord. According to Jīva Gosvāmī, Mahārāja Parīkṣit must have heard about the childhood pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, for he used to imitate the pastimes with his young playmates.



According to Śrīdhara Svāmī, Mahārāja Parīkṣit used to imitate the worship of the family Deity by elderly members. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī also confirms the viewpoint of Jīva Gosvāmī. So accepting either of them, Mahārāja Parīkṣit was naturally inclined to Lord Kṛṣṇa from his very childhood, and he might have imitated either of the above-mentioned procedures, and all of them established his great devotion from his very childhood, a symptom of a mahā-bhāgavata. Such mahā-bhāgavatas are called nitya-siddhas, or souls liberated from birth. But there are also others who may not be liberated from birth but who develop a tendency for devotional service by association, and they are called sādhana-siddhas. There is no difference between the two in the ultimate issue, and so the conclusion is that everyone can become a sādhana-siddha, a devotee of the Lord, simply by association with the pure devotees. The concrete example is our great spiritual master Śrī Nārada Muni. In his previous life he was simply a boy of a maidservant, but through association with great devotees he became a devotee of the Lord in his own standard, unique in the history of devotional service."

Prabhupāda: So this is the difference between sādhana-siddha and nitya-siddha. Gaurāṅgera saṅgi-gaṇe, nitya-siddha kari' māne, se yāya vrajendra-suta-pāśa. Gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi, yebā jāne cintāmaṇi, tāra haya vrajabhūme vāsa. So nitya-siddha means he has no chance to forget Kṛṣṇa. That is called nitya-siddha. And sādhana-siddha means by following the regulative principles, the rules and regulations, one revives his Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Both things are siddha because you cannot revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness without being Kṛṣṇa conscious. It may be covered. So nitya-siddha means he does not get covered by the influence of material nature about his natural devotional tendency to serve Kṛṣṇa. He never becomes covered. This is difference. Kṛṣṇa gives him chance to get birth in such a family. Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja, that he never gets the chance of forgetting Kṛṣṇa. So one who does not get the chance of forgetting Kṛṣṇa is called nitya-siddha. This is the difference.



And sādhana-siddha means one has forgotten Kṛṣṇa. That is the position of all materialistic men. Every one of us forgotten. But even though forgotten, the thing is there. It has to be awakened only. And the awakening process is hearing. Just like you are out of your family touch for many years. Practically, you have forgotten. Now, if somebody comes to you, some friend, "Do you remember your child, when he came out, he was such little, and now he is grown-up? Now he's this, that, so on." If for some days this topics of the family is... then again he becomes attracted: "Let me go and see." It is natural. Similarly, anyone who has forgotten Kṛṣṇa somehow or other-the cause may be so many-but if he is given chance to hear about Kṛṣṇa... Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



As soon as somehow or other one begins to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Either by his natural inclination or by chance or any way, he comes to hear about Kṛṣṇa, attempts hearing about Kṛṣṇa, then... Kṛṣṇa is within everyone's heart, Paramātmā. So Kṛṣṇa helps him immediately. Kṛṣṇa helps both ways. If you want to forget Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will help you with that, so that you will be able to forget Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, if you want to revive your lost relationship with Kṛṣṇa again, Kṛṣṇa will help you.



These things are stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānām. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. One who is engaged twenty-four hours in rendering service to the Lord with faith and devotion, bhajatām ... Bhajatām, this word is used. Bhaja, sevā, service. Bhaja sevayā. Every verbal root has got particular meaning. When this bhajatām, bhajana ... Just we call bhajana. Bhajana means serving the Lord. So bhajatām, one who is engaged always. Teṣāṁ nitya, satata-yuktānām. Twenty-four hours he's engaged. In that stage, Kṛṣṇa is become, Kṛṣṇa is very pleased upon you: "No, now he has taken to My service. He's engaged twenty-four hours. All right, let Me give some instruction."

So Kṛṣṇa (is) within you. So śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. One profit is, by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, he becomes gradually sinless, simply by hearing. Unless we are sinful, we don't come into the material world. So we have to become sinless before going back to home, back to Godhead. Because kingdom of God ... God is pure, the kingdom is pure. No impure living entity can enter there. So one has to become pure. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. "One who has completely been freed from all sinful reaction of his life," yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām, "and always engaged in pious activities, no more sinful activities..." So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that once he's given chance to erase all the sinful activities and keeping himself intact: no illicit sex, no intoxication, no meat-eating, no gambling. If we follow these regulations, then after initiation, all my sins are washed off. And if I keep myself in that washed-off position, then where is the question of becoming sinful again?

But once washed off... You take your bath and again take the dust and throw on your body-that process will not help. If you say, "I take again wash and again throw," then what is the use of washing? Wash off. Once washed off, now keep yourself in that washed-off condition. That is required. So that will be possible if you keep yourself constantly in touch with Kṛṣṇa by hearing about Him. That's all. You have to remain uncontaminated. And that is puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. If you hear about Kṛṣṇa, then puṇya, you will be always in pious position. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Either you chant or... Therefore our recommendation is always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. So we should be careful about our slipping down again into the sinful activity. Everyone should be careful and keep oneself in the chanting process. Then he's all right. So śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. And gradually, as you go on hearing about Kṛṣṇa, the all the dirty things within the heart will be cleansed.

The dirty things are that "I am a material body; I am American; I am Indian; I am Hindu; I am Muslim; I am this; I am that." These are all different types of covering of the soul. The uncovered soul is fully conscious that "I am eternal servant of God." That's all. One has no other identification. That is called mukti. When one comes to the understanding that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, God, and my only business is to serve Him," that is called mukti. Mukti does not mean that you will have another two hands, another two legs. No. The same thing, simply it is cleansed. Just like a man is suffering from fever. The symptoms are so many, but as soon as the fever is not there, then all the symptoms gone. So our, this fever in this material world is sense gratification. Sense gratification. This is the fever. So when we become engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this sense gratification business ceases. That is the difference. That is the test how you are becoming advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. That is the test. So because this disease is called bhava-roga... Bhava-roga means again and again taking birth, bhava-roga. But if we take the medicine, bhavauṣadhi. Everything is there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhava-roga, the disease of repeated birth and death in the material world, and the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is bhavauṣadhi, the medicine to cure this bhava-roga. Bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt virajyeta pumān vinā paśughnāt [SB 10.1.4]. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. There are very nice verses in Bhāgavatam. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. This chanting of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, or God, is possible by a person who is disgusted with all these material activities. They can actually chant. That means mukta-puruṣa, liberated soul. It is ... The chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is the business of liberated soul, not for the conditioned soul. But even in our conditioned life, we chant, we become gradually purified.

Therefore it is recommended that everyone should chant. Never mind. Nama oṁ apavitraḥ pavitro vā yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣam. Anyone who remembers the Puṇḍarīkākṣa. By chanting, you'll remember. So nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāt [SB 10.1.4]. It is the medicine for our, this bhava-roga, repeated birth and ... Such a nice thing. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt. Not only it is medicine ... Medicine is always bitter. But it is not bitter. Mano 'bhirāmāt. It is very pleasing to the mind, to the senses. Otherwise, how we become ecstatic in chanting unless it is pleasing? It is medicine, but pleasing medicine. Other medicines, they are very bitter. If you practice yoga, oh, you have to take so much labor. And that, you do not know whether you'll be successful or not, haṭha-yoga. And if you take to jñāna, that also requires much education, much understanding of philosophy. So they actually, although they are medicine, but they are bitter medicine.

Not very palatable. Neither everyone can take it. A child cannot become a jñānī. A child cannot become a yogi. But a child can become a bhakta. Therefore this is the easiest process. Pleasing. Everyone is pleased to execute this process. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt [SB 10.1.4]. Mano-'bhirāmāt. Even for ordinary men who wants to hear about conjugal love... They read therefore so many novels, fiction, dramas. What is that? The love affairs between one young man, one young girl. But that is also there, Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. In that sense also, it is pleasing.

Even to the ordinary man. So, mano 'bhirāmāt, it is very pleasing. Nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ... For philosophers it is also pleasing. We are talking all of philosophy in Bhāgavata. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt [SB 10.1.4]. Ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt. Uttamaśloka is Kṛṣṇa, who is worshiped by offering nice, selected ślokas, authorized. Just like we offer prayer, cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa... [Bs. 5.29]. Each line is full of poetry, poetic and literary character, grammar. Anything you take, they're all full. All Bhāgavata, all Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. You cannot produce such literature in this day. Such meaningful. Because Vyāsadeva was incarnation, he could produce. Therefore it is uttamaśloka: by the best selected verses, Kṛṣṇa is described.

So who can be away from such activities, to hear about Uttamaśloka through nice verses, philosophy? Who can be bereft? Vinā paśughnāt [SB 10.1.4]. Only the animal-hunter or the animal-killer. The animal-killer cannot understand. Therefore it is prohibited, no meat-eating, no flesh-eating. This is the greatest disqualification for understanding. One cannot understand. The animal-killer cannot understand. Therefore it has to (be) stopped. Vinā paśughnāt. Paśughnāt means... Ghna means "killer," and paśu means "animal." And another meaning is, paśu means oneself, living entity-ghna. So either one is killing himself or killing animals, such person cannot understand about the glories of the Lord. It is not possible. Parīkṣit Mahārāja said that, ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt. Only the animal-killers. Ārati. (end)



690712SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.17

-

Los Angeles, July 12, 1969



Prabhupāda: ...spoken by Śaunaka Ṛṣi, a great sage of the name Śaunaka. There was great meeting in Naimiṣāraṇya, a place, a very sacred place in India. If you sometimes go to India, you'll try to find out this place. It is in northern India and there is a big city, very well known city, Lucknow. And it is about forty or fifty miles from Lucknow. But the place is so nice, so attractive, that any man who goes there will find immediately spiritually impelled(?), it is so nice place, Naimiṣāraṇya. So it is very old place. Formerly, when sages used to hold their meeting, they generally held their meeting in that place, Naimiṣāraṇya.



So this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was also discussed first in that Naimiṣā... Not first, for the second time. First it was explained by Śukadeva Gosvāmī to Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy to die within a week. Formerly, even a small child... This boy, this brāhmaṇa boy, was playing with his playmates. That means he was a child, not more than ten to twelve years old. And he was informed that "Mahārāja Parīkṣit has insulted your father by garlanding him with a dead snake." The fact was that Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in hunting. One after another, so many things comes, but let me explain to you. This hunting business was allowed only for the kings, kṣatriyas, not for ordinary man. Killing in sports. Because the king had to administer so strongly that sometimes he had to kill an evil person immediately with sword. The kingdom was very strong. Not many days before, say, about hundred years ago in Kashmir, if a thief was caught, burglar was caught, and he was proved that he has committed theft, the king would personally cut off, chop off his hand. The punishment was so severe. And the result was that even you miss something on your way, nobody will touch it. Everyone was afraid: "Let the things remain there. One who has lost his thing, he will come and take away. We don't require to take it." So the kings were very severe to punish unwanted social elements. So the kings were therefore allowed sometimes to hunt in the jungle to practice killing. Just like doctors are allowed to practice surgical operation on dead body; otherwise, how they'll practice, how they'll become surgeon, if they do not practice? Similarly, only the kings were allowed to kill some animal in the jungle sometimes.

So this Parīkṣit Mahārāja was hunting, and when he became tired and thirsty he entered in the hermitage home of a sage. Because in those days in the jungles there were many hermitages. Those who wanted to live secluded life in the jungle, in the forest, they would have their home, very small cottage, and their means of living was milk and fruit. They would get fruits from the trees, and the kings would sometimes contribute some cows. So that was sufficient for them. To have some milk from the cow and get the fruits from the trees in the jungle, that was sufficient. That is sufficient still. Anywhere, any part of the world, you can live without any economic problem, provided... There is no question of "provided." Anywhere, you can keep a cow. There is no expenditure. The cow will go out and eat some vegetables and grass, so you haven't got to spend anything for the cow. And when she returns, she gives you milk, nice milk. We are trying to introduce this system in our New Vrindaban scheme. We are keeping there cows, and that place is in Virginia, Moundsville. It is about three miles away from any city or any citizen approach. But they are living very nicely, depending on some vegetables, fruits, and cow's milk. So actually, a man can live very peacefully and healthy life. Not only peacefully. If you are healthy, if your mind is equilibrium, then naturally you are peaceful. So that was a system for the sages and hermitages, hermits, that they used to live on cow's milk and fruits.

So this king, being tired, being thirsty, entered the home of a sage, and he was in meditation. So the king called him. Because he was king, so he is habituated to order. A king is not supposed to submit, although they submitted to great sages and brāhmaṇas. But generally, their spirit is ordering, commanding spirit. So he commanded, "Give me a glass of water. I am very thirsty." So that sage, who was in meditation, could not hear him. The king became little angry, that "I am your guest. I am king. I am asking you water, and you are not hearing me. You are in your meditation." So he became little disgusted, and there was a dead snake. So he took that dead snake and got it round about the neck of the sage and went away in disgust, that "This sage did not offer me even a glass of water." Because, according to Vedic system, if somebody comes in your home, even if he is enemy, it is the injunction of the Vedas: gṛhaṁ śatrum api prāptaṁ viśvastam akuto 'bhayam. When a person comes at your home, never mind even if he's enemy... Friend is welcome, that's all right. But even an enemy comes, they are not forbidden. Not that in the gate there is, oh, "Beware of dog," "No trespasser allowed." No. There was no restriction. Even enemy was admitted, "Come on." So gṛhaṁ śatrum api prāptaṁ viśvastam akuto 'bhayam. Even an enemy enters your house, you'll receive him in such a friendly way that he will forget that you are his enemy. That was the system. So because Mahārāja Parīkṣit was king, he saw that there is negligence of this disciplinary action. "I became... I was king, and I was thirsty. I became his guest, I came..." Athiti. This guest is called athiti. Athiti means there are some guests who give notice before, prior to coming there, and some guests come without any notice. So the guest who comes without any notice, he's called athiti. So according to Hindu custom, the householder is to keep always some foodstuff for athiti guest. Somebody may come without notice, so some foodstuff is already in the stock. That is called athiti food. And a gṛhastha, the householder, is ordered that before eating, a householder was to see in the members of the family, first the children must be fed, then diseased person must be fed, then elderly, old person must be fed. In this way, when everything is finished, then the proprietor of the household, he will take his meals, and before taking his meals, he will stand outdoors and call loudly, "If somebody is hungry, please come. Still there is food here." And if there is no response, then he'll take. This is the system of Vedic civilization.

So when Mahārāja Parīkṣit saw that "This sage, although he's sage, he's to be ideal man, he did not hear me. I am thirsty, I asked him water, and..." The injunction is, when you receive somebody, even if you are very poor man, you should offer the guests a comfortable seat and a glass of water. That is not expensive. You can offer anyone a seat: "Please come and sit down here and take a glass of water." And if you can provide, you can give him nice foodstuff, but even if you have got nothing at your home, this thing you can offer without any expenditure, without any botheration: to receive him, "Please come on, come here, sit down. Take a glass of water." That is the system still. In Indian villages... Just like we are sannyāsī, renounced order. There is no problem. You sit down underneath a tree and so many residents will come: "My dear sannyāsī, will you please come and take prasādam?" So many people invite. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu was traveling alone, wherever He goes, He was invited. That system is still there. A sannyāsī is never hungry. So many people will provide him. And it is the injunction of the śāstra that a sannyāsī, a brahmacārī, are sons of the society. As you take care of your children at home, similarly, you are also required to take care of the sannyāsīs and the brahmacārīs. Because their life is dedicated for the social welfare work. Without any charge. This our Kṛṣṇa consciousness society is giving the most valuable thing, chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, without any charge. Without any... They are canvassing, "Please take it. You'll be happy. Please take." So people should know how much valuable service they are rendering. How much valuable.

Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **. This world is just like blazing fire. People realize it. And when they do not find any solution, they become frustrated, they become confused, they take to intoxication to forget the blazing condition of life. So actually everyone in this material world is burning in the blazing fire of material consciousness. That's a fact. Somebody is trying to solve by forgetting it through the influence of intoxication or something else artificially. That is not the solution. The real solution is to come to the original consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Actually, what is the real fact of our existence? Real fact of our existence is this consciousness. Either an animal or a man or a superman or an aquatic or a tree or a plant-any living entity-what is the ultimate stand? The ultimate stand is consciousness. The animal body is animal body so long there is consciousness. The human body is human body so long there is consciousness. Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find this verse, avinaśi tu tad viddhi yena sarvam idaṁ tatam. Avinaśi tu tad viddhi. Just try to understand. Just try to understand that thing. What is that? Just try to understand that thing as imperishable. What is that thing? Yena sarvam idaṁ tatam. That thing which is pervading all over your body. And what is that thing? That is consciousness. So long there is consciousness, you feel either from this part of this body or this part of the body or this part of the..., anywhere you pinch, because the consciousness is there, you feel, "Oh, it is painful," or it is pleasure. There are two kinds of feelings: painful or pleasure. And that is due to consciousness. And this consciousness is there in every body, but they are in degrees. That is, the consciousness in tree is very lower. Therefore if you cut a tree, it does not respond. It responds... According to modern science... Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose, he has invented a machine that when you cut a tree or take out the fruit or the leaves or the branches, he feels, and that feeling is recorded in a machine. I do not know exactly the machine name, but there is a machine. It immediately...

So the consciousness is there in the trees also. But that has been known by the scientific apparatus, but according to our Vedic injunction, that is already mentioned in the śāstras, that the trees have consciousness. They are also living entities. Don't say that they are without life. They have got life. And therefore the system is... Just like we pick up flowers from the trees for offering to Kṛṣṇa, but the injunction is that after evening you should not touch the tree. The idea is that they are sleeping, don't disturb. So the consciousness of the trees are admitted in the Vedic literature. Similarly, the consciousness is developed from tree to worms, microbes, worms, germs-their consciousness is little more higher. Then birds, their consciousness is little more higher; then beasts, their consciousness is little more higher. This is development, gradual process of evolution. Gradual process of evolution means gradual process of developing the status, the state of consciousness. In this way the consciousness in human form of body is further developed, very nicely developed. And similarly, there are other elevated living condition in higher planets. They are called demigods. They are far advanced, very more and more intelligent. Their standard of living, their everything, is far, far above than all these planets, thousands and thousands of times. Just like we can discriminate here, even on this planet. Your standard of living, from materialistic point of view... Just like to get a motorcar in this country is ordinary thing, but in our country, in India, if somebody has got a motorcar, he's considered to be very rich man. Here even a worker goes on motorcar, but in India only a person who is very rich, he can have a motorcar. As there is difference of standard of living from one country to another, similarly, there is difference of standard of living, standard of duration of life, standard of intelligence, standard of developed consciousness, everything different.

That is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā: yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhuti-bhinnam [Bs. 5.40]. If you try to read Vedic literature... Not very many. Try to understand Bhagavad-gītā as it is. Try to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. These two books will give you sufficient knowledge, and we should take advantage of it, because our consciousness is developed. We should not waste our time simply reading these all nonsense literatures, sex literatures. Simply wasting their time. Tad vayasaṁ tīrtham. To read nonsense ordinary literature and books or newspaper is compared just like the pleasure place of the crows. The crows, they are very much attached to the rejected refuse, garbage. In your country I don't see many crows, but in our country there are many crows, and the garbage section is pleasure, pleasuring place there. Where rejected things, they take pleasure in that. But the swans, the ducks, they take pleasure in clear lake with lily flower, nice garden, and nice birds are chirping. They take pleasure in that place. Similarly, there are classes of men also like crows and like swans. The swans, they will take pleasure in this kind of literature, Vedic literature. And the crowlike men, they will hunt after that rejected garbagelike things. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. What is there in the sex literature? There is no new information; the same sex life, that's all. Sometimes half-naked, sometimes naked, sometimes this, sometimes that, but the central place is sex.

So when you have got developed consciousness, try to understand Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Don't waste your time in nonsense literature. Don't waste. The life is very valuable. You don't think that "Because we have got human form of life, we shall live for one hundred years or sixty or seventy years, so let us enjoy." Bhāgavata says this kind of enjoyment is there everywhere-in animal life, in plant life. This enjoyment means sex pleasure. Viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. Viṣaya. Viṣaya means eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. This is called viṣaya. One who is very much fond of these principles of life only... Just like animals. They have no other problem. They do not know what Kṛṣṇa consciousness, what philosophy, what is metaphysical understanding. They have no such problem. Their only problem is eating, sleeping, mating and defending. That's all. So this human form of life is not like that. Therefore this Śaunaka Ṛṣi says that,

āyur harati vai puṁsām

udyann astaṁ ca yann asau

tasyarte yat-kṣaṇo nīta

uttama-śloka-vārtayā



He says that our duration of life is being taken away by the sun beginning from his rising up to the end of setting. We are daily losing the duration of our life. Just like this morning, today is 12th July, the sun rises at 5:30 in the morning, and now it is 5:30 again in the evening. These twelve hours have been taken away from the duration of our life. Is it not a fact? You'll never get it back. If you ask any scientist that "I'll give you twelve millions of dollars. Please give me back these twelve hours again," no, it is not possible. No scientist can give you. That is not... Therefore Bhāgavata says that from the beginning of the sunrise up to the end of sunset, your duration of life is being taken away. That is the business. Kalaḥ. This is called time: past, present and future. What is present, tomorrow it will be past, and again future. So past, present, future; past, present, future. But what is this past, present and future? This is past, present and future of this body. So far I am concerned, I am not past, present. I do not belong to the category of the past, present and future. I belong to the category of eternity. Therefore we should be careful how to attain, how to be elevated to the platform of eternity. That is our business. The developed consciousness of human being should be utilized not in the animal propensities of eating, sleeping, mating and defending, but we should search out the path or the way or the avenue which will help us to get that life of eternity.



So here it is said that tasyarte yat-kṣaṇo nīta uttama-śloka-vārtayā. The sun is taking away our duration of life every minute, every hour, every day. But if we engage ourself in the topics of Uttama-śloka, that time he cannot take away. The idea is that the time which you are devoting here in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness temple, this time the sun cannot take away. This is becoming your asset. Plus. It is not minus. The duration of life, so far your body is concerned, that may be taken away. That will be taken away, however I may try to keep it intact. Nobody can keep it; it will be taken away. But the spiritual education which you are receiving in this class, oh, either the sun or sun's father, his father, nobody can take it away. It becomes a solid asset. Therefore we should utilize our consciousness, how to make it a solid asset. And that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you chant twenty-four hours very easy thing-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma... That means this time cannot be taken away by the sun. Just like he has taken away the time of, pertaining to my body. Just like I was also young man sometimes, say, fifty years ago, or, say, some years ago, but that is taken away. Now that cannot be returned. But the spiritual knowledge which I received from my spiritual master, that cannot be taken. That cannot be taken away. It will go with me. Even after this body it will go with me. And if it is perfect in this life, then it will take me to the eternal abode. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6].

This dhāma, everywhere, either this material world or the spiritual world, that belongs to Kṛṣṇa, or God. We are not proprietor of anything. But in this material world, this is, although it is a property, it is the property of the Supreme Lord... Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Everything belongs to God. Just like everything belongs to government, either in the prison house or outside the prison house, similarly, this material world is just like prison house, conditioned life. Just like in the prison house you cannot change your cell from this cell to another cell. Just like in free life you can go from this home to that home, in prison life you cannot do that. You must stay to your cell. So all these planets are like cells. We are trying to go to the moon planet; that is not possible, not in this way. That way is different. I have explained many times in this meeting. Because we are given a particular cell. Either we are Americans or Indians or Chinese or Russian, we have been given this planet. Live-you cannot leave it by your will. Although there are millions and billions of planets, and although you have got machine to fly, but because we are conditioned, checked by the laws of nature or God, you cannot go. Exactly like the man who is put into certain cell, he cannot change at his will without the superior authority. So Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that don't try to change this cell, from this cell to that cell. That will not make you happy. If you think, if a prisoner thinks that "I am in this cell. Let me request the superintendent of the jail to change my cell and I'll be happy," that is a mistaken idea. One cannot be happy so long he is under the prison walls. One should become free. That should be the aim of our life. So we are trying to be happy by changing the cell, by this "ism" to that "ism," by capitalism to communism, from communism to this "ism," that "ism." That will not make us happy. You'll have to completely change from this "ism," this materialism. That's all. Then you'll be happy.

So that is our program, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are not childish-ism. We are taking advice from the Supreme Person. Ā-brahma bhuvanāl lokām punar āvartino 'rjuna: "My dear Arjuna, even if you are elevated to the highest planetary system, which is called Brahmaloka..." That is also desirable because the life is very, very long there. You cannot calculate even their half-day. That is given in the Bhagavad-gītā: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. In the Brahmaloka the duration of life is very, very long. It is beyond your arithmatical calculation. But even there is death. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, don't try to waste your time to elevate yourself or to transfer yourself from this planet to that planet. That is natural instinct. Especially I see in your country that people are so restless, they cannot stay in one place. Sometimes they go from this place to that place, this apartment to that apartment, this country to that country, that country... That restlessness is there because we are searching after that eternal happiness and we are restless. We are trying to find out in one place, and when it is finished we try to go to another place. But if I change this place or that place, that is not eternal life. The eternal life is with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. Everything belongs to Him-"Everything belongs to Me"-but He has got a superexcellent place which is called Goloka Vṛndāvana. If you want to go there, then become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

That I have repeatedly explained in this meeting. Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa, how He appears, how He disappears, what is His constitutional position, what is my constitutional position, what is the relationship with Kṛṣṇa, how to live. Everything. Simply if you understand these things, Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ... Tattvataḥ means reality, scientifically. Not by whims or sentiments or fanaticism. No. Everything. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is everything scientific, solid scientific. It is not bogus. It is not imagination. So tattvataḥ. That is called tattvataḥ, in fact, in reality, in truth. If one understands Kṛṣṇa in truth, then the result is tyaktvā deham. By giving up this body... We have to give up this body, willingly or unwillingly. A day will come when you have to submit to the laws of nature and give up this body. Even your president, Mr. Kennedy, he was going in procession, but when nature's law demanded that "Now you submit your body here and change for another body," he had to. There was no question, "Oh, I am president, I am Mr. Kennedy, I cannot do this." No. You have to do it. Force. That you do not understand, how this nature's force is working on us.

So this is the business of developed consciousness, human consciousness. Otherwise, consciousness is there in the dog, in the cats, in the worms, in the trees, in the birds, in the beasts. Consciousness is there. But are we meant for living in that consciousness? Cats' and dogs' consciousness? No. Therefore Bhāgavata says that labdhvā sudurlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte: [SB 11.9.29] "After many, many births you have got this nice body, human form of body." And what to speak of American body, the nicest body, very beautiful body, very rich body. Don't misuse, please. Utilize it. Develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness and be happy. That is our propaganda. We are not asking anything that "Give me some fees, and I give you some mantra." The mantra is being distributed free in the street. You simply take it, chant it, and just see how you are developing your Kṛṣṇa consciousness. An inch development, advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is a great profit. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. This consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if achieved in the slightest degree, it can help you for the highest benefit. For the highest benefit, to takes you to the spiritual kingdom, Vaikuṇṭhaloka, Vṛndāvana. So don't be proud that "I have got human body" unnecessarily. Don't be proud that "I can live very, very longer period than the cats and dogs."

These things are very nicely discussed here. We shall try to explain. The beginning is taravaḥ kiṁ na jīvanti [SB 2.3.18] . The beginning of this... How our consciousness is developed and important, that is stated in these pages, that taravaḥ kiṁ na jīvanti. You are proud of having a little long duration of life than the cats and dogs; therefore you are proud? Oh, don't you see how long the trees also live, for seven thousand years, many thousands of years. So what is there in living for long duration of life? So there is no actual wonderful achievement by the so-called material advancement of life unless you have got developed consciousness to the standard of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Everything is false. False means maybe, temporary. You are American. You are feeling that you belong to the rich country, very beautiful body, no scarcity of food. That's all right, but it is also temporary. It is not permanent. And next life you do not know. Even if you have no information what is life after death, but there is. There is life after death. The body is changing. This is the instruction of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The body is changing, but the soul is eternal. We are busy with the bodily affairs of life, but we do not take care of the soul. That is the mistake of the present civilization. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is teaching to the people in general, the philosophers, the religionists, the leaders, that this is not the way of civilization. You try to develop your consciousness to the standard of Kṛṣṇa. Then your life will be successful.

Thank you very much. Any question? [break]

Because the Bhāgavata, the topics of Śrīmad-Bhāgavata was due to Parīkṣit Mahārāja being cursed by the brāhmaṇa boy. So at the time of his death he wanted to know from the great sages what was his duty at the time of death, and it was decided that he should hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Śukadeva Gosvāmī. That was the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavata teaching. Therefore I was talking of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, little introduction. That is stated in our First Canto Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. You must read it. In the first part it is stated what was the cause of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam teaching. The beginning was at the time of death of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So we should take the place of Mahārāja Parīkṣit that he was given time, seven days, and he prepared himself, by learning Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, for the next life. But we have no even notice when we shall die; therefore we should always read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and prepare for the next life. That is the business of elevated consciousness. We should not waste our time by reading or by, I mean to say, mixing our consciousness with so many rubbish things. We should try to purify it. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. This chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra will cleanse your consciousness, and if you hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavata, Bhagavad-gītā, then it becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. That should be the duty of everyone. [break]

Viṣṇujana: Prabhupāda, you described that the Lord is the cause, the original cause, and since no one knows the Lord, how is it possible for the people to know how they are controlled? How can they know how they are controlled since no one knows Kṛṣṇa and He is the original cause? How can they know that it's because of Kṛṣṇa that things are happening?



Prabhupāda: How can you know that you are controlled by the state? How can you know?



Viṣṇujana: The state has a lawbook.



Prabhupāda: Therefore we have got lawbooks. Anādi bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli gelā, ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇe karilā. Because you have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, therefore Kṛṣṇa has given you so many books, Vedic literature. Therefore I was stressing, don't waste your time in reading nonsense literature. Just concentrate your mind in this Vedic literature. Then you'll know. Why these books are there? Just to remind you to become lawful. But if you don't take advantage, then you are misusing your life. This preaching work, this publication of books, literature, magazines, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, everything is to remind you how we are being controlled, who is the supreme controller, how your life can be successful, how you can be relieved from this controlled life, how you can get freedom life. This is the movement. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is for that purpose; otherwise, what is the utility of this movement? It is not an "ism" just to make some temporary appeasement. It is the ultimate solution of all the problems of life, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. And this chanting is pavement of the heart, where you'll receive this message. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], cleansing the heart. Then you'll be able to receive the message. So our process is very scientific, authorized, and if anyone takes to it he'll realize gradually, and he'll be elevated. There is no doubt about it. So what is the next engagement?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa: Āratika. (obeisances) (end)





720612SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.17

-

Los Angeles, June 12, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



āyur harati vai puṁsām

udyann astaṁ ca yann asau

tasyarte yat-kṣaṇo nīta

uttama-śloka-vārtayā

[SB 2.3.17]



Translation: "Both by rising and by setting, the sun decreases the duration of life of everyone, except one who utilizes the time by discussing topics of the all-good Personality of Godhead."



Prabhupāda: So you read purport.



Pradyumna: "This verse indirectly confirms the greater importance of utilizing the human form of life to realize our lost relationship with the Supreme Lord by acceleration of devotional service. Time and tide wait for no man. So the time indicated by the sunrise and the sunset will be uselessly wasted if such time is not properly utilized for realizing identification of spiritual values. Even a fraction of the duration of life wasted cannot be compensated by any amount of gold. Human life is simply awarded to a living entity, jīva, so he can realize his spiritual identity and his permanent source of happiness. A living being, especially the human being, is seeking happiness, because happiness is the natural situation of the living entity. But he is vainly seeking happiness in the material atmosphere. A living being is constitutionally a spiritual spark of the complete whole, and his happiness can be perfectly perceived in spiritual activities. The Lord is the complete spirit whole and His name, form, quality, pastimes, entourage and personality are all identical with Him.



Once a person comes into contact with any one of the above-mentioned energies of the Lord through the proper channel of devotional service, the door of perfection is immediately opened. In the Bhagavad-gītā the Lord has explained such contact in the following words. 'Endeavors in devotional service are never baffled, nor is there failure. A slight beginning of such activities is sufficient even to deliver a person from the great ocean of material fears.' (Bg. 2.40) As a highly potent drug injected intravenously acts at once on the whole body, similarly, the transcendental topics of the Lord injected through the ear of the pure devotee of the Lord can act very efficiently. Aural realization of the transcendental messages implies total realization, just as fructification of one part of a tree implies fructification of all other parts. This realization for a moment in the association of pure devotees like Śukadeva Gosvāmī prepares one's complete life for eternity, and as such the sun fails to rob the pure devotee of his duration of life, in as much as he is constantly busy in the devotional service of the Lord, purifying his existence.

Death is a symptom of the material infection of the eternal living being, and due to material infection only, the eternal living being is subjected to the law of birth, death, old age, and disease. The materialistic way of pious activities like charity, etc., is recommended in the smṛti-śāstras as quoted by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Money given in charity to a suitable person is guaranteed bank balance in the next life. Such charity is recommended to be given to a brāhmaṇa. If the money is given in charity to a non-brāhmaṇa without brahminical qualification, the money is returned in the next life in the same proportion. If it is given in charity to a half-educated brāhmaṇa, even then the money is returned double. If the money is given in charity to a learned and fully qualified brāhmaṇa, the money is returned a hundred and thousand times, and if the money is given to a veda-pāraga, one who has actually realized the path of the Vedas, it is returned by unlimited multiplication.

The ultimate end of Vedic knowledge is to realize the Personality of Godhead Lord Kṛṣṇa, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. There is guarantee of money being returned if given in charity regardless of the proportion. Similarly, a moment passed in the association of a pure devotee by hearing and chanting the transcendental messages of the Lord is a perfect guarantee for eternal life for returning home back, to Godhead. Mad-dhāma gatvā punar janma na vidyate. In other words, a devotee of the Lord is guaranteed eternal life. A devotee's old age or disease in the present life is but an impetus to such guaranteed eternal life."

Prabhupāda: So āyur harati vai puṁsām. The sunshine, sunrise, and sunset means decreasing our life. It is very nice example. The sun's business is to take away a portion of your span of life. That is business. But he cannot take away the portion of the life of a devotee. Because a devotee is going to live. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to give a living entity a permanent span of life. Uttama-śloka-vārtayā. Uttama-śloka is Kṛṣṇa. Uttama-śloka. Bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī bhagavaty uttama-śloke. In another place it is stated, tadā... naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam ... Just like we are holding class daily. Nityam, regularly. Nityam means regularly, daily, always. So nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. The beginning... Just like when a man is infected with a disease, he is subjected to death. Crude example. So when a man falls diseased, the physician tries to get him relieved from that infection. So our material body is an infection.



Actually, we spiritual soul, we have no death. It is due to this infection. This infection is called dirty things. Actually it is dirt. "Dust thou art, dust thou beist." That's a fact. Because as soon as I, the soul, will leave this body, it will be immediately decomposed, and after a few days it will be earth, dust. So actually it is dirt. So we have to cleanse this dirt from my real identity, spiritual life. This is the process. And this cleansing process is very nicely done simply by hearing the message of Uttama-śloka, or Kṛṣṇa. You haven't got to scratch it with some machine. No. It will be automatically cleansed if you simply give aural reception to the message of the Uttama-śloka, which is, in other word, it is called kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kṛṣṇa-kathā means words of Kṛṣṇa. Kathā means words, and kṛṣṇa, you understand. So kṛṣṇa-kathā, Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa personally giving you words of instruction. So if we simply read Bhagavad-gītā, then the sun cannot take away the, my duration of life.

How? What is the proof? The proof is the Bhagavad-gītā. In the Bhagavad-gītā the Lord says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ: [Bg. 4.9] "Anyone who understands about My birth and appearance..." Lord does not take birth. Aja. Aja means who never takes birth. Ever-existing. Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san, sambhavāmi yuge yuge. So aja, one who does not take birth, but still we see that Kṛṣṇa is taking birth. We are observing the birth anniversary of Lord Kṛṣṇa. So therefore what is the mystery? He does not take birth. Still, we are observing the birth anniversary of Kṛṣṇa, Janmāṣṭamī. So this is to be understood, tattvataḥ, in truth. Yo jānāti tattvataḥ. Kṛṣṇa says, Veda says that na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. "The Supreme Lord God has nothing to do." Why He shall do? So... And again, we see that Kṛṣṇa, since the day of His appearance at His maternal uncle's prison till His going back to His own home, He was always active.

Active means especially in killing the demons. But such demons could be killed without the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If there is little earthquake, millions of demons can be killed. It is not very difficult job. If the Pacific Ocean overfloods this city, millions of people can be killed. If there is a war, millions of people can be killed. If there is epidemic, millions of men can be killed. So killing the demons, for that purpose He does not come, Kṛṣṇa. Rather, Kṛṣṇa's many agents, they can kill such demons without any difficulty. But He comes, paritrāṇāya sādhūnām. [Bg. 4.8] Just like Lord Nṛsiṁha appeared not to kill the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. He could be killed otherwise. But He appeared for Prahlāda. Prahlāda Mahārāja, he was being so much teased and so much tortured. He could not tolerate it. So he wanted to show His devotee that "I shall kill your torturer before you." That is the purpose. So He did not appear for killing Hiraṇyakaśipu. He appeared to give encouragement to Prahlāda Mahārāja.

As He says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. He asked Arjuna to declare, "My dear Arjuna, you declare that My devotee will never be vanquished." So therefore He comes. So these are the understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in toto. So if we discuss about kṛṣṇa-kathā, the words of Kṛṣṇa... There are two books, words of Kṛṣṇa. One, Bhagavad-gītā. Every Vedic literature is kṛṣṇa-kathā, but these two books especially, kṛṣṇa-kathā. Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa is directly speaking, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, directly speaking about Kṛṣṇa. Both of them are kṛṣṇa-kathā. So therefore here it is said that uttama-śloka-vārtayā. Vārtā means message, words. So if we pass our time simply by reading and talking about Kṛṣṇa, then the sun will not be able to take away our life. This is the secret. If you want to become immortal, then you always be engaged in kṛṣṇa-kathā. Always, twenty-four hours, always think of Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So everyone is dying, but those who are engaged in kṛṣṇa-kathā, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, those who are busy in Kṛṣṇa's business, they are not dying. They are living. How? Because ordinary man, his duration of life, span of life, is being taken away by the sun rising and sunset every day. If a man is fifty years old, that means... He has to live for eighty years. So fifty years duration has already been taken away by the sun. Fifty years old means that fifty years of time has already been taken away by the sun. It will never come back. "But what about the devotees? He is also the same. His, also, life is being taken away." No. His life is not being taken away, because he is going to live. Superficially we see that the body of a devotee is also taken away. But this is not the real body. Real body is the spiritual body. So spiritual body... Just like Kṛṣṇa says, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. "After giving up this body, he does not take birth. He comes to Me."

So he has... Now the body is given up. Then how he goes? He says, "He comes to Me." So who comes to Him? Materialistic person, the so-called scientist, philosopher, they know this body-the self. They do not know that the body is the cover of the self. This real self, the real person, goes to Kṛṣṇa to live forever. So those who are devotees, those who are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are giving up this infected body and they are getting their new... Not new. The old, original body, spiritual body. Therefore, as soon as you get the spiritual body, the sun has no power to take it away. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, that "The fire cannot burn it, the weapon cannot kill it, the water cannot moist it..." In so many way, indirect way, are described. The spirit cannot be destroyed by anything material. Matter... Just like this body is matter. This body can be cut into pieces, but the spirit soul cannot be. The body can be burnt into ashes, but the spirit soul cannot be.

Pāvakaḥ. Dahati pāvakaḥ. So the modern scientists, they say that there is no life in the sun planet, sun globe. But that is not a fact. What is sun globe? It is a fiery planet, that's all. But the spirit soul can live in the fire, and he gets a fiery body. Just like here, on this planet, on earth, we have got this earthly body. It may be very beautiful, but it is earth. Simply by nature's manipulation. Just like we are coming... Karandhara showed me. The plastic, some trees. So they have made the plastic tree exactly resembling the tree. But it is not tree. Similarly, this body is as good as the plastic body. It has no value. So tyaktvā deham. So when Kṛṣṇa says that after giving up this body... But this body is plastic body. Just like you have got cotton shirt or plastic shirt or so many. You can give it up. That does not mean you die. That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. As one gives up old garment for a new one, similarly, death means to give up this plastic body and take another plastic body.

That is death. And again, under that plastic body, you have to work. If you get a nice body, then you can work nicely. If you get a dog's body, then you act like dog. According to body. So tyaktvā deham. Kṛṣṇa says that "Anyone who understands Me in truth ..." So how you will understand? Simply if you hear about Him, then you will understand. Then you will understand. So hearing is not very difficult job. But you must hear from the realized soul. That is... Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. If you hear from a professional man, that will not be effective. Hearing must be from sādhu, from devotee, from the lips of the devotee. Just like Śukadeva Gosvāmī was speaking to Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So ... Or even if you hear yourself, you read books, you will save your life. If you simply read Kṛṣṇa book or Bhagavad-gītā or Teachings of Lord Caitanya, then you know the... As long as you are reading, the sun is unable to take your life. It is not possible for the sun to take your life.

So if you constantly read, then where is the opportunity of sun's taking your life? That means you are becoming immortal. People are very much anxious to become immortal. Nobody wants to die. Everyone knows that "I shall die." But if there is immediately some danger, fire, immediately you go away from this room. Why? I do not wish to die. I do not wish to die. Although I know I must have to die. Still, why do I go away? I know that... "Oh, let there be fire. I have to die today or tomorrow. Let me die." No. I do not wish to die. Therefore I go away. This is psychology. So everyone wants to live forever. That's a fact. So if you want to live forever, then you have to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so important and nice. Everyone wants to live. So actually, if you want to live, then you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This verse confirms it. Āyur harati vai puṁsām udyann astaṁ ca yann asau. The sun is rising early in the morning. As it is rising, gradually it is taking your life.

That's all. That is the business. But if you want to defeat the sun... Sun is very powerful. It is very difficult to fight. But you can fight with the sun. How? Simply by reading kṛṣṇa-kathā, the words of Kṛṣṇa. Uttama-śloka-vārtayā. Vārtayā. Uttama-śloka, Kṛṣṇa. So this is the simple process. You don't waste your time by talking nonsense. Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī has advised, atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ. Prajalpaḥ.

atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati

[NoI 2]



Our devotional life can be finished, means may be baffled... Those who are in devotional life, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they is fortunate. This fortune can be ruined by six things. Be careful. What is that? Atyāhāra. Atyāhāra means eating more than necessity or collecting more than necessity. Āhāra. Āhāra means collecting. We require to collect some money, but we should not collect more than necessity. That we shouldn't. Because if I get more money, then immediately māyā will pa... "Why don't you spend for me?" Yes. So don't collect more than ... What you require, you collect. Or similarly, āhāra means eating. Don't eat more than necessity. Actually, we have to come to the point of nil, eating, sleeping, mating and defending. And that is not possible because we have got this body. But minimum. So atyāhāraḥ prayāsaḥ, and too much unnecessary spoiling energy.



We should not take great risk so that we have to work for it very seriously. We must accept something which can be easily done. Atyāhāraḥ prayāsaḥ, prajalpa. And prajalpa means talking nonsense. As soon as ... This is the nature of the living entity in conditioned state. Just like as soon as the crows, they gather together, caw caw caw caw ... (Laughter) The frogs ... Any living entity, as soon as they will gather, they will talk all nonsense. Don't do that. We have got great assembly, we have got facility for mixing, but if you take advantage of this assembly and talk all nonsense-what is politics, what is this, what is that ... Prajalpa. That is called prajalpa. So atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ [NoI 2]. Niyamāgraha means not accepting the rules and regulation. Another meaning of niyamāgraha means simply blindly following the rules and regulations, but he does not know for what he is doing that. Gardalika-pravāha (?). It is called gardalika-pravāha. Everyone is doing this, but he does not understand why he is doing it. There are many stories of this gardalika-pravāha. Sometimes I will tell you.

So niyamāgraha. So one, atyāhāra; two, prayāsa; three, prajalpa; and four, niyamāgraha; and fifth, laulyam, greediness; and sixth, jana-saṅgaḥ. Jana-saṅgaḥ means to associate with ordinary men, those who have no sense of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So-called karmīs, jñānīs, yogis. They do not understand Kṛṣṇa. Or scientist, philosophers. We should not associate with them. Because we know ... Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. Anyone who does not understand what is Kṛṣṇa and what is Kṛṣṇa's service, he may be very big man in the ordinary estimation, but we don't give him any value.

Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ [SB 5.18.12]. Because they are mental speculators. They have no value. They have their value in their own way, but according to our line of thought, they have no value. So prajalpa ... In this way, prajalpa, there is tendency of talking. You talk of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like we assembled together, few friends, (baby cries) we want to vibrate something. Just like the child is also vibrating. That is nature. A bird will vibrate, a beast will vibrate. So we have to vibrate the transcendental sound. Then we shall be saved from the plundering business of the sun. This is the secret. Always talk of Kṛṣṇa and you must know that you are saving yourself. You are not dying yourself. Because talking of Kṛṣṇa means you will understand about Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa says, "Anyone who understands Me rightly, then after giving up this body, he comes to Me." And as soon as you go to Him, back to home, back to Godhead, your life is eternal, blissful, and full of knowledge.

That is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. So why should we lose this opportunity? The most rascal, rascal person, they give up this. They do not take advantage of this, advantage of kṛṣṇa-kathā. Therefore śāstra says, smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur vismartavyo na jātucit. We shall have to remember Viṣṇu always, everywhere, always.

tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam

[SB 2.1.5]



So this is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We have to hear about Kṛṣṇa, we have to chant about Kṛṣṇa, we have to memorize about Kṛṣṇa, we have to worship Kṛṣṇa. This is our movement. We are worshiping Kṛṣṇa in the temple. We are thinking of Him. We are talking about Him, and we are hearing about Him. So if we live in this way, it does not require any monetary exchange or any high education. Everyone can hear about Kṛṣṇa. Anyone... After hearing, everyone can talk about Kṛṣṇa. And while hearing and talking, he can remember about Kṛṣṇa.



And everyone can worship in the temple. Where is the difficulty? By prosecuting these four principles of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you become immortal. No austerity. No austerity, no penance, no education, no riches. Simply by following these four principles, you become immortal. So this verse is very important. Āyur harati vai puṁsām udyann astaṁ ca yann asau, tasyarte yat-kṣaṇo nītaḥ. Tasya ṛte, one who is passing time in this way, simply with kṛṣṇa-kathā, chanting also... If you have no time... If you have spare time, don't sit idly. If there is no facility for reading books or talking about Kṛṣṇa, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. If you have got... Next moment, you can interchange, read something. Always be busy with Kṛṣṇa. Then sun will not be able to kill you. You are going to live forever. This is the process. What is the time? Kīrtana. Where is Śyāmasundara? Where is Śyāmasundara? (end)



720613SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.18-19

-

Los Angeles, June 13, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.:)



taravaḥ kiṁ na jīvanti

bhastrāḥ kiṁ na śvasanty uta

na khādanti na mehanti

kiṁ grāme paśavo 'pare

[SB 2.3.18]



(When Līlāvatī chants, Śrīla Prabhupāda says, "That's nice. Go on. Anyone else?")



(After word meanings, Śrīla Prabhupāda says, "Not 'beastly.' 'Animals.' Paśavaḥ means animal and beastly living being also. Then.")

Pradyumna: "Do the trees not live? Do the bellows of the blacksmith not breathe? All around us, do the beasts not eat and discharge semen? The materialistic man of the modern age will argue that life or part of it is never meant for discussion of theosophical or theological arguments. Life is meant for the maximum duration of existence for eating, drinking, sexual intercourse, making merry and enjoying life. The modern man wants to live forever by the advancement of material science, and there are many foolish theories for prolonging life to the maximum duration. But the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam affirms that life is not meant for so-called economic development or advancement of materialistic science for the hedonistic philosophy of eating, mating, drinking and merry-making. Life is solely meant for tapasya, for purifying existence, so that one may enter into eternal life just after the end of the human form of life. The materialists want to prolong life as much as possible because they have no information of the next life.



Therefore they want to get the maximum comforts of life only in this present life, thinking conclusively that there is no life after death. This ignorance about the eternity of the living being and the change of covering in the material world has played havoc in the structure of the modern human society. Consequently there are many problems multiplied by various plans of modernized man. The plans for solving the problems of society have only aggravated the troubles. Even if it is possible to prolong life more than 100 years, advancement of human civilization does not necessarily follow. The Bhāgavatam says that certain trees live for hundreds and thousands of years. At Vṛndāvana there is a tamarind tree. The place is known as Imlitala, which is said to be existing since the time of Lord Kṛṣṇa. In the Calcutta Botanical Garden there is a banyan tree said to be older than 500 years, and there are many such trees all over the world. Svāmī Śaṅkarācārya lived only 32 years, and Lord Caitanya lived 48 years.

One may doubt that trees have life because they do not breathe, but modern scientists like Bose have already proved that there is life in plants, so breathing is no sign of actual life. The Bhāgavatam says that the bellows of the blacksmith breathe very soundly, but that does not mean that the bellows has life. The materialist will argue that life in the tree and life in the man cannot be compared because the tree cannot enjoy life by eating palatable dishes or by enjoying sexual intercourse. In reply to this, the Bhāgavatam asks whether other animals like the dogs and hogs living in the same village with human beings do not eat and enjoy sexual life. The specific utterance of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in this connection regarding other animals means that persons who are simply engaged in the matter of planning a better type of animal life consisting of eating, breathing, and mating are also animals in the shape of human beings. A society of such polished animals cannot benefit suffering humanity, for an animal can easily harm another animal but rarely do good."

Prabhupāda: So this is the situation. We have discussed in the previous verse that we are decreasing the span of life. The scientists will say, "No, we are making arrangement so that by science we shall make man immortal." Vikatate(?). When a man becomes mad, he speaks so many nonsense. Like a child. A child also speaks so many nonsense things, and the parents enjoy it. Similarly, the so-called scientist, when he says that "By scientific method, we shall stop death," so there is no evidence in the history of the human society that a man has not died. That cannot be. Hiraṇyakaśipu, he was also atheist and materialistic. He also tried to become immortal. And he made a plan, negative plan, to cheat Lord Brahmā that "I shall not die in this way, in this way, in that way, in this way, in that way." But still he was killed. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am death, and at the time of death I take away everything." Sarva-haraś ca. So we cannot cheat God or His law.



That is not possible. We may be very intelligent to cheat here the police or the government or the laws, but it is not possible to cheat the supreme laws. That is not possible. Therefore, in order to avoid the superintendence of the Supreme Lord ... because there is superintendence ... as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, you have read, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. "Under My superintendence the law of nature is working." So we are under the laws of nature. The nature is very vigilant, strong agent of Kṛṣṇa. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. So we cannot avoid. Even if we deny, "There is no God, there is no systematic government or stringent laws," just to avoid our responsibility, but that will not save us. Now, the argument is in the previous verse. It is said that we are decreasing our duration of life. The scientists will say, "No, we shall stop it." Taking this argument, Bhāgavata says, "Suppose you stop death ..." It cannot be.

Suppose you increase the duration span of life to a very extensive way. In reply to that, it is said that "What is the use of living for so many years?" If the life is not properly utilized ... Now, the living for many, many years, so the trees are also living, standing in one place, living for many years. In San Francisco we saw. They say that one tree, red tree, very tall, very stout and strong, and they said that this tree is standing there for seven hundreds of years. So what is the benefit? So we can argue that "You cannot compare with tree and us. Because we have got so many facilities." What facilities? That facility ... The tree's life ... That is life, admitting, but it cannot breathe. So immediately the answer is bhastrāḥ kiṁ na śvasanty uta. Bhastrāḥ, bellow ... You have seen big, big bellows in blacksmith shop. That is also made of skin. Just like our body is made of skin, that bellow is also made of skin, and it has got a big nose and breathing is coming, "bas, ghans, ghans, bas."

So these are the tangible examples. So if you want to increase your life there are many living entities, they are living many, many years more than you. So what excel, what is excellence in your part? And if you say that "I am breathing. The tree cannot breathe." Oh, there is the bhastrāḥ, the bellows. It can breathe better than you. Then he says, "No, they have no enjoyment of eating and mating." Then the Bhāgavata replies, kiṁ na khādanti na mehanti kiṁ grāme paśavo 'pare. Wherever we live, there are many other lower animals, just like dogs, cats, hogs, asses, animals, camels. Of course, in city we do not find these, but in villages these are domestic animals. Dogs, asses, hogs, camel, monkey, and so many others. Therefore he says, grāme, "In your vicinity, in your neighborhood, there are many animals. They have got the facility of eating and sexual intercourse." So how do we excel them? The modern civilization is such a foolish civilization that they think they are advanced.

In which way you are advanced? The animals, the trees, they are far advanced than you in this matter. So far bodily necessities are concerned, you cannot compete with them. You are flying. So we can fly by airplane. Oh, the vulture can fly more than you. It is a vulture, and it flies many miles above, and it has got very sharp eyesight. The vulture is so up. The business is where there is a dead body. That's all. He is trying to find out, "Where is a dead body?" You see? It goes high, but the business is to find out a dead body. That's all. Similarly, our, this advancement of science, increasing the duration of life, increasing the sex power especially in these days ... As soon as there is lack of sex power, there is divorce suit. Yes. But you have seen the dogs and cats. How much sex power they have got! So begetting children, the hog can beget children, at least three dozen a year. What we can do? In three years it is hardly we can produce one child. And the hog will produce in three years at least thirty-six children.

So you cannot compete. Simply by competing with these things, animal life, that is not excellence of your life. Real excellence is that these animals, they cannot become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is the difference only. You can excel with all these lower animals, trees, birds, beasts and others, so many, only by awakening your Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the only business. And if you lack in that matter Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then the other animals, lower animals, they are far, far advanced. They are far, far advanced. So as human being, we should consider all these points. The Bhāgavata is pointing out each and every step of our life and helping us how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. When Nārada Muni advised Vyāsadeva that "You have written so many books, but actually they are not very much beneficial to the human society. You write such a book that they will come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." So this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is especially written to bring these rascals and animals to come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

The so-called advanced civilization going to hell, they do not know. Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Chewing the chewed. So many advertisement, only for drinking and sex. We go, when we go to the beach, two sides, the advertisement full of drinking and sex. That's all. So animal civilization. Don't be proud of this rascal civilization. There is no meaning of this civilization. And big professor, he says, "Swamiji, there is no life after death." Just see. And he is a professor. He's teacher. This is the position. Fools, rascals, they are leaders, professors, and scientists and philosophers, and pushing us towards hell. That's all. Because they do not know what is the value of life. They do not know that there is life after death. Otherwise, why there are so many varieties of life? They concoct their own conclusion. They do not refer to the authorities, what is the actual position. They make, they manufacture their own way of life.

It is very dangerous civilization. Because ... Dangerous in this sense, that this life, human form of life, is especially meant for God realization, but in that subject matter they are blind. There is no educational system, there is no university, nothing of the sort. Simply animalistic way of life, "How we can increase our eating capacity, our sexual capacity," and this ... This is going on. So Bhāgavata is pointing out, "My dear sir, by these things you cannot be very much proud." Then? One more verse, yes.

Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.:)



śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ

saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ

na yat-karṇa-pathopeto

jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ

[SB 2.3.19]



Prabhupāda: That's all. So śva. Śva means dog, and viḍ, viḍ-varāha. There are two kinds of hogs. One is that we see generally in towns and villages. That is varāha. Varāha means hogs. And they eat stool, viḍ-varāha. Another, jungle varāha. They have got a big, what is called?



Devotees: Tusk.



Prabhupāda: Tusk, yes. That is more dangerous. They live in the jungle. And viḍ-varāha means they live in the forest, finding out "Where is stool? Where is stool? Where is stool?" Śva-viḍ-varāha uṣṭra. Uṣṭra means camel, and khara means ass. So here it is a very terse remark, that "Anyone who has never heard the glories of Gadāgraja, the Supreme Personality of Godhead-in other words, one who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, does not know anything about Kṛṣṇa, or God-they are no better than these animals, especially: dog, hog, ass, camel." Why these four kinds of animals have been selected to compare? That is explained. Śva means dog. A dog, however powerful it may be, very strong, stout, but it, unless it has got a master, its life is very precarious. Dog. Just see our education at the present moment. Very advanced education. Many Indian students come here also to take advanced education. But actually, we consider this education creating dogs. Why? Now, because however technologist you may be, if you don't get a suitable service, all your education is finished.



Therefore, after education you'll have to write application, "My dear sir, I am such and such qualified dog. (laughter) If you'll kindly give me some service." And the tail is like this. (laughter) You see? Just imagine. If by education he becomes independent ... Just like Vedic culture. The brāhmaṇas, the kṣatriya, the vaiśyas, they are independent. The śūdras are compared with the dogs because they cannot live without a master. Brāhmaṇa, he will not accept anyone's service. That is real brāhmaṇa. A kṣatriya will never accept anyone's service. Why the battle of Kurukṣetra was there? The Kurus, they took away the whole kingdom of the Pāṇḍavas. But they were kṣatriyas. How they will live? Therefore the fight was necessity. The kṣatriyas must be, must have some land to collect taxes. That is the kṣatriya's source of income. The brāhmaṇa's source of income, paṭhana pāṭhana yajana yājana ... They must be learned scholar, they must teach others, they must be devotee and teach others how to become devotee.

They must take contribution and must spend for Kṛṣṇa. This is brāhmaṇa. No service. Formerly, no brāhmaṇa ... Sanātana Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī, they were born in high-class brāhmaṇa family, Sārasvata brāhmaṇa, but because they accepted the service of Nawab Hussein Shah, immediately they were rejected from brāhmaṇa society. It is by the grace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu that they again became gosvāmī. Otherwise, they were rejected. No brāhmaṇa could take service and especially service of a low-class man. That is ... In Bhāgavata you will see especially that if a brāhmaṇa is in difficulty, he may accept the profession of a kṣatriya or utmost of a vaiśya, but never take the profession of a śūdra. What is the profession of śūdra? Śūdra ... Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma śvabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. One who is hankering after service, he is śūdra. He has no capacity to live independently. The brāhmaṇa, real brāhmaṇa, he will starve, he will die out of starvation.

He will never accept anyone's service. That is brāhmaṇa. Uñcha-vṛtti. If he has no income, he will go on the field ... And when the grains are taken away, some grains fall down. They will pick up all those grains and live on that. Still, they will not go to anyone that "I am hungry. Give me something." No. Uñcha-vṛtti. So our education ... And why we were so independent? Because the education was very high, Vedic education. Satisfied with Brahman realization. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. Not very long ago, say about 300 years ago, there was a brāhmaṇa, a very rigid brāhmaṇa, in Kṛṣṇa-nagara, near our Māyāpura. And brāhmaṇa's business, he was teaching. So the king of that place, means a big zamindar, Rājā Kṛṣṇa-candra ... By his name, that place is Kṛṣṇa-nagara. So he heard about the brāhmaṇa, very learned brāhmaṇa, but very poor. So he one day came to him and asked him, "Brāhmaṇa, can I help you any way?" So he said, "No, I don't require any help from you."

"No, I see you are so poverty-stricken. You have no sufficient means." "No, I am not poverty-stricken. My students, they get some alms of rice. So my wife boils the rice, and here is a tamarind tree. So I take some leaves and boil it, and that's sufficient. Why I am poverty-stricken?" He's satisfied, whatever is coming automatically, that's all. He doesn't require any higher standard of life, any botheration. He is satisfied, little rice and tamarind juice. That's all. So in each and every home, formerly, this independence was very much valued. So at the modern education this independence is being killed. People are becoming unemployed, machine. Machine ... High technologist means he must find out a job where technological machines are there. Otherwise he will starve, and he will have to go round, factory to factory: "Will you give me some service?" "No vacancy." Yes. So we shall discuss further next, tomorrow. (end)



770323SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.18-19

-

Bombay, March 23, 1977,

At Cross Maidan Pandal



Prabhupāda: ...Bhavānanda Swami, to recite two or three verses from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the theme of our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Read it. The verse begins with taravaḥ kiṁ na jīvanti. Read that verse.



Bhavānanda:



taravaḥ kiṁ na jīvanti

bhastrāḥ kiṁ na śvasanty uta

na khādanti na mehanti

kiṁ grāme paśavo 'pare

[SB 2.3.18]



"Do the trees not live? Do the bellows of the blacksmith not breathe? All around us, do the beasts not eat and discharge semen?" Purport by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda. The materialistic man of the modern age will argue that life, or part of it, is never meant for discussion of theosophical or theological arguments. Life is meant for the maximum duration of existence for eating, drinking, sexual intercourse, making merry and enjoying life. The modern man wants to live forever by the advancement of material science, and there are many foolish theories for prolonging life to the maximum duration. But the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam affirms that life is not meant for so-called economic development or advancement of materialistic science for the hedonistic philosophy of eating, mating, drinking and merrymaking. Life is solely meant for tapasya, for purifying existence so that one may enter into eternal life just after the end of the human form of life.



The materialists want to prolong life as much as possible because they have no information of the next life. They want to get the maximum comforts in this present life because they think conclusively that there is no life after death. This ignorance about the eternity of the living being and the change of covering in the material world has played havoc in the structure of modern human society. Consequently there are many problems, multiplied by various plans of modernized man. The plans for solving the problems of society have only aggravated the troubles. Even if it is possible to prolong life more than one hundred years, advancement of human civilization does not necessarily follow. The Bhāgavatam says that certain trees live for hundreds and thousands of years. At Vṛndāvana there is a tamarind tree (the place is known as Imlitala) which is said to have existed since the time of Lord Kṛṣṇa. In the Calcutta Botanical Garden there is a banyan tree said to be older than five hundred years, and there are many such trees all over the world. Svāmī Śaṅkarācārya lived only thirty-two years, and Lord Caitanya lived forty-eight years. Does it mean that the prolonged lives of the abovementioned trees are more important than Śaṅkara or Caitanya? Prolonged life without spiritual value is not very important. One may doubt that trees have life because they do not breathe. But modern scientists like Bose have already proved that there is life in plants, so breathing is no sign of actual life. The Bhāgavatam says that the bellows of the blacksmith breathes very soundly, but that does not mean that the bellows has life. The materialist will argue that life in the tree and life in the man cannot be compared because the tree cannot enjoy life by eating palatable dishes or by enjoying sexual intercourse. In reply to this, the Bhāgavatam asks whether other animals like the dogs and hogs, living in the same village with human beings, do not eat and enjoy sexual life. The specific utterance of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in regard to "other animals" means that persons who are simply engaged in planning a better type of animal life consisting of eating, breathing and mating are also animals in the shape of human beings. A society of such polished animals cannot benefit suffering humanity, for an animal can easily harm another animal but rarely do good.



śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ

saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ

na yat-karṇa-pathopeto

jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ

[SB 2.3.19]



"Men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and asses praise those men who never listen to the transcendental pastimes of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the deliverer from evils." Purport by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Śrīla Prabhupāda. The general mass of people, unless they are trained systematically for a higher standard of life in spiritual values, are no better than animals, and in this verse they have particularly been put on the level of dogs, hogs, camels and asses. Modern university education practically prepares one to acquire a doggish mentality with which to accept the service of a greater master. After finishing a so-called education, the so-called educated persons move like dogs from door to door with applications for some service, and mostly they are driven away, informed of no vacancy. As dogs are negligible animals and serve the master faithfully for bits of bread, a man serves a master faithfully without sufficient rewards.



Persons who have no discrimination in the matter of foodstuff and who eat all sorts of rubbish are compared to hogs. Hogs are very much attached to eating stools. So stool is a kind of foodstuff for a particular type of animal. And even stones are eatables for a particular type of animal or bird. But the human being is not meant for eating everything and anything; he is meant to eat grains, vegetables, fruits, milk, sugar, etc. Animal food is not meant for the human being. For chewing solid food, the human being has a particular type of teeth meant for cutting fruits and vegetables. The human being is endowed with two canine teeth as a concession for persons who will eat animal food at any cost. It is known to everyone that one man's food is another man's poison. Human beings are expected to accept the remnants of food offered to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and the Lord accepts foodstuff from the categories of leaves, flowers, fruits, etc. (Bg. 9.26). As prescribed by Vedic scriptures, no animal food is offered to the Lord. Therefore, a human being is meant to eat a particular type of food. He should not imitate the animals to derive so-called vitamin values. Therefore, a person who has no discrimination in regard to eating is compared to a hog.



The camel is a kind of animal that takes pleasure in eating thorns. A person who wants to enjoy family life or the worldly life of so-called enjoyment is compared to the camel. Materialistic life is full of thorns, and so one should live only by the prescribed method of Vedic regulations just to make the best use of a bad bargain. Life in the material world is maintained by sucking one's own blood. The central point of attraction for material enjoyment is sex life. To enjoy sex life is to suck one's own blood, and there is not much more to be explained in this connection. The camel also sucks its own blood while chewing thorny twigs. The thorns the camel eats cut the tongue of the camel, and so blood begins to flow within the camel's mouth. The thorns, mixed with fresh blood, create a taste for the foolish camel, and so he enjoys the thorn-eating business with false pleasure. Similarly, the great business magnates, industrialists who work very hard to earn money by different ways and questionable means, eat the thorny results of their actions mixed with their own blood. Therefore the Bhāgavatam has situated these diseased fellows along with the camels.



The ass is an animal who is celebrated as the greatest fool, even amongst the animals. The ass works very hard and carries burdens of the maximum weight without making profit for itself. Footnote. The ass is generally engaged by the washerman, whose social position is not very respectable. And the special qualification of the ass is that it is very much accustomed to being kicked by the opposite sex. When the ass begs for sexual intercourse, he is kicked by the fair sex, yet he still follows the female for such sexual pleasure. A henpecked man is compared, therefore, to the ass. The general mass of people work very hard, especially in the age of Kali. In this age the human being is actually engaged in the work of an ass, carrying heavy burdens and driving ṭhelā and rickshaws. The so-called advancement of human civilization has engaged a human being in the work of an ass. The laborers in great factories and workshops are also engaged in such burdensome work, and after working hard during the day, the poor laborer has to be again kicked by the fair sex, not only for sex enjoyment but also for so many household affairs.



So Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam's categorization of the common man without any spiritual enlightenment into the society of dogs, hogs, camels and asses is not at all an exaggeration. The leaders of such ignorant masses of people may feel very proud of being adored by such a number of dogs and hogs, but that is not very flattering. The Bhāgavatam openly declares that although a person may be a great leader of such dogs and hogs disguised as men, if he has no taste for being enlightened in the science of Kṛṣṇa, such a leader is also an animal and nothing more. He may be designated as a powerful, strong animal, or a big animal, but in the estimation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam he is never given a place in the category of man, on account of his atheistic temperament. Or, in other words, such godless leaders of dogs and hoglike men are bigger animals with the qualities of animals in greater proportion.



Prabhupāda: So



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



Anartha. We living entities, we are part and parcel of God. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. Some way or other, we are now fallen in this material condition, and we are changing bodies. This is the first instruction in the Bhagavad-gītā. There are so many commentators on Bhagavad-gītā, but nobody has pointed out what is the real business of Bhagavad-gītā. The real business is, as Kṛṣṇa says in the beginning of His teachings,



dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



This is the first instruction, that we are changing body on account of the spirit soul, and when the spirit soul changes... We are changing every day, every moment, our body-kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā. I was a child. You were a child. We have now changed our bodies. Similarly, now I am old man. Some of you, you are also old man. We have changed the body.



So what kind of body we are going to have? What change is going to take place? There is no knowledge. So at least in India this condition should be changed, to keep people in ignorance of this bodily concept of life-"I belong to this community." "I belong to that community." "I belong to this body." "I belong to that body."-No. They should be educated to become brahma-bhūtaḥ.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



Sama-sarveṣu bhūteṣu. India's education is not to distinguish that "Here is an Englishman," "Here is a German," "Here is a Christian," "Here is a Hindu," "Here is a Muslim." Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Because India's realization of knowledge is brahmānubhūti, brahma-bhūtaḥ. Then, when one comes to the standard of brahma-bhūtaḥ knowledge, he'll be happy.



It is not possible, of course, to realize Brahman by everyone. That is not possible. But there must be an ideal institution. Unfortunately, at the present moment it is very difficult to find out where is that ideal brāhmaṇa, but there must be. Kṛṣṇa says. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement includes this, that cātur-varṇyaṁ māyā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. There must be division. There may be only a few number of brāhmaṇas, but there must be ideal brāhmaṇas so that people may learn that "Here is the first-class brāhmaṇa. Here is the first-class man. Let us take instruction from him, not from so-called politicians." This is Indian civilization. Don't think... Formerly even Lord Rāmacandra, who was the king... He is God Himself. Still, He used to consult learned brāhmaṇas, sages, saintly persons, for governmental duties. The division must be there.

So there are so many things to be done in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Don't take it that it is simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa chanting is the prime factor because if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, then gradually everything will be clear in your mind. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Whole world is suffering on account of all contaminated things accumulated within our heart. So the Bhāgavata process is to hear from the right person.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



So our request to all of you is that take this movement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, chanting, very seriously. Don't neglect it. This is the India's gift to the whole of the world. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission.



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



India's mission is para-upakāra, not to exploit others but to do good to others. And what is the best thing to do? Because a human being also, he has got the opportunity to understand his position. He's kept into darkness that he is like animal and his only business is how to eat, how to sleep, how to mate. This kind of ignorance, at least in India, we should not desire. Let us combine together. That is my request. Take it very seriously. In America they are now taking it seriously. Perhaps you know. Recently there is a judgment by the Supreme Court in New York. They admitted that Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is genuine religious movement. There was a great opposition against this movement. Our students were being kidnapped, and so many harassments was going on, but by the grace of Kṛṣṇa I went to America in 1965, and now it is '77. After eleven, twelve years of struggle I was loitering in the street, who cared for me? But it is now being recognized, that "Here is a movement." Now we have to utilize it. I always put this logic to my students, andha-paṅgu-nyāya, that for the benefit of the whole world, American money and Indian culture should combine. (applause) That will bring benefit to the whole world.



So the opportunity is there. Now let our Indians' leader come out. Take this movement very seriously. There will be great advantage to the people of the whole world. This kind of situation, to keep them in darkness that "I am dog," "I am hog," "I am American," "I am Indian..." No. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. This is real conception of life. What is the difference? If a bulldog thinks that "I am a bulldog," and if a man thinks, "I am American" or "I am brāhmaṇa," what is the difference? The real thing is knowledge. So don't keep this knowledge locked up in your books, but spread it. My only request is: the leaders of India should now come forward and join this movement and take this advantage of doing good to the whole world, para-upakāra. (applause)

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



Thank you very much. (applause-break)



Girirāja: We request you to ask them now. So please... A lot of information has been presented, a lot of food for thought. So this is a very important movement, very important subject matter. So we request any of you who have any question at all to please put that question and we can have further discussion.



Lokanātha: Come here and ask the question in the microphone. Please come forward and ask question.



Girirāja: Who will be the first? Asking questions is a sign of intelligence.



Lady: What is the most important thing in life?



Girirāja: The question is what is the most important thing in life?



Prabhupāda: To understand yourself. If you misidentify yourself that you are this body, then you are finished. Our most important... athāto brahma jijñāsā. The question should be, "What I am? Am I this body or something else?" That is most important thing. That is the beginning of Vedānta-sūtra knowledge, athāto brahma jijñāsā. The animals cannot ask "Whether I am dog or something else?" And if the man is kept into darkness, that he has no question, "Whether I am this or that?" then he is animal. So the most important thing according to our Vedic culture is to understand oneself, "what I am." [break]



Guest (1): ...to educate?



Prabhupāda: Do you think that you are not taxed? Why should you not be taxed for the proper gain? You are being taxed for so many nonsense things. Why not be taxed for the proper thing? That is intelligence.



Guest (2): What is the importance of health in life, and how does Guruji advise people to maintain health, and how does it connect to your mission?



Prabhupāda: What is health? First of all you have to understand that however healthy you may be, you must die. What problem you have solved? Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9], Kṛṣṇa says. It is not my manufacture. However you may try to remain very healthy, nature's law is that you must die. How you can help yourself? After all, you have to meet death. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi. So long you have got this material body, there is no question of health. You must suffer. You may be very great scientist in oblivion, but the nature's law must act.



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



Foolish persons-ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā-bewildered by false egotism, he's thinking, "I am improving health, I am improving this, I am doing..." He's improving nothing. He is completely under the clutches of material nature. He cannot act anything independently. That is the law of nature.



Guest (3): May I know the distinction between Kṛṣṇa consciousness and supramental consciousness described by Śrī Aurobindo?



Prabhupāda: Yes, Kṛṣṇa consciousness means superconsciousness. Kṛṣṇa You are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. Just like father and son. Father knows, "He is my son," and the son knows, "He is my father." So this father, paternal consciousness, is there. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is real consciousness, but we color it with other consciousness. That is polluted. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to purify your consciousness.



sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



When you become free from all designations of this world-sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam-and you become purified, without any contamination, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then your real business, real life, begins.



Guest (4): Can we solve political problems with this religious basis?



Prabhupāda: Yes. All problems will be solved if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious.



Guest (5): What is a simple solution to understand soul? I would like to understand soul in a simplified form.



Prabhupāda: This is very simple, but we are educated so foolishly that we cannot understand. This is our defect. Kṛṣṇa says, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā: [Bg. 7.4] "Arjuna, there are eight material elements: earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, ego." Apareyam: "But these are inferior elements." Itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām: "Beyond this there is another, superior element." What is that? Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. "The living entity is superior element." Without the living entity, what is the value of this bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ? This distinction we can experience every day. Here is an important man. Now he's finished. And if you kick on his face, he won't protest. What is the wanting? That-jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho-that living force is wanting. So anyone, any child, can understand that "Something is wanting. Therefore this important body is nothing but a lump of matter." Anyone can understand. Everything is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, but we are not serious to understand. That is the (indistinct).



Guest (6): Can the Janata explosion be regarded as a division of Kṛṣṇa consciousness or similar consciousness?



Prabhupāda: You cannot have everyone to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is not possible. It is not so easy.



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścid vetti māṁ tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



It is very, very difficult. But at least there must be one section of people who understand Kṛṣṇa so that people may take advantage of their position.



Guest (7): The first śloka of the Bhagavad-gītā says,



dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre

samaveta yuyutsavaḥ

māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

kim akurvata sañjaya

[Bg. 1.1]



I ask you, Prabhu, what is that dharma-kṣetra and kuru-kṣetra?



Prabhupāda: Dharma-kṣetra everyone knows. Kurukṣetra is still dharma-kṣetra. Everyone goes there for religious performances. Where is the difficulty? Why you make it difficult? In candra-grahaṇa, in sūrya-grahaṇa, hundreds, thousands of people still go there. This is dharma-kṣetra. In the Vedic injunction it is said kurukṣetre dharmaṁ yajet: "When you want to perform religious ritualistic ceremonies, go to Kurukṣetra." So Kurukṣetra is still there, the place is there, the station is there, and it is mentioned in the Vedas, it is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā. Where is the difficulty? Why you create difficulty? It is your fault that creates difficulty. Otherwise Kurukṣetra is dharma-kṣetra since time immemorial. That's all. Now chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Lokanātha: Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda. [break]



Bhavānanda: So we are continuing our reading from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Second Canto, Third Chapter, "Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart." (reads texts 20 and 21 and purports)



Prabhupāda: Girirāja, you speak.



Bhavānanda: Girirāja, you speak.



Prabhupāda: Try to explain all this. (end)





720614SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.19

-

Los Angeles, June 14, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ

saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ

na yat-karṇa-pathopeto

jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ

[SB 2.3.19]



Translation: "Men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and asses praise those men who never listen to the transcendental pastimes of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the deliverer from evils."



Prabhupāda: So one who does not listen to the glories of the Lord... Because the human life... This life is meant for learning how to engage our senses in the service of the Lord. That is the mission of human life. In other lives the senses are engaged for sense gratification. And in the human life, when we have got developed consciousness, at that time the senses are meant for being engaged in the service of the Lord. So ear is the most important sense because our spiritual enlightenment begins from this sense. Hearing. Na yat-karṇa-pathopetaḥ. Karṇa-patha means aural reception. So one has to go to hear from the realized person, guru, spiritual master. That is the meaning. Śruti. Śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. One has to approach a spiritual master, śrotriyam, who has also heard from a spiritual master. This... Our knowledge is by hearing, śruti.



Therefore Vedas are called śruti. Śruti means this is not experimental knowledge. This knowledge is acquired by hearing, that's all. If you have got nice receptive power through the ear, then your life can be successful. You don't require to use any other sense. This one sense will make you correct. Therefore those who are not taking advantage of this facility of hearing... He may be a very big man in the estimation of persons who are like dogs, asses, camels, and such nice animals. You can say, "Oh, here is a big man, and... Mr. such and such, such a great politician, great scientist, great... So we must praise." But the Bhāgavata says, "Whether he has given any aural reception about Kṛṣṇa, that is the test." No. He has no knowledge about Kṛṣṇa. Then he must be praised by persons who are like camel, asses, dogs, hogs. That means, "No human being will praise him." If he is voted or praised, the vote must be coming from the asses, dogs, hogs, like that. That is going on. Asses, hogs, dogs, camels, they are giving vote.

How they can select? These animals, any animal, they do not know which person is perfect and should be selected as leader. They do not know. Śūdras. Śūdras, animals, the same thing. So people are being educated like dogs, hogs, camels and asses. So how they can expect any real happiness? That is not possible. The test should be... Public, general public, they may be like cats, dogs, hogs naturally because they have no sufficient education. Not they are expected to be highly educated, general mass of people. But if arrangement is made to give them chance of hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then they will be very big men, perfect men. That should be the policy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We should accept the general mass of people no matter than dogs, hogs. It is in your country, "Dog is best friend." Because he is a dog. Therefore he has chosen a best friend dog. And cow, mother, giving milk and actually drinking-"Send her to the slaughterhouse." Just see. Is it not an animal, who is making friendship with dogs and sending mother to the slaughterhouse? What is your answer? This is my charge against your country. What is your answer?

Devotee: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Yes. They are such foolish persons. They are making friendship with dog, which has no value except creating some offense. The dog's business is, you are not offender, still it will offend, "Gow! Gow! Gow!" (laughter) "Oh, I have not entered your house. Why you are barking?" No, it is his business. He will disturb you. He'll come. We have experience. Unnecessarily they come. At least, make a show of, to attack. That means offending. If... Suppose you are passing on the road, and if I come with a stick, "Why you have come here?" Is it not offense? All right, if I trespass in your house, you can attack with me a stick. Or no, in your country one can kill. You see. Such a nice mentality. But men are also like that. They deserve to be killed. This is going on. So the animal society. You cannot believe a man, just like animal cannot believe another animal. This is... So it is very rightly written, śva-viḍ-varāha uṣṭra khara. Śva-viḍ-varāha uṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ. The general mass of people is no better than these animals, and they are voting to select their leader.



So whom they will vote? Another paśu, another animal. Because they have no choice. They are animals and how they can select a man? A man means karṇa-pathopetaḥ, one who is hearing about Kṛṣṇa. He is man. Otherwise all animals. Now, you say, how this charge can be refuted by you. Bhāgavata says, "He is not man." Na yat-karṇa-pathopeto jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ. He may be in the if form of a man, but if he has not heard about Kṛṣṇa, if he has not given aural reception to kṛṣṇa-kathā, then he is paśu, animal. And what kind of animal? Dogs, hogs, camels, asses. Why these nice animals have been selected? That is described. Now you can read the purport.

Pradyumna: "The general mass of people, unless they are trained systematically for a higher standard of life in spiritual values, are no better than the animals, and in this verse they have particularly been put on the level of dogs, hogs, camels and asses. Modern university education practically prepares one to acquire a doggish mentality to accept the service of a greater master.



Like a dog, after finishing his so-called education, the so-called educated persons move from door to door with applications for some service, and mostly they are driven away, informed of no vacancy. As the dogs are negligible animals and serve their master faithfully for bits of bread, similarly one serves a master without sufficient rewards. Persons who have no discrimination in the matter of foodstuff and who eat all sorts of rubbish are compared with the hogs. Hogs are very much attached to eating stools. So the stool is a kind of foodstuff for a particular type of animal. And even stones are eatables..."

Prabhupāda: This is very important. Why hog has been selected? The hog has no discrimination. He is prepared to eat even stool. Therefore hog is selected. So people are now eating anything, everything. So we have heard that in Korea they eat cats, snakes, dogs. In other places also seen, anything. They have no discrimination. No discrimination. Jīvo jīvasya jīvanam. One living entity is the source of vital strength for another living entity.



That is law. Just like we are vegetarians. We are vegetarian. We are also eating some... Not killing, but eating. We are taking fruit. That means we are not killing the tree. We are taking grains. We are not killing the cow. We are eating milk, but we are not drinking the blood. Milk is nothing but blood of cow. But we know the art, how to drink the blood of cow without killing. That is civilization. That is civilization. Medically, they say the cow's blood or bull's blood is very effective, and that is accepted. But you must know the art. It is the arrangement of God that cow's milk... Cow's own milk, she does not drink. She eats grass. That means God's arrangement is like that, that "Let the human being drink the milk of cow, and the cow may eat grass." Because they haven't got good brain... Foodstuffs should be given, nice foodstuff given, should be given to the particular person for developing nice brain. Milk is a foodstuff which can develop your finer tissues of the brain so that you can understand higher philosophy.

And if you become blunt, and you eat meat by killing any animal, then how you will understand? The finer tissues given in the human form of life for understanding spiritual things... You cannot. Vinā paśughnāt. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja says, vinā paśughnāt. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt [SB 10.1.4]. Uttamaśloka, Kṛṣṇa, guṇānuvādāt, glorifying His activities, who can be bereft of this opportunity, vinā paśughnāt, unless he is an animal killer? Unless he is animal killer, nobody will deny to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Because the animal killers, they have lost their brain. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mercy is so great that even who has lost his brain, he can be revived by hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Yes, in this age everyone is fallen. But he can be, I mean to say, elevated to the position of nice brain. How? By paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. Simply by chanting. So in this age everyone is blunt-headed, animal-killer.

They cannot understand what is kṛṣṇa-kathā, what is spiritual life. We see actually. They are not at all interested. They feel disturbance: "What these people are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa?" They cannot make any solution of the problems. Just like Atreya Ṛṣi was speaking that government is embarrassed how to solve the question of intoxication, LSD taking. They could not. Huge amount they are spending. But here is the remedy. They will not take. Why? Paśughnāt, killing, animal killers. So animal cannot take it. Vinā paśughnāt [SB 10.1.4]. Vinā means without. Unless one is animal killer, he cannot give up this opportunity of hearing about Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we forbid, "No meat-eating." This is the qualification. Unless you stop meat-eating, you cannot understand. Blunt head. So the hog has been especially mentioned because he has no discrimination of food. Our Ramakrishna Mission, they say, "What is there in food? Whatever you like, you can eat . It has nothing to do with spiritual life." Nonsense. You see? Āhāra, śuddha āhāra.

Even George Bernard Shaw, he wrote one book that "You are what you eat." Actually, that is so. Why there are so many varieties of foodstuff? Because there are varieties of men. Those who are meat-eaters, if you give them so many varieties of fruits and sandeśa and rasagullā, he won't like it. He won't like it. If before the hog, you put nice, first-class halavā, "No sir, stool. Give me stool." Therefore hog. All right. One who has no discrimination of foodstuff, he is going to be hog next life. That is the punishment by nature. One who are loitering in the street naked, they are going to have next life trees. "Stand up naked for 10,000 of years. That's all right." But they are enjoying. They're showing beauty by nakedness. But nature will not tolerate. Prakṛteḥ... Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā... [Bg. 7.14]. There is nature. They do not consider how one living entity has got the body of a tree, how one living entity has got the body of a hog, how one living entity has got the body of a demigod, how one has got the body of a Vaiṣṇava.

They do not know. They do not know. The education is so cramped, they do not even consider that these are... They say, Darwin's theory, developing the body. So the education is going on in that way. This is our position. You should take advantage of the scientific knowledge given by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam. Amalaṁ purāṇam. Spotless education, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore, in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. Atra śrīmad-bhāgavata. "In this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, cheating type of religious system is kicked out." Kicked out. In religion where there is no discrimination of foodstuff, what is that religion? What is that religion? This is fanaticism. That is not religion. Religion is to understand God. And one cannot understand God, the purest of all pure, unless one is pure. Next, hogs.

Pradyumna: "And even stones are eatables for a particular type of animal or bird. But the human being is not meant for eating everything and anything, save grains, vegetables, fruits, milk, sugar, etc. Animal food is not meant for the human being. For chewing solid food the human being has a particular type of teeth meant for cutting fruits and vegetables. The human being is endowed with two canine teeth as a concession..."



Prabhupāda: Our teeth is just like... You take fruit, you can easily cut. But if you take meat, bite... That is not natural. Unnaturally. But you take fruit, immediately you cut. and... So that is discrimination, that "We have to take some food, but what kind of food we shall take?" So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that you take only kṛṣṇa-prasādam, that's all. You save yourself. Even if I cannot discriminate, Kṛṣṇa's prasādam I take, it is transcendental. I don't require any discrimination. Don't require. Kṛṣṇa-prasādam. And Kṛṣṇa says, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. We offer Kṛṣṇa foodstuffs, what He wants. Kṛṣṇa is God. He can take anything. He can eat the whole world. And eating the whole world means all animals, all men, all everything, vegetables, not vegetables.



Everything goes in His... Just like Yaśodā-mā saw within the mouth of the whole universe. (sic) So Kṛṣṇa can take everything. But He does not take. Because He is appeared to educate us. Therefore He is giving very importance, cow-keeping tending the cows. Personally. Personally taking, protect cows. He is stealing butter, showing us that "These things should be stolen. If you have no money, then you steal and eat." (laughter) You see? These things are eatables. You see. Produce huge quantity of milk, and make so many preparation out of it, and become happy. This is the instruction Kṛṣṇa is giving. Otherwise what Kṛṣṇa business, He has got to do some such business? No. He is teaching us. Even the urine in cow is valuable. Stool of cow is valuable. Kṛṣṇa in His..., while He is crawling on the yard, He captures the tail of a calf and he drags him, and he is smeared with all stools and urine of the cows. Kṛṣṇa enjoys. He is showing that even the stool and urine of cow is valuable, what to speak of its milk. Cow is so important.

Personally, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is teaching us. And He is ordering in the Bhagavad-gītā, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. He is mentioning especially vegetables, grains, fruits. But not that everyone can offer Kṛṣṇa all these things. No. He says yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. He does not accept anything from the hands of a nondevotee. Therefore the non-initiated student cannot offer Him. He doesn't accept. He says especially yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. He must be devotee. He is not hungry that He has come to your temple to eat. No. He is giving food to all the living entities. Eko bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. That one Kṛṣṇa is giving all the necessities of life to all the living entities. So what we can offer? We cannot offer anything. Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Still He is very kind. He comes before you as you can handle Him, as you can dress Him, as you can wash Him, you can touch His lotus feet. Kṛṣṇa is giving you chance. It is very difficult to approach Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He has appeared in your temple and He is accepting. According to the rules and regulation, if you offer, He will accept.

This is the process of Deity worship. If you have no such feelings that "Here is Kṛṣṇa personally present and He has given me the chance, in a way by which I can approach Him," and if I think, "He is stone, He is wood, I can do anything, He cannot speak," then He will be, you will worship only stone and wood, not Kṛṣṇa. Not Kṛṣṇa. If you are not fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, if you do not know who is He, then your effect will be touching the stone and wood of... That's all. So every one of you must be very careful that "Here is Kṛṣṇa personally present." Not that wood and stone, as atheists think. Atheist will think, "Oh, they are worshiping a wood, a stone statue." Because they have their ideas, worshiping of great man. They make also statue, but place them in the open air, and their worship is by the stools of crows. Worship him. So if... The crows take it a place of passing stool on the head of your leader. (laughter) That is their method of worship. They are respecting president George Washington, keeping a statue and honoring him with the stool of crows.

You see. This is their intelligence. This is their intelligence. And our Indian people are also imitating. I have seen one statue of Sir Asutosh Mukherjee. He was a very respectable man. Or Gandhi. The whole year, the crows passed stool on the face. It becomes covered with stool. And the day of their anniversary the municipal washing brush, street , they brush over the..., in the morning. (laughter) They brush over the... Because the gene..., gentlemen will go, they have to call some sweeper. So he will brush the face of Sir Asutosh Mukherjee and wash, and then in the evening-big garland. In the morning it was washed with municipal brush, and in the evening there is big garland. So people have become so... So therefore they are compared with these dogs, asses, camels. They have no intelligence. We are worshiping Deity. Shall we allow like that? That is worship. But this is a fictitious thing, and they are thinking "We are honoring Sir Asutosh Mukherjee or president Jawaharlal Nehru," like that. Such foolish persons. If I know that "This is Sir Asutosh Mukherjee," how I can allow his mouth to be washed by the municipal brush?

No. They know it is stone. It is stone. Therefore it has been forbidden, arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matir vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhiḥ. If anyone, the Deity in the temple, thinks, śilādhīḥ, stone and wood; vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhiḥ, if anyone considers a Vaiṣṇava under certain particular race or caste; guruṣu nara-matiḥ, if one considers guru as ordinary human being, then he is hellish. These are forbidden. We should know the arcā-vigraha, the worshipable Deity, is Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, present. He is not wood and stone, but because we cannot touch except wood and stone, therefore He has appeared as wood and stone. He is not wood and stone. He is all-powerful. So to show me favor...If somebody says, "Here is Kṛṣṇa standing," but I have no eyes to see Kṛṣṇa. Spirit, I cannot see even your spirit, my spirit. Spirit is there. But I have no eyes to see the spirit, what to speak of touching. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, although He is spirit... In connection with Him, He is stone also. Because everything is Kṛṣṇa.

Everything is product of Kṛṣṇa, energy. So we are not worshiping stone. We are worshiping Kṛṣṇa in a form which is tangible for us, that's all. Not that Kṛṣṇa is stone. Kṛṣṇa is stone also, because stone is nothing but Kṛṣṇa's energy. So in this way you should understand what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Don't remain foolish Perfect knowledge. Perfect knowledge. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. Simply if you understand Kṛṣṇa, everything will be known to you. And if you actually understand Kṛṣṇa, then your life is successful. Immediately you are eligible to go back to home, back to Godhead. Immediately. Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. "That man who has understood Me rightly, he is no more coming back to accept this temporary material body. He comes to me." So try to understand Kṛṣṇa, and the beginning is karṇa-patha, these holes of the ear. Lend your ears to hear from the devotee. That's all. Na yat-karṇa-pathopetaḥ. It is not that you have to pass MAD, DHC, no.

Simply lend your ear, "Oh, let us hear about Kṛṣṇa." Then everything is all right. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. Kṛṣṇa is unconquerable, but if you simply hear about Him in your position, śruti-gatām, through the aural reception, you will conquer Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's name is Ajita, nobody can conquer Kṛṣṇa. But if you simply hear about Kṛṣṇa, time will come, you will conquer Kṛṣṇa. Like the gopīs. They conquered Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was within the hand, or the grip, of the gopīs. Kṛṣṇa could not go away even an inch from Vṛndāvana on account of the gopīs. What was their education? They were village girls. Not even brāhmaṇa. Uneducated girls, village girls, but they conquered Kṛṣṇa. So this aural reception is so great. Read little more.

Pradyumna: "The human being is endowed with two canine teeth as a concession for such persons who will eat animal food at any cost. It is known to everyone that one man's food is another man's poison. Human beings are expected to accept the remnants of food offered to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and the Lord accepts foodstuff from the categories of leaves, flowers, fruits etc.(Bg. 9.26)



No animal food is offered to the Lord as prescribed by Vedic scriptures. Therefore, a human being is meant to eat a particular type of food, and should not imitate the animals to derive so-called vitamin values. Therefore, a person who has no discrimination in regard to eating is compared with a hog. The camel is a kind of animal that takes pleasure in eating thorns. Similarly, a person who wants to enjoy family life or the worldly life of so-called enjoyment is compared to the camel. Materialistic life is full of thorns. So one should live only by the prescribed method of Vedic regulations just to make the best use of a bad bargain. Life in the...

Prabhupāda: Is it not materialistic way of life? He's lying down on thorns. Is it not like that? So many people in old age, they are so distressed, "Now I want to be killed." Because the thorns have disturbed so much that they don't feel any value of life. So the so-called materialistic way of life, tātala saikate vāri-bindu-sama suta-mita-ramaṇi-samāje. Society, friendship, and love, so-called, it is simply full of thorns. That's all. But the camel likes that thorns. Therefore those who do not understand what is the value of materialistic way of life, they are just like camels. Camel is eating thorn and cutting the tongue, and blood is coming out. It is mixed with thorn. He is thinking that it is very nice food. Actually, he is tasting his own blood, and he is thinking, "Thorn is very nice." Similarly, those who are materialistic person, working day and night very hard, eating his own blood, and he's thinking he is very happy man. That's all. Therefore they are camels. That's all right. Have kīrtana. (end)





720615SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.19

-

Los Angeles, June 15, 1972





Pradyumna: Do you want to read the rest of that purport, Śrīla Prabhupāda?



Prabhupāda: No, first of all read one verse.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting:)



śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ

saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ

na yat-karṇa-pathopeto

jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ

[SB 2.3.19]



Prabhupāda: (after chanting:) That's all right.



Pradyumna: So on the purport on page 153, the second paragraph: "The camel is a kind of animal which takes pleasure in eating thorns. Similarly, a person who wants to enjoy family life or the worldly life of so-called enjoyment is compared with the camel. Materialistic life is full of thorns, so one should live only by the prescribed method of Vedic regulations, just to make the best use of a bad bargain."



Prabhupāda: Hm. Just like if you are passing through thorns, you must be very careful. Otherwise the thorns will be stuck up with your garment, and you will be inconvenienced. It is said in the Vedas, kṣurasya dhārā niśitā duratyayā. Just like we shave with razor. Razor is very sharp. So if we can carefully handle the razor, we get our cheeks very cleansed, that business is done. But little inattention, immediately cut and there will be blood. Little inattention. That example is given. Kṣurasya dhārā niśitā duratyayā durgaṁ pathas tat kavayo vadanti. The path of salvation is very difficult. Just like we are trying to go back to home, back to Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. The path is very difficult. Kṣurasya dhārā niśitā duratyayā durgam. Durgam means very difficult to pass over. But little attention will save you. Little attention, that "I am passing through a very dangerous way, so I must be very careful." So our attention should always be how we are executing our spiritual life.



That is very simple. We observe strictly the regulative principles and chant sixteen rounds minimum. That will save us. But if we become inattentive to these principles, then there is chance of being pricked by the thorns. There are so many thorns all over. Or the same example. Kṣurasya dhārā. You shave, make your face very cleansed, but little inattention, immediately produce blood. We should be very careful. Go on.

Pradyumna: "Life in the material world is maintained by sucking one's own blood. The central point of attraction for material enjoyment is sex life. To enjoy sex life is to suck one's own blood, and there is not much more to be explained in this connection. The camel also sucks his own blood while chewing the thorny twigs. The thorns that the camel eats cuts the tongue of the camel. And so blood begins to flow within the camel's mouth. The thorns mixed with fresh blood create a taste for the foolish camel, and so he enjoys the thorn-eating business with false pleasure. Similarly, the great business magnates, industrialists who work very hard to earn money by different ways and questionable means, eat the thorny result of their action mixed up with their own blood. Therefore the Bhāgavatam has situated these diseased souls along with the camels."



Prabhupāda: They take risk, so much risk, for earning money and sense enjoyment. The thief, the burglars, they risk their life. They go to steal to a man's house, and it is known that as soon as he is known, "He has come," the man, the proprietor of the house, may immediately shoot him. That risk he takes. So not only the burglar and thieves, every one of us. It is stated padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. In every step there is danger. Every step. We are running our motorcars very fast, seventy miles, one hundred miles speed, but any moment there can be great danger. So actually there cannot be any peace in material life. That is not possible. Samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam. We have to take therefore shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. If we want to be happy, if we want to be peaceful, then this is the only way. And the... Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-khara... And in the previous verse, kiṁ grāme paśavo 'pare, na khādanti na mehanti. This eating, sleeping, mating, so it is criticized: "Do the cats and dogs and the camels, they do not eat?"



They also eat. They enjoy. As the camel is enjoying thorny twigs. His enjoyment, that is his enjoyment. Na khādanti na mehanti. Now, another enjoyment. Sex life, discharge. Na mehanti. Again it is described. These are very terse criticism. You see. A fact. Sex enjoyment means you discharge your semina. Your thing, not others. And it is said by medical science, some pounds of blood makes one drop of semina. That means, suppose you allow, if you allow somebody to take your blood, pounds of blood, would you like to do that? Unless it is... Nowadays, blood bank, there is going on. But anyone, if he wants to take your blood, you will protest. But our enjoyment is by giving our own blood. Tul... There is a Hindi poet, din ka ḍākinī, rāt ka bāghinī, palak palak rahe cuṣe duniyā sab bhora hoye, ghara ghara bāghinī pūje (?). It is actual for the materialistic person, that there is an animal, din ka ḍākinī, at, during daytime she is witch, and at night she is tigress.

So din ka ḍākinī, rāt ka bāghinī, palak palak rahe cuṣe. The witches, they also, by their black art, they suck the blood of children. Do you know that? There are witches. You know? I am asking Svarūpa Dāmodara. The kamekha (?) witches, from the black art. The Pūtanā was like that. They suck the blood of children by some mantra. So din ka ḍākinī, rāt ka bāghinī. It is pointing out to one's wife. During daytime she is ḍākinī, witches, and at night she is tigress. So Tulasī dāsa says that. . . Tulasī dāsa's life is very interesting. Therefore he had very bad experience of his wife. Everyone. So bāghinī. Nobody keeps a tigress to suck one's blood, but Tulasī dāsa says, duniyā sab bhora hoye. The whole world, being mad, they keep one tigress. Palak palak rahe cuṣe. In every moment, sucking blood. This criticism is for the materialistic person. Those who are spiritually advancing, this criticism does not apply. For materialistic person, this agent of sucking blood is their happiness, is their happiness.

That is the real fact. Therefore the Vedic system of civilization is seventy-five percent life of celibacy. In the brahmacārī system there is no connection with woman. Student life. Student life, if one remains brahmacārī, he becomes determined. His brain becomes very receptive. Therefore, in the brahmacārī system, complete celibacy, no connection with woman. So up to twenty-five years, if he does not discharge semen, he becomes very stout, strong, and his health is built up for whole life, and he becomes so intelligent that anything he will hear, he will remember immediately. Then after brahmacārī system, if one cannot remain brahmacārī, naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī, then the spiritual master allows him to marry. That is gṛhastha-āśrama. So when one is complete, fit for sex life, he begets children, male children, and after twenty-five years, the child becomes grown up, so he retires. In this way, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. The whole aim is Viṣṇu, how to go back to home, back to Godhead.

Not like, living like this, animals. Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-khara. Not to live. That is not human life. Śva means dependent. "Unless somebody gives me food, I cannot live." That is the life of a dog. A street dog is never happy. One dog who has got master, he is happy. That is śva. Viḍ-varāha means eating everything, anything nonsense eatable. Varāha, viḍ-varāha. Śva-viḍ-varāha-uṣṭra. Uṣṭra means chewing or drinking his own blood, and he thinks it is very tasteful. And similarly ass. Ass is working hard for the washerman, not for himself, and still, he thinks he is happy. Therefore these four nice animals has been exemplified. That is our life. The karmīs are compared with the ass. Big, big businessmen, day and night working hard, earning money, not for himself. What he will eat? Two cāpāṭis, that's all. Or little milk or little... Not that he has earned 1000 dollars every day and he will eat it. No. He will eat, out of that 1000 dollars, he will eat fifty cents, and balance will be eaten by others.

You see. But still, he is working hard. And the example is ass. The ass takes a morsel of grass. It is worth nothing. The ass can get anywhere the morsel of grass. But still, he thinks that the washerman is feeding me. So he remains there. And in Mexico you found some asses, carrying loads. So they are carrying loads, very heavy loads, tons, for that morsel of grass, which he can get anywhere. But he thinks, "Oh, I will die. If my master does not give me a morsel of grass, I will die. So let me remain here and carry all the big loads." You see. Similarly, the karmīs, they remain at home. They think that "My wife, my children, my family-without them, I shall die. So I have to work to maintain them like an ass." That's all. The karmīs, they are working, accumulating bank balance, more, more, more, more, more, more. But forgetting the real mission of life. Therefore ass. Ass means fool. Whenever one man is called, "You are ass," that means he's a fool. So this human form of life, so valuable...

To realize Kṛṣṇa and go back to Him, that should be our main business. But these karmīs, they do not know what is the mission of this human form of life. They are busy working hard, day and night, for a morsel of grass. That's all. Yan maithunādi-gṛha... There are many other verses. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. So śāstra, intelligence, knowledge, means one should study everything very critically, "What is my position? What is my duty?" We should not be like the animals. Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-khara. Now we have got our great personalities, leaders. They are praised, eulogized, our, these political leaders. "Our Hitler," "Our Gandhi," "Our Churchill," "Our Nixon." But śāstra says these leaders, those who are not spiritual leaders, those who cannot give our life, they are worshiped by these classes of animals, animals. These so-called leaders, politicians, they are eulogized very much by whom? By these class of men: dogs, camels, asses and...

What is the other one?

Devotees: Hogs.



Prabhupāda: Hog. So this is the verdict of... That means one who does not know whom to eulogize, whom to give honor, they give votes to these classes of men, without any knowledge of Kṛṣṇa. They are becoming the great philosophers, leaders, scientists. They have no knowledge of Kṛṣṇa, no knowledge of God. Still, they are leading the society. And who praise them? This class of men-dogs, hogs, camels, and asses. This is the verdict. Now you can challenge. You can talk, if it is right or wrong. This is the challenge given by Bhāgavatam, that "Persons who have no knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are praised by these dogs, hogs, camels, and asses." This is the challenge. Now how can you refute it? Can you refute it? This is a great challenge. We are not only... We are accepting some rascal as God, as incarnation of God. So who accept this so-called God? These classes of men. These classes of men: camel, hogs, dogs. So by the vote of camels, dogs, hogs, one cannot become God.



That is not possible. God is a different thing. So we should not be misled. If some incarnation come, "God," who is accepting? These camels, dogs, and hogs and asses. So what is the value? What is the value of their vote? No. Formerly, the votes were taken by highly saintly persons, brāhmaṇas. Just like Pṛthu Mahārāja's father Veṇa Mahārāja. He was disapproved by the brāhmaṇas and the saintly persons, and immediately he was dethroned and killed. Not the public vote. Not vox populi. Vote should be taken from the highly elevated persons, not from the lower-class dogs and asses. What is the value of their vote? What they can select? Vote should be taken... Just like Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa wanted that Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira should be on the throne. That is vote. So nowadays, a vote is franchised. Any common man, any rascal can vote. So how he can elect nice man? That is not possible. Therefore, if you want real government who can lead you back to home, back to Godhead...

That is perfect government. That is the duty of the government. To see the citizens happy in this life. They have no grievance for their living condition. They are happy. At the same time, they are preparing for going back to home, back to Godhead. That is good government. And the government who simply levies taxes somehow or other... Every year, the budget is increasing tax. "You give us tax, and you go to hell. It doesn't matter. You give us tax." And the tax is divided amongst themselves. That is government. Whatever... We know in India, the tax collected, eighty percent is spent among the government servants. That's all.

So this is the position of Kali-yuga. Mlecchā rājanya-rūpiṇo bhakṣayiṣyanti prajās te. That is predicted in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that in Kali-yuga the mlecchas, means the rejected from human society, such persons, rogues and fools and rascals, they will take the post of king. Rājanya-rūpiṇaḥ. They are unworthy to be kicked, but they will take the post of government.

Rājanya-rūpiṇaḥ. And what will be their business? Bhakṣayiṣyanti prajās te. They will eat the citizens. That's all. Vital force. Vital force, blood-sucking, tax. Durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ [SB 12.2.9]. In one side, there will be scarcity of supply. In other side, they will be perplexed with taxes. These are going to be happened. Kara-pīḍitāḥ gacchanti giri-kānanam. And they will give up their homely life and will go to the forest, to the hills. Just like every year you hear. Now it is going on. Just like in Vietnam. The poor people, they are sometimes evacuating this place and evacuating... vacating this place, vacating that place. They are troubled. The politicians, they are making their own plan, and the poor people ... We have seen. When partition was made in India, all poor Hindus and Muslims, they were in trouble. And the leaders, they were in happy mood in their apartment, ordering and eating very nicely, butter and bread. That's all. This is going on. Therefore the only opportunity of becoming happy is that you preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement amongst the people, so if the people become educated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and if they decide that "We shall vote for Kṛṣṇa conscious leader," then there will be happiness.

Just like Pṛthu Mahārāja, the king. We were discussing. So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement comprehends all sides of life. It is not that a stereotype "churchianity," weekly going to the church and come back and do all. No. It is embracing all sides of our life. But the only aim is how to go back to home, back to Godhead. So we have to educate these classes of men, śva-viḍ-varāha-uṣṭra-khara, these class of men: dogs, hogs, camels, and the asses. The world is full of these classes of men, and you have to educate them. Your responsibility is very great. You have to make an ass a devotee, a camel a devotee, a dog a devotee, a hog a devotee. This is your mission. Next.

Pradyumna: "The ass is another animal who is celebrated as the greatest fool, even amongst the animals. The ass works very hard and carries burdens of the maximum weight without making profit for itself. Footnote: Human life is meant for earning values. This life is called arthadam, or that which can deliver values. And what is the greatest value of life? It is returning home, back to Godhead, as indicated in the Bhagavad-gītā (8.15). One's selfishness must be aimed at the point of going back to Godhead. The ass does not know its self-interest, and it works very hard for others only. Similarly, a person who works very hard for others only, forgetting his personal interest available in the human form of life, is compared to the ass. In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa it is said:



aśītiṁ caturaś caiva lakṣāṁs tāñ jīva-jātiṣu

bhramadbhiḥ puruṣaiḥ prāpyaṁ mānuṣyaṁ janma-paryayāt

tad apy abhalatāṁ jātaḥ teṣām ātmābhimānināṁ

varākāṇām anāśritya govinda-caraṇa-dvayam



Prabhupāda: Hm. This is very important verse. You can repeat this. One may take it by heart.



aśītiṁ caturaś caiva lakṣāṁs tāñ jīva-jātiṣu

bhramadbhiḥ puruṣaiḥ prāpyaṁ mānuṣyaṁ janma-paryayāt

tad apy abhalatāṁ jātaḥ teṣām ātmābhimānināṁ

varākāṇām anāśritya govinda-caraṇa-dvayam



Repeat it. (Devotees say the verse.) So aśītim means eighty. Aśītiṁ caturaḥ. Caturaḥ means four. So eighty-four. Eighty plus four means eighty-four. Lakṣāṁs. Lakṣāṁs means hundreds of thousand. So eighty-four hundreds of thousands. Aśītiṁ caturaś caiva lakṣāṁs tāñ jīva-jātiṣu. Jīva-jāti. This is different species of living entities. Jīva-jāti. The hog species, the ass species, the dog species, just like they have got species. Jīva-jātiṣu. So in different species of living entities, they are counted, eighty-four hundreds of thousands, or 8,400,000. Bhramadbhiḥ. Bhramadbhiḥ means transmigrating, wandering one after another. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. There are 900,000 species within the water.



Then trees, plants. In this way, passing through different species of life, the living entity... Jīva-jātiṣu. Jīva-jātiṣu, in different species of life, he is transmigrating, one after another, one after another. Bhramadbhiḥ puruṣaiḥ. Puruṣa. Puruṣa means the living entity. The living entity is described here "puruṣa" because he wants to enjoy. Puruṣa is the enjoyer. Actually enjoyer is Kṛṣṇa, but we are imitating Kṛṣṇa. We want to become God. That is the Māyāvāda philosophy. That is our trouble. I am trying to imitate something which I cannot. Suppose if I want to be God, is it possible to become God? But they are trying to be. Bhramadbhiḥ puruṣaiḥ. So in this way, for this misunderstanding, he is falsely trying to have happiness through so many species of life. "Let me enter this life, let me enter that life, that life, that life, that ..." In this way he falls down. He is fallen already from Vaikuṇṭha planet. He is fallen in this material world, and he is again trying to make progress.

Prāpyaṁ mānuṣyam. In this way, after many, many births, he gets this human form of life. Prāpyaṁ mānuṣyaṁ janma-paryayāt. By the graduation, gradual evolution process. This is real evolution. Not the body is changing. Body is already there. Jīva-jātiṣu. The jīva-jāti, species, are already there. There is a defect of Darwin's theory. He does not want, he does not know that the living entity is passing through different types of body. Not that the body is changing. Bodies are already there. Bhramadbhiḥ puruṣaiḥ prāpyaṁ mānuṣyaṁ janma-paryayāt. Paryayāt means chronological. What is called, one after another?

Karandhara: Sequential?



Prabhupāda: Sequential, yes. That's all right. Tad api. Tad api means that human form of life. Abhalatām, becomes spoiled. Tad api. Once missed, again come down. Circle. Circle. Just like merry-go-round. So you are sometimes very high and immediately low down. So this circle of birth and death in different species of life is going on, and this human form of life is a chance to get out of this cycle of birth and death. Is a chance. It is by nature's arrangement, by Kṛṣṇa's arrangement, that these living entities, who have come here in this material world for false happiness, material happiness, and they are entrapped in this birth and death problem, transmigrating from one type of life to another type of life... Here is a chance for the human being. And Kṛṣṇa comes to the human being, and He... "Here is a chance, Bhagavad-gītā." Kṛṣṇa gives them. So if, after reading Bhagavad-gītā, anāśritya govinda-caraṇa-dvayam, who is neglecting... He is neglecting means that teṣām ātmābhimānināṁ varākāṇām.



Varāka means fools or childish. We are thinking that "I am this body." Such fools cannot understand how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, tad apy abhalatāṁ jātaḥ teṣām ātmābhimāninām, varākāṇām anāśritya, without taking shelter, govinda-caraṇa-dvayam, the lotus feet of Govinda. So bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. We get this chance, and if we are not educated by our teachers, by our fathers, by our leaders, by our government men, by our gurus, by our relatives, how to accept the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, who is canvassing... Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all this nonsense engagement, trying to become Kṛṣṇa, or God. Give up this. Surrender unto Me." This is education. This is education. The father should give education at home. The leaders should give education in institution. The politicians should give education in their assemblies, congress. The guru should give education how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. The father should educate, the mother should educate.

Therefore Bhāgavata says, na mocayed yaḥ samupeta... gurur na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt pitā na sa syāt. There are some negative definitions, that there are so-called gurus, so-called swamis, but Bhāgavata says that "You should not become a swami or guru. Kindly don't become if you cannot save your disciple from the imminent danger of birth and death." Gurur na sa syāt. This is the injunction. "No rascal should become a guru unless he can save his disciple from the cycle of birth and death." Or, in other words, anyone who wants to become guru, if he cannot teach his disciples how to surrender, govinda-caraṇa-dvayam, anāśritya, how to take shelter of the lotus feet of Govinda, he should not become guru. That is cheating. That is cheating. Similarly, one should not become father. The father and mother should have determination that "The child I produce, I give birth, if I cannot teach him Kṛṣṇa conscious, surrender to Kṛṣṇa, I shall not beget any child."

This is real contraceptive method. Not to beget child like cats and dogs. Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-khara. So Bhāgavata says, "One should not become father, one should not become mother, one should not become relative, one should not become king, one should not become guru, if they cannot save their dependants from this cycle of birth and death." This is the meaning of this verse. Anāśritya govinda-caraṇa-dvayam, varākāṇām ātmābhimāninām. So after wandering through these so many species of life and so dangerous... There are two million species of plant life, tree's life. Just see. You have to stand for so many years. A great opportunity, this human form of life. Don't waste. Don't become dogs and hogs and asses and camels. Become devotee. Just surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Make your life successful. Thank you. (end)



720616SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.20

-

Los Angeles, June 16, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



bile batorukrama-vikramān ye

na śṛṇvataḥ karṇa-puṭe narasya

jihvāsatī dārdurikeva sūta

na copagāyaty urugāya-gāthāḥ

[SB 2.3.20]



(Prabhupāda corrects pronunciation several times during chanting of verse.)



Translation: "One who has not listened to the messages about the prowess and marvelous acts of the Personality of Godhead and has not sung or chanted loudly the worthy songs about the Lord is to be considered to possess earholes like that of the snakes and a tongue like that of the frogs."

Prabhupāda: So the impersonalists or the voidists, so where is their God? So there is no God for them. Impersonal. So there is no activity. What they will hear and where they will chant? If you have no activity, then what shall I hear about you? If you are a dead stone, then what can I hear? Simply one, "A big stone." That's all. So they have no this opportunity. These impersonalists, they are so unfortunate that they cannot hear. As soon as there is some activity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they will say, "It is māyā." That is called Māyāvāda. "These are ... our activities, māyā, and therefore God's activities are also māyā." A poor fund of knowledge or rascaldom. "Because I cannot do this, therefore God cannot do this. I am pleased in this way; therefore God can be ... Permanent, they are identical." Big, big sannyāsī explained like that. "When I am pleased, God is pleased. When I am dissatisfied, God is dissatisfied." So roundabout way, their philosophy is to satisfy one's own sense gratification.



That's all. The Māyāvāda philosophy means, impersonalist means, the same material condition. The material condition means everyone is busy in sense gratification. And ... therefore they cannot understand. And when there is a question of sense gratification ... Just like, "We are dancing here, ball dance. So this is material māyā. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's dance with the gopīs, that is also māyā." This is Māyāvāda symptom. The example can be given like this: Just like a patient, since his birth, he is sick, and he is lying in the hospital, cannot walk freely or cannot eat nice things. All bitter medicine, injections, always suffering. So if he is informed that "After your cure, you shall be able to eat nice rasagullā, sandeśa," he cannot believe it. He says, "Again eating? Oh, it is horrible." Because he has got bad experience of eating in sick condition, he thinks that eating in healthy condition is also the same. This is Māyāvāda. He has no experience what is healthy eating.

Therefore his bad experience of this diseased condition, he wants to make it zero. He is thinking that "When my, this drinking of medicine and lying down will be zero, oh, that will be my real healthy condition." This is their philosophy. Because bad experience ... Just like foolish persons sometimes commit suicide or they talk of suicide. The whole thing is zero, wants to make the life zero. That is their happiness. Śūnyavādi. Because they have no experience that there is another life, going back to home, back to Godhead. There also, Kṛṣṇa is eating; Kṛṣṇa is dancing; Kṛṣṇa is playing; Kṛṣṇa is killing; Everything is there. They are all transcendental. Everything is there. Here, only perverted reflection, false reflection only. There are five principal rasas: śānta, dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, mādhurya. Here also, the same rasas are here, śānta, dāsya. Just like I am sitting in this comfortable seat. This is śānta, śānta-rasa. The throne is giving me service in silence.

This is called śānta-rasa. Above this, somebody is giving me flower, sandalwood. This is called dāsya-rasa, serving. Better than ... This is silence; there is work. The śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, then, again develop, sākhya-rasa, more intimate, friendly. Then vātsalya-rasa, more intimate. Just like the parental affection. And more intimate, conjugal love. Just like young boy, young girl, try to love one another. So these rasas are there. Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa is in love with the gopīs. He is playing with friends, cowherd boys. His affectionate mother Yaśodā, feeding Him, and there are servants also, serving Kṛṣṇa. And the trees, the water, the flowers, they are serving silently. Pañca-mukhya-rasa, five chief mellows, humors. The same thing is here also. Here also the śānta-rasa, sākhya-rasa, dāsya-rasa is there. But that is mixed with material grains. Just like sweet rice. Sweet rice is very nice, but if it is mixed with some grains of sand, just imagine.

How it is pleasurable? So all the rasas ... The Māyāvāda philosopher, they have eaten sweet rice with grains, with sand grains. Therefore when you offer him next sweet rice, "Oh, I have got taste. Don't supply it." Or, "I wish to live without eating-zero." This is Māyāvāda philosophy. Try to understand, impersonal, making everything zero, without any varieties. Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi. Nirviśeṣa means without any varieties, and śūnyavādi means zero, voidist. The two kinds of Māyāvādīs, generally headed by Saṅkara philosophy and Buddha philosophy. But our position is transcendental, above. Karmīs ... Karmīs, they are on the material field. They are trying to enjoy on the material platform. Jñānīs, they are trying to make it varietyless, and the Buddhists, they are trying to make it zero. Our philosophy is substance. This is difference, substance, reality. Vāstava-vastu, real reality, not the false thing. So these people, the voidists and impersonalists, because they have no information of the Supreme Lord and His activities ...

Activities are there. Kṛṣṇa is coming, showing His activities. But they will say, "It is māyā. Kṛṣṇa is māyā." Although Kṛṣṇa is practically showing them that it is not māyā, it is completely spiritual, but their dull brain cannot accommodate that Kṛṣṇa is Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore the so-called scholars, when Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]-Kṛṣṇa says, "Just become My devotee, offer your obeisances unto Me, always think of Me," man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ-the scholar, the so-called scholar, says, "This is not to Kṛṣṇa the person. It is to the unborn which is within Him." The rascal does not know that Kṛṣṇa has no within-without. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. Otherwise there is no meaning of absolute. When there is duality, how it can be absolute? That sense they haven't got. Still, they are passing as big scholars. Kṛṣṇa is no such thing as within and without. We living entities, ordinary living entities ... I am soul. I am within this body.

I am not this body. But Kṛṣṇa is not like that. Kṛṣṇa is both body and soul together. Kṛṣṇa is everything. Kṛṣṇa has no such difference as material and spiritual. For Kṛṣṇa, everything is spiritual. Because material and spiritual, they are two energies only, but they are energy of Kṛṣṇa. So for Kṛṣṇa, there is no such distinction, material or spiritual. He can convert the material into spiritual and the spiritual into material because He is the original source of these two energies. He is the original source. The same example: just like an expert electrician, he can convert the heater into cooler and the cooler into heater, although they are two opposites. Because he knows how to utilize the electrical energy. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa says that "These material elements, they are also My energy. And the spiritual energy, the jīva-bhūtas, they are also My energy." And the whole cosmic manifestation is combination of this material and spiritual energy. Therefore ... But Kṛṣṇa is Absolute.

He has nothing to do with material or spiritual. Another example can be given. Just like government. Government has got many departments, the criminal department and the educational department. (The) educational department is giving knowledge to the citizens, and the criminal department is punishing, chastising the citizens. Now, to us, we find difference, that "In this department government is so liberal, is giving education. People are becoming learned, enjoying. And this department ... So government is discriminating. This department is favorable, and this department is not favorable." But to the government, it is not like that. To the government, both the departments are equal. Rather, sometimes, the government has to spend more to the criminal department than to the educational department. Because they have to maintain both these departments. To run on the street politically, they have to maintain both these. Similarly, because the individual soul has got little independence, is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, so Kṛṣṇa has full independence.

And we, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, we have got that independence quality. How it can be without? Then how we can be part and parcel? The same example-just like a drop of ocean water, it is also salty, the same ingredient. Similarly, we have got little independence. Just like you have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness out of your independence. There are many other American boys and girls-they are not taking to it. It is not obligatory. But the door is open for everyone. One who is intelligent, he is taking to it. That is due to independence. And some of our boys are also falling back. After remaining few years, again he falls back, again into hodgepodge. You see, due to this misuse of independence. So because God has given us little independence, therefore there must be two departments: material and spiritual. Otherwise, there is nothing material. Everything is spiritual. Material is called māyā because those who are in poor fund of knowledge, they cannot see Kṛṣṇa's spiritual energy.

They are covered. Therefore they are called Māyāvādī. So the unfortunate Māyāvādī cannot chant. They criticize, "This chanting is sentimentalism." Even Caitanya Mahāprabhu was criticized at Benares when He was chanting. You know the story. Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, a great Māyāvāda sannyāsī, he used to criticize that "This sannyāsī is sentimental. Sannyāsī's business is reading Vedānta, but this sannyāsī is chanting and dancing." So there was strong criticism. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu was arranged to meet this Māyāvāda sannyāsī, and He talked on Vedānta and He defeated him. And the sannyāsī , along with his 60,000 disciples, became His followers. So you should not be simply chanting and dancing. Along with, you must know philosophy. There are so many Māyāvādīs; you have to defeat them. It is not that we are cowards. We are Kṛṣṇa's soldiers. So as soon as there is Māyāvādī attack, you must immediately defeat them. That is wanted. Therefore so many books are being written. Jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam.

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



If you become pure devotee, this jñāna to defeat this Māyāvāda philosophy will be revealed unto you. Kṛṣṇa is within you. As soon as "He's ... Oh, he is very sincere. He's doing seriously," He will give you all intelligence. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam. But if you are in doubt, "Oh, whether Kṛṣṇa is person or not?" then Kṛṣṇa will not give you intelligence. That is the difficulty. He does not talk with nonsense. He talks, but not with the nonsense. So when you are above the nonsensical platform by sincere service, then Kṛṣṇa will talk with you from within. (aside:) Sit down properly. So the fact is that "One who has not listened to the messages about the prowess and the marvelous acts of the Personality of Godhead ..." Now, they have got ... These Māyāvādīs, they have got their ears, but they cannot hear about the activities of the Lord. They'll reject, "Oh, this is all māyā. Let us meditate." So their, these earholes is compared with the snake holes.



When you go, walk on the paddy field, you will find so many holes. Have you got experience? There are so many holes. Even on the beach, you will find so many holes. But especially in the agricultural field there are holes, because the paddy ... The rats and mouse, they come to eat the paddies, and they make hole to live there. And the snakes take advantage. They enter the hole and eat the rat and mouse and live peacefully. So these holes, because there are snakes, nobody utilizes it, that hole. Similarly, when these earholes are not receptive of the message of Kṛṣṇa, it like that, it is not being utilized properly. Similarly, you have got tongue, but you cannot chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Jihvāsatī dārdurikeva. It is just like the tongue of the frogs. The frogs ... You have got experience during rainy season. They use their tongue very nicely. They sing ka-ka-kan, ka-ka-kan, ka-ka-kan.. (laughter) Yes. But what is the result of singing? The result of singing: in the darkness, the snakes, they can understand, "Here is a frog," and it comes and takes, immediately eats.

Similarly, we have got tongue, and we are lecturing all nonsense things, mental speculation, or singing in the dancing club, ho ho, ho ho, like that. So the result is that we are diminishing our duration of life in that way. The opportunity, the human form of life opportunity, is being uselessly diminished. In the previous verse we have learned, āyur harati vai puṁsām udyann astaṁ ca yann asau.. Because the sun's business is to take away your span of life gradually. So same. As the frog is calling (to) his death, the snake, "Please come here, I am here," similarly, these persons who are talking all nonsense without kṛṣṇa-kathā, they are inviting the Yamarāja, "Please come soon. I am here. I am here." This is the position. So explain.

Pradyumna: Purport: "Devotional service to the Lord is rendered by all limbs or parts of the body. It is the transcendental dynamic force of the spirit soul. Therefore a devotee is engaged one hundred percent in the service of the Lord. One can engage in devotional service when the senses of the body are purified in relation with the Lord. And one can render service to the Lord with the help of all senses. As such, the senses and the action of the senses are to be considered as impure or materialistic as long as they are employed in sense gratification only."



Prabhupāda: The same earholes, you hear some radio message, some materialistic news, some advertisement, so many things you can hear. And in the same earholes, you can hear Hare Kṛṣṇa. So the hearing is there. But when you hear something for your sense gratification, that is material, and when you hear something about Kṛṣṇa, that is spiritual. This is the difference between material and spiritual. The things are already there. You have got your ears; you have got your tongue; you have got your hand; you have got your leg; you have got your eyes; everything is there. You can utilize it for material purpose and for spiritual purpose. How you can utilize? If you change your consciousness, then you can realize. So if you change your consciousness to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and utilize the senses for that purpose ... Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Just like you are American and I am Indian. We are not concerned about hearing about Indian and American.



We have no other business, no more any business. I am not interested hearing about something Indian, and you are also not interested to hear something about American. No. This is called sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. The designation is ... Freed from the designation. Tat-paratvena nirmalam. When we simply hear about Kṛṣṇa, then we are purified. Hearing. The machine is there. People are hearing as American, the message of the President or some politics or ... They are very much interested, "What my country is advancing, how they are killing in Vietnam, how they are doing this, that?" The whole big, big lump of newspapers, you see. For hearing. For hearing. So when one is interested with this big, big lump of newspaper, lumpy newspaper, for American interest or Indian interest or German interest ... Everyone has demarcated. "This is Germany, this is America, this is ..." Everything belongs to God, and these rascals, they have demarcated "This is Germany. This is ..."

Īśāvāsyam idam. Kṛṣṇa says, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram: He is the proprietor of all the planets. And in this teeny planet we have made, "Oh, this is America, this is Germany, this is Japanese." I come as American, live for, say, 50 years or 100 years, and then kicked out, and I become absorbed in the thought of that land. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. I'll live for some years, and because I have got this misconception that "I am this body." I am worshiping the land, nationalism. What is this land? Does it belong to you? No. Because I have got this designation, title, "I am American, I am Indian," therefore I am fond of land. Just see how much illusory things are going on. I have got a false designation. On account of this designation, I am thinking, "This is mine." This is illusion. Actually, it is God's. Suppose you are twenty-five years old. Say, before twenty-five years old, where was that country?

That you do not know. Might be it was in China or in the hell. You have no knowledge. And now, since twenty-five years you are born in this land, you are absorbed in thought, "This is my country." People are mad after nationalism and fighting. One nation is fighting with another. But these rascals do not know that "Why they are fighting? The land belongs to God. You simply fight, and die, and go to hell. That's all." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So when people become Kṛṣṇa conscious, this nonsense fighting will stop. Otherwise there is no possibility. Otherwise it is not possible. They are trying to stop fighting by the so-called League of Nations, or United Nations. They are disunited. On principle, they are disunited. So many hundreds of flags. How they can be united? They can be united in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When they will be really learned, paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18], paṇḍitāḥ ... When one is learned ... Just like we are sama-darśinaḥ. We don't discriminate American, India, African, this ...We distribute Kṛṣṇa consciousness to everyone. Because we know, "Everyone is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Everyone is son of Kṛṣṇa. They are suffering on account of this material contamination. Let us do something for them." This is wanted. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise ...

Now you can have kīrtana. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



770324SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.20

-

Bombay, March 24, 1977,

At Cross Maidan Pandal



Bhavānanda: "One who has not listened to the messages about the prowess and marvelous acts of the Personality of Godhead and has not sung or chanted loudly the worthy songs about the Lord is to be considered to possess earholes like the holes of snakes and a tongue like the tongue of a frog." [SB 2.3.20]



Purport: Devotional service to the Lord is rendered by all limbs or parts of the body. It is the transcendental dynamic force of the spirit soul; therefore a devotee is engaged one hundred percent in the service of the Lord. One can engage in devotional service when the senses of the body are purified in relation with the Lord, and one can render service to the Lord with the help of all the senses. As such, the senses and the action of the senses are to be considered impure or materialistic as long as they are employed only in sense gratification. The purified senses are engaged not in sense gratification but in the service of the Lord in toto. The Lord is the Supreme with all senses, and the servitor, who is part and parcel of the Lord, also has the same senses. Service to the Lord is the completely purified use of the senses, as described in the Bhagavad-gītā. The Lord imparted instructions with full senses, and Arjuna received them with full senses, and thus there was a perfect exchange of sensible and logical understanding between the master and the disciple. Spiritual understanding is nothing like an electrical charge from the master to the disciple, as foolishly claimed by some propaganda-mongers. Everything is full of sense and logic, and the exchange of views between the master and disciple is possible only when the reception is submissive and real. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that one should receive the teaching of Lord Caitanya with intellect and full senses so that one can logically understand the great mission.





In the impure state of a living being, the various senses are fully engaged in mundane affairs. If the ear is not engaged in the service of the Lord by hearing about Him from Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, certainly the holes of the ear will be filled with some rubbish. Therefore the messages of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam should be preached all over the world very loudly. That is the duty of a pure devotee who has actually heard about them from the perfect sources. Many want to speak something to others, but because they are not trained to speak on the subject matter of Vedic wisdom they are all speaking nonsense, and people are receiving them with no sense. There are hundreds and thousands of sources for distributing mundane news of the world, and people of the world are also receiving it. Similarly, the people of the world should be taught to hear the transcendental topics of the Lord, and the devotee of the Lord must speak loudly so that they can hear. The frogs loudly croak, with the result that they invite the snakes to eat them. The human tongue is especially given for chanting the Vedic hymns and not for croaking like frogs. The word asatī used in this verse is also significant. Asatī means a woman who has become a prostitute. A prostitute has no reputation for good womanly qualities. Similarly, the tongue, which is given to the human being for chanting the Vedic hymns, will be considered a prostitute when engaged in chanting some mundane nonsense.



(followed by lecture by Hṛdayānanda) [break]

Prabhupāda: ...great responsibility of preaching the message of Bhagavad-gītā throughout the whole world. It is meant for the human being and-do not mind it-it appears that rarely a human being is found there to take up the responsibility in India. They're talking all nonsense. The real message of Indian culture is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati [Bg 18.68]. Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. Kṛṣṇa says at the end of His instruction that "Anyone who is taking the responsibility of preaching the message of Bhagavad-gītā to the devotees..." Because unless one is devotee, one cannot understand what is Bhagavad-gītā. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. To know Kṛṣṇa superficially, that is a different thing. You can imagine anything nonsense. But if you want to know Kṛṣṇa as He is, that requires intelligence.



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ, as He is. This tattvataḥ word has been used in several places in Bhagavad-gītā. Janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Here is one tattvataḥ. Kṛṣṇa's appearance and disappearance is not ordinary thing. Yo jānāti tattvataḥ: "Anyone who understands in truth..." So what is the result? Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Immediately becomes liberated. Immediately he becomes eligible not to accept any more this material body. Tyaktvā deham. Everyone has to give up this body, material body. You cannot remain permanently Indian or this party or that party. You have to change your body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. So why should you waste your time in this way, that "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am horse," "I am cat," "I am dog"? There is no difference. If a dog is thinking that "I am dog," and if I am thinking "I am Indian," where is the difference? The mentality is the same: I'm identifying with the body. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke. Anyone who is thinking of this body as himself,



yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Go-khara. Go means cow, and khara means ass. Anyone who's identifying with this body as self, he's go-khara, animal. So this animal civilization is not meant for India's culture. India's culture is different. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. This is India's culture. Why should we identify ourself as animal-"I am Indian," "I am American," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am this"? It is wrong type of civilization, go-khara civilization.



So our little attempt is... We are not manufacturing anything. We are not manufacturer of religious system, neither it is possible to manufacture. Just like you cannot manufacture law. Law is given by the state. Similarly, dharma means dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means the law given by God. That is dharma. You cannot manufacture. Who cares for your manufactured system? Just like nobody cares for if you make some law, that "I have made some law," and go to the court, "Sir, I have made this law. Please accept." "He's lunatic. Drive him away." That is not possible. This is dharma, as Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is dharma. Don't manufacture dharma. [break] Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. What is that glāni? Discrepancy. So glāni is disobedience to the order of God. That is glāni. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata. So the whole world is denying, śūnyavādi, nirviśeṣa-vādi, nirākāra-vādi: "No God. God is dead." So what kind of religious system they'll manufacture? They are simply misled. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Very tightly regulated by the laws of nature, and still, we are independently manufacturing religion. This is not possible. Give us this... Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. Actually this is dharma. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. It doesn't matter whether you are Hindu, Muslim, Christian, or any other sect. The test is how much you are advanced in understanding God. That is the... If you do not understand God, if you have no obedience to God, that is not dharma.

So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very important movement. It is neither manufactured nor unauthorized. It is authorized, the oldest. Yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ. Kṛṣṇa said to Arjuna that "I am repeating the same yoga, purātanam. Kṛṣṇa does not say that "I am manufacturing another system of yoga." No. "I am speaking to you the same yoga system."

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



So yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa. As soon as we deviate from the original system, it is naṣṭa, spoiled. So what is the use of giving things which is already spoiled? But it cannot be spoiled if you follow the paramparā system. This is the secret of success. So our only request is that India should not be misled by imitating the Western type of civilization, unnecessarily fighting on political and social... These political, social, there is problem, but that is temporary. Temporary... We must have our interest to the real life. Somebody yesterday was speaking of health. So what is health? If you are going to die, what is the value of your so-called health program? First of all you stop death; then the question of health. Kṛṣṇa said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. First of all come to this position. Then even after the destruction of the body, you are not destroyed. That is health. That is health. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. That is health, not that patchwork: you have got some disease, take some pill and again become diseased. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. That is not health. Here is health.



But we have no brain to understand. That Kṛṣṇa said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit-at any time. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Where is that medicine? Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. I am dying, my father is dying; my son is dying. But even if we accept, "Yes, we are accepting another body," but what do you know what kind of body you are going to accept? What is the position? There are 8,400,000 different forms of body. If you become an insignificant worm, then it will take millions of years by the evolution process to come again to this human form of body and come to..., there may be chance to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not very easy. If I miss this opportunity, I may miss millions of years. So this knowledge should be given. It is not expected that everyone will accept or understand. But this knowledge must be current. A class of men, the brāhmaṇa class, the Vaiṣṇava class... Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu [Bg. 7.3]-that is a fact. But still there must be somebody out of millions to understand this philosophy. And there is good opportunity now. We have published so many books on this subject matter, and we have got very nice place in Bombay, Juhu. Please come, read our books, try to understand the philosophy and make your life successful.

Thank you very much. Any question?

Girirāja: Are there any questions? Please come forward with your questions. You can ask them in the microphone at the front of the stage.



Indian man (1): When chanting, you chant the name of Rāma as well as Kṛṣṇa. I do not see any photograph of Rāma here. What is the thinking?



Prabhupāda: You do not see, but can you hear?



Indian man (1): I do not see!



Prabhupāda: But you do not hear!



Indian man (1): Photograph, that we are seeing.



Prabhupāda: Hearing is also experiencing. Why do you want to see? You do not see your father who is dead.



Indian man (1): No, why? Why? Kṛṣṇa has so many...



Prabhupāda: No. Seeing and hearing is the same thing. Suppose you have grandfather. Are you seeing him? How do you accept you had a grandfather?



Indian man (1): I saw him all right.



Prabhupāda: That is hearing.



Indian man (1): No, I saw him also.



Prabhupāda: You saw... You did not see your great-grandfather. But how do you know? Hearing is also another process.



Indian man (1): My question is whether there is distinction between Rāma and Kṛṣṇa.



Prabhupāda: The distinction is that hearing is also a process of acquiring knowledge. Why don't you accept it? Simply seeing is not acquiring knowledge. There are so many senses, and hearing is the first-class sense to understand which you cannot see. (applause)



Devotees: All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda!



Girirāja: Next? Please come forward with your questions. Asking questions is a sign of intelligence. Athāto brahma jijñāsā.



Tamāla Kṛṣṇa: I think you scared them away.



Indian man (2): How could I know the unknown within the known?



Prabhupāda: This is already explained. How could you know your great-grandfather? From the paramparā system. Your father says, "Yes, I had my grandfather." So from the authority of your father you can understand. This is easy process. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. You have to hear. Therefore Veda is called śruti. Śruti means you have to hear from the right source. Then you know. That is knowledge. You don't hear from a cheater. You hear from the right source. Then the knowledge is perfect.



Devotees: Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Indian man (3): If a man is highly religious, it is very difficult for him to move in the material world. What is the subject? How should he move, the people who are materialistically-minded?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Therefore you have to understand your spiritual identification. Because you are fools and rascals, you are thinking, "I am this body," and Kṛṣṇa gives instruction in the beginning that you are not this body. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]. Asmin dehe: you are within this body, not this body you are. So Kṛṣṇa is authority. You have to take it. Kṛṣṇa is not only simply speaking authoritatively but He is giving practical example. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]. Because the soul is within the body it is changing. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. You have to become a dhīra, not adhīra. There are two classes of men: dhīra and adhīra. So in order to become a dhīra, you have to go... Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. You have to be trained up. Then you'll understand, not so quickly, without being dhīra. Dhīras tatra na muhyati.



Indian man (4): What is the difference between mind and soul?



Prabhupāda: Mind is material; soul is spiritual. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, apareyaṁ bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. They are also elements, but bhinnā means material, separated from Kṛṣṇa. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām: "These material elements, they are inferior quality, and beyond this, there is another, superior quality. That is soul." Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. So you have to know from the books. That you now understand?



Indian man (5): Swamiji, they read a lot that Bhāgavata says that our body is a temple for the soul, and the soul is a temple for the spirit. Would you kindly enlighten us on this point?



Prabhupāda: That is already explained, that you are soul within this body, the body superficially covered with the senses. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ manasas tu parā buddhiḥ [Bg. 3.42]. You have to analyze that "First of all, I am prominent by my senses. My body means my senses. But the senses are useless unless there is mind." Indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ. If your mind is not in order, your senses cannot act. Therefore mind is superior than the senses, and the mind cannot act if you have no intelligence. So manasas tu parā buddhiḥ. And if you can go beyond the intelligence, then you can find out what is soul. So it requires study. It requires education. The education is there. The books are there. The teachers are there. Unfortunately you are not interested to take the spiritual education. You are now interested in technology, how to hammer, that's all.



Indian man (6): It is told that athāto brahma jijñāsā. Whether to attain that Brahman you should follow that Brahman which is qualityless and shapeless, that is nirguṇākāra or ṣoḍaśākāra(?)?



Prabhupāda: Brahman is always greater than anything. If you limit within some limited idea, that is not brahma-jñāna. Brahman is unlimited, the greatest. Bṛhatvān bṛhanatvat(?). So Brahman includes everything-nirākāra, sākāra, and whatever you can speak. But Brahman ultimately is sākāra. It's not nirākāra. That is the verdict of the śāstra.



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



This is brahma-jñāna. Brahman... Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Everything Brahman, but there is division-brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Just like the sun. The sunshine is impersonal, but the sun globe is localized and the sun-god is person, but the same sun. Similarly, you have to understand Brahman. When you cannot understand the real nature of Brahman, then it is nirākāra. And when you partially understand, Paramātmā, then localized. And you fully understand, that is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.



Devotees: Jaya! (applause)



Indian man (6): It is said that first athāto brahma jijñāsā, and then it is said athāto brahma jijñāsā. It is said by one Yājñavalkya. Is there any difference between these two?



Prabhupāda: So brahma-jijñāsā, spiritual inquiry. So the cat and dog cannot inquire. It is not possible. But when you have got this human form of body, especially born in India and especially born in a Brahman family, if you misuse your life like cats and dogs, that is a great loss.



Indian man (7): Idol worship, impersonal, considered as a stepping stone. Is it fact?



Prabhupāda: I don't follow. What is that?



Tamāla Kṛṣṇa: "Is worshiping the idol a stepping stone?"



Indian man (7): Idol worship, mūrti-pūjā, is considered as a stepping stone only. When you attain something, then you need not do.



Prabhupāda: So unless you step one by one, how you can go to the topmost? You have to.



Indian man (7): After attaining that.



Prabhupāda: Yes. First of all you have to step on the first step, then second step, then... Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. So everything requires training and knowledge.



Tamāla Kṛṣṇa: Jaya Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. That's all.



Devotees: Jaya. All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Tamāla Kṛṣṇa: Kīrtana. [break]



Indian man (8): Can you please explain that it is our only way out for salvation?



Prabhupāda: Yes. People are so fallen that they cannot take the life of tapasya. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the life of tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. So, tapasā brahmacaryeṇa yamena niyamena vā [SB 6.1.13]. So, there is process of tapasya, but in this age, Kali-yuga, people are so fallen that they cannot undergo all the items of tapasya. It is very difficult. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu... Caitanya Mahāprabhu has not manufactured. It is mentioned in the śāstra that only by this process.



kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann

asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ

kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya

mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet

[SB 12.3.51]



This is special concession to the Kali-yuga, that there are so many faults in this age, but if one sticks to this principle of kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet, he becomes liberated and go back to home, back to Godhead.



Indian man (8): And is it so, that in Śrīmad-Bhāgavata it is also written, many really great men want to be here in Kali-yuga, because it is easier to be for salvation? Only by...



Prabhupāda: Yes. That I am speaking. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya. Kṛṣṇasya kīrtanād eva mukta-saṅgaḥ param. Simply by chanting. Therefore we practically see that these Western people, they are not coming from high-class brāhmaṇa or Vaiṣṇava family, but still, by kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya they are becoming so liberated that they are preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world.



Indian man (8): Another thing, my last question. I shall not disturb you. The name is power, and to utter name...



Prabhupāda: The name is the person. This is absolute. Absolute.



Indian man (8): Personified.



Prabhupāda: Not personified. He is person.



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

[Cc. Madhya 17.133]



There is... Just like here in this material world, dual world, water and the name "water" is different. But in the spiritual world, Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name is the same. Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. So these things are to be realized one after another if you come to the process. Thank you very much. (end)





720617SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.20-21

-

Los Angeles, June 17, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting:)



bile batorukrama-vikramān ye

na śṛṇvataḥ karṇa-puṭe narasya

jihvāsatī dārdurikeva sūta

na copagāyaty urugāya-gāthāḥ

[SB 2.3.20]



Prabhupāda: So bile batorukrama-vikramān ye. Urukrama. Urukrama means Kṛṣṇa. Krama means activities. Uru means great. So urukrama-vikramān. Vikramān means chivalrous activities, very brave activities. So one who does not hear about the brave activities of Kṛṣṇa, they are satisfied with teeny activities of this material world... We give credit to an ordinary man to become a God. How? Now, meditation. Now, what are his wonderful activities? Simply by meditation he becomes God? This is the foolishness. God must be acting very wonderfully. Otherwise, how he's God. If he is just like ordinary man, and because he has got a big beard, he becomes God? How foolishness it is. They do not know what is God because they have not heard about God, how powerful He is, how brave activities He does. Just like Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, when He was seven years old, He lifted a great hill, Govardhana Hill. Giridhārī. And He kept it on His finger for seven days. That is God. Kṛṣṇa, when He was householder, He married sixteen thousand wives.



And who can maintain sixteen thousand wives? One cannot maintain even one wife. This is called urukrama. Great activities. Not that Kṛṣṇa remained one, and He had sixteen thousand wives. No. He also expanded Himself into sixteen thousand forms so that no wife may be displeased. His wife... If I am one, and if I have got many wives, so everyone will be displeased. He provided sixteen thousand palaces, and in each palace, there were many thousands of servants and maidservants, and each wife was blessed with ten sons. This is called urukrama, great activities. Lord Rāmacandra, He killed Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa was so powerful that all the demigods in higher planetary systems, they were all afraid of him. He became so powerful. And Rāvaṇa's brother, he reigned in Mexico, Brazil. Brazil. And there was subway from Ceylon to Brazil. We get information from Rāmāyaṇa. Such powerful demons. Who can make now subway from one country into another country? They can make subway from one city to another, utmost.

But at that time, Rāvaṇa was able to make a subway from one continent to another, from Asia to Africa. And Brazil, they say, still there are big stock of gold. So Rāvaṇa utilized these gold mines for constructing his city. Svarṇa-laṅkā, "Golden Ceylon," it was known at that time. He was so advanced even in material science, even at that time. And he was also a good scholar in Vedic literature. He was a great devotee of Lord Śiva. And by the blessings of Lord Śiva, he got so much opulences. And he became so powerful that he dared to kidnap the wife of Rāmacandra. So such a powerful demon was killed by Rāmacandra. And He approached his kingdom on a stone bridge. And the stones were floating on the water. Where is the law of gravitation? The law of gravitation, the so-called scientists' imagination, does not act when Urukrama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, acts. He wanted, "There should be no law of gravitation. Let the stones float on the water." This is called urukrama.

So we accept Lord Rāmacandra as God, Lord Kṛṣṇa as God, not these petty dogs and cats. We have no business with these petty dogs and cats. All rascals, they are declaring, "I am God." No. Therefore, these rascals, who do not know what is God, you have to inject within their earholes the message of God. That is your business. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means... These rascals, dogs, hogs, camels and asses, who have no information of God, and therefore their earholes are compared like the snake holes, bile... So you have got very responsible task, to inject within their ear the chivalrous activities of God. Otherwise, their earholes remain as snake holes. As I explained yesterday, in the snake holes, nobody goes there. Nobody puts their hands or legs. Similarly, if these earholes remains empty, without aural reception of the great activities of the Lord, it is as good as the snake holes.

Bile batorukrama-vikramān ye na śṛṇvataḥ. They have decided, "There is no God. God is dead. God has no personality. He's zero." Therefore they have no opportunity to hear about God. Na śṛṇvataḥ karṇa-puṭe narasya. This human form of body... These earholes are meant for giving aural reception to the message of God. But they'll not do that. Therefore your mission is to go home to home, village to village, town to town, and give them injection, "Hear." Make such arrangement, nice dancing, nice chanting, prasāda distribution. Why? Just to inject in their snake holes the words of Kṛṣṇa. This is your mission. Those who have taken sannyāsa especially, it is their duty. Sat-nyāsa, to sacrifice everything ... Sacrifice means ... Nothing to be sacrificed. But sacrifice the sense of "I am the Lord." That's all. What you have got, you can sacrifice? This is simply a bluff, sacrifice. We cannot sacrifice. What we have got we can sacrifice? There is no question of sacrifice, but sacrifice means this doggish mentality that "I am Lord, I am God, I am enjoyer."

This doggish mentality has to be sacrificed. Otherwise, what you can sacrifice? What you have got? Renouncement. There is no question of renouncement. You haven't got anything, what to renounce? When you come naked, and you go naked. Simply by false, illusory conception, you think: "This is mine, this is mine, this is mine." Actually, when you take your birth, you do not bring anything with you. And when you go away, you do not take away anything. The things were there, and things will be there. You come and go. But then where is the question of sacrifice? Where is the question of renouncement? This is illusion. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Everything belongs to God; nothing belongs to you. So what is the meaning of renouncement? And what is the meaning of enjoyment? You cannot enjoy others' property, neither it is a very nice thing if you say, "I renounce it." Suppose you are passing through Bank of America, if you say, "I renounce this." Where, where? What is the renouncement?

Bank of America belongs to you? This is craziness. You cannot enjoy the Bank of America. If you go and try to enjoy, then you'll be criminal. And if you say, "I renounce it," then you are a madman. This is your position. But people are going on under two impressions. Somebody, the karmīs, they are thinking, "I am enjoyer. I am the lord of all I survey. This America is mine. You cannot enter." So this is the karmī's position. Falsely, they are claiming proprietorship, which does not belong to them. Thieves, rather; they are thieves, rogues. There is a story that a, a group of thieves, they plundered some booty, some property, somewhere, and then, out of the town, they were dividing. So one of the thieves was speaking, "Please divide the property morally." Now, the property's stolen property, and they are speaking of "morally." Devil recites scripture. Similarly, you Americans, you have come from Europe, you have stolen this property. Now you are speaking of morality.

So not you. Everyone. Nothing belongs to us. There is no question of morality unless one surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. Everything immoral for a person who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, everything immoral. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta says,

'dvaite' bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba-'manodharma'

'ei bhāla, ei manda'-ei saba 'bhrama'



In this material world, which is called "duality," these, our listing, "These things are good. These things are bad," bhadra abhadra... Bhadra means good. Abhadra means bad. These are all the same. It is simply mental concoction. Here, the so-called morality, ethics-all nonsense. Because you, you are trying to lord it over on the property of somebody else. So where is your morality? So these sentiments-morality, immorality, good, bad-they are simply manufactured. Actually, unless one surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, there is no question of this ethics and morality. We are now discussing in our philosophical class, Huxley's morality. These are all crazy man's proposals. Actually, there is no morality.



So that we can understand things as they are if we receive the message of Urukrama, Kṛṣṇa. If you give aural reception to the activities of Kṛṣṇa ... Therefore, you should not waste a moment even with nonsense talkings. You have got so many books. Either chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, or read books, discuss amongst yourself. Don't waste your time by so-called drama and play. It is simply waste of time. Don't waste your time in that way. If you have got inclination to enjoy some drama, then you should take hint how that drama should be written or played. Don't manufacture. You are not so expert that you can manufacture things. That is illegal. Just like we do not read any rascal's book. They are manufacturing so many ideas. We read Bhāgavatam, authorized. We read Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā. We read Brahma-saṁhitā. Not rascal's book. What these rascals can write? They're imperfect. So don't waste your time. Simply always pour in, give aural reception to the message of Urukrama.

Don't waste a single moment. This should be your life's policy. Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]. Rūpa Gosvāmī advises an advanced devotee should always look "Whether my time is wasted?" Avyartha-kālatvam. Vyartha means useless. So that is, that should be one of the, mean, target of devotees, that "Whether I am wasting my time?" Don't waste your time. Always pour in the activities of the Lord, Kṛṣṇa. Always, twenty-four hours. Kīrtaniyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31], Caitanya Mahāprabhu says. Sadā. Sadā means always, twenty-four hours. Otherwise, it is the snake hole. Similarly, jihvāsatī dārdurikeva sūta. Dārdurikeva. A frog's tongue, ka-ka-kanh, ka-ka-kanh. No. Dārdurikeva sūta na copagāyaty urugāya-gāthāḥ. Urugāya. Glorious activities. This should be our motto of life. Now read the purport.

Pradyumna: Purport: "Devotional service of the Lord is rendered by all limbs or parts of the body. It is the transcendental dynamic force of the spirit soul; therefore a devotee is engaged one hundred percent in the service of the Lord. One can engage in devotional service when the senses of the body are purified in relation with the Lord, and one can render service to the Lord with the help of all senses. As such, the senses and the action of the senses are to be considered as impure or materialistic as long as they are employed in sense gratification only. The purified senses are engaged not in sense gratification, but in the service of the Lord in toto. The Lord is the Supreme with all senses, and the servitor, who is part and parcel of the Lord, also has the same senses. Service of the Lord is the completely purified use of the senses, as it is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. The Lord imparted instructions with full senses, and Arjuna received them with full senses, and thus there was a perfect exchange of sensible and logical understanding between the master and the disciple.



Spiritual understanding is nothing like an electrical charge from the master to the disciple as it is foolishly claimed by some propaganda-mongers. Everything is full of sense and logic, and the exchange of views between the master and the disciple is possible when the reception is submissive and real only. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that one should receive the teaching of Lord Caitanya with intellect and full senses so that one can logically understand the great mission."

Prabhupāda: Caitanya dayāra kathā karaha vicāra. The exact language is there. That Caitanya-caritāmṛta writer, Kavirāja Gosvāmī, says that "You put your logic about the mercy of Lord Caitanya. I request you, you consider. Don't accept it blindly." Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-dayā karaha vicāra. "But if you intelligently deliberate on the mercy of Caitanya Mahāprabhu,"



śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-dayā karaha vicāra

vicāra karile citte pābe camatkāra

[Cc. Ādi 8.15]



"you'll feel wonderful. If you accept it by systematic deliberation about the mercy of Lord Caitanya, then you'll feel that it is wonderful." So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not a, I mean to say, force, that we are pushing something forcibly to anyone. There is complete judgement. But unfortunately, if one cannot understand, that is not our fault. One must have the intelligence to understand. Otherwise, logically, philosophically, it is perfect. Go on.



Pradyumna: "In the impure state of a living being, the respective senses are fully engaged in mundane affairs. If the car is not engaged in the service ..."



Prabhupāda: "If the ear..."



Pradyumna: "If the ear is not engaged in the service of the Lord by hearing about Him in the Bhagavad-gītā or in the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam, certainly the holes of the ears will be filled up with some rubbish."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This is the secret. We have got the ears, and we have got the sound also. Just like we are reading this book. So if we don't fill up our ears with this transcendental sound, then it will be filled up with some rubbish things. It cannot remain empty. Either you fill up with transcendental message, or you fill up with rubbish nonsense. Two ways. So if you take care that your earholes are always filled up with the transcendental message of Kṛṣṇa, so there is no scope for rubbish things to enter into it. So therefore our attempt should be twenty-four hours hearing. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. Twenty-four hours. As soon as you get time, read books, discuss amongst yourselves, partial closing.(?) Don't fill up the ears with rubbish things. Then advance will be choked up. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Therefore the messages of the Bhagavad-gītā and the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam should be preached all over the world very loudly. That is the duty of a pure devotee who has actually heard about them from perfect sources. Many may want to speak something to others, but because they are not trained up to speak on the subject matter of Vedic wisdom, they are all speaking nonsense, and the people are receiving them with no sense. There are hundreds and thousands of sources for distributing mundane news of the world, and people of the word are also receiving them. Similarly, the people of the world should be taught to hear the transcendental topics of the Lord, and the devotee of the Lord must speak loudly so that they can hear. The frogs loudly croak, with the result that they invite the snakes to eat them. The human tongue is especially meant for chanting the Vedic hymns and not for croaking like the frogs. The word asatī used in this verse is also significant.



Asatī means a woman who has become a prostitute. A prostitute has no reputation for good womanly qualities. Similarly, the tongue, which is given to the human being for chanting the Vedic hymns, will be considered a prostitute if it is engaged in the matter of chanting some mundane nonsense."

Prabhupāda: Yes. Just like a chaste woman has got good reputation, similarly, a chaste tongue... Chaste tongue means... Chaste tongue and ear. Jihvādau. Our spiritual life begins from tongue. Jihvādau. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. These senses-these mundane, blunt senses-they cannot receive or understand what is Kṛṣṇa; what is Kṛṣṇa's name; what is Kṛṣṇa's form; what is Kṛṣṇa's pastimes; what is Kṛṣṇa's paraphernalia; so many things Kṛṣṇa's... what is Kṛṣṇa's word. Na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ. These senses cannot do it. But when the one sense, the tongue, is engaged in devotional service... The tongue is engaged in devotional service means chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. This tongue is especially given to you. The dog, the cat cannot chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, but you can. Because God has given you the opportunity. So just like chaste woman means he is meant for her husband, similarly, chaste tongue means which is meant for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is chaste tongue. And tasting kṛṣṇa-prasādam.



So if you can simply engage your tongue chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and tasting kṛṣṇa-prasādam, you become perfect. Simple thing. There is no difficulty. Whenever there is time, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. And when you feel hungry, take kṛṣṇa-prasādam and live here peacefully. Don't talk rubbish. Then life is successful. Is there any difficulty We are, we are trying to give you kṛṣṇa-prasādam. We are giving you chance to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is our duty. So you take advantage of it, and make your life successful. Otherwise, it is jihvāsatī dārdurikeva sūta. Dārdurikā. The frogs, frog's tongue, very busy in croaking. But it, it, it is means inviting death, "Please come here. I am sitting here." So similarly, by talking nonsense, we allow our span of life being diminished by the sunrise and sunset, but if we talk about the urugāya-gāthāḥ, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then our life cannot be taken away. It cannot be decreased.

It will be eternal. Simply by doing these two things... Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Brs. 1.2.234]. If we simply engage the jihvā, the tongue, in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, then we can see God, eye to eye. Then? You read one verse more.

Pradyumna: (chants verse with devotees:)



bhāraḥ paraṁ paṭṭa-kirīṭa-juṣṭam

apy uttamāṅgaṁ na namen mukundam

śāvau karau no kurute saparyāṁ

harer lasat-kāñcana-kaṅkaṇau vā

[SB 2.3.21]



Prabhupāda: That's nice. So you can read the word meanings. Read.



Pradyumna: (reads synonyms, then:) Translation: "The upper portion of the body, though crowned with a silk turban, if not bowed down before the Personality of Godhead who can award mukti, freedom, is a heavy burden only. And the hands, though decorated with glittering bangles, if not engaged in the service of the Personality of Godhead Hari, are like those of a dead man."



Prabhupāda: So you have seen Indian turban-very, very big, made of silk and jewels. Perhaps you can, you have seen the typical turban by the Indian Airways, a big turban. So what is the use of the turban? It is a great burden, you, if you do not bow down before the Lord. Similarly, if you don't engage your hand in the service of the Lord, it is exactly like the dead man's hand. If the dead man's hand, if it is decorated with nice, glittering, golden bangles, what is the beauty? There is no beauty. So we'll discuss tomorrow again. Thank you. (end)





720618SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.21

-

Los Angeles, June 18, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



bhāraḥ paraṁ paṭṭa-kirīṭa-juṣṭam

apy uttamāṅgaṁ na namen mukundam

śāvau karau no kurute saparyāṁ

harer lasat-kāñcana-kaṅkaṇau vā

[SB 2.3.21]



Translation: "The upper portion of the body, though crowned with a silk turban, if not bowed down before the Personality of Godhead who can award mukti, freedom, is a heavy burden only. And the hands, though decorated with glittering bangles, if not engaged in the service of the Personality of Godhead Hari, are like those of a dead man."



Prabhupāda: So bhāraḥ paraṁ paṭṭa-kirīṭa-juṣṭam. A silk turban with pearl, what is called, decoration, bedecked with pearls, these are the signs of king. Just like we decorate Kṛṣṇa with turban, bedecked with jewels. So this turban is good so long we bow down before the Deity. Otherwise it is a great burden. Although it is made of silk, still, it will be a great burden. The idea is that if we bow down or surrender unto the lotus feet of Mukunda-Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, one who gives liberation-then we can enjoy princely order or richness. There is no harm. But if we are lacking in that capacity to surrender unto the Supreme Lord, and simply we become puffed up with these riches, then it will be a burden. Burden means very soon everything will be lost. Just like you cannot keep the burden, heavy burden, on your head for a long time, similarly, this nice turban, silk turban, will be felt as great burden. This is the law of nature. If you misuse the power and do not feel obliged to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has given you the power, then you'll be finished very soon.



That is the history. Any nation, any empire, any man, as soon as one begins to defy the authority of the Supreme Lord, like Rāvaṇa, he'll be finished. Sooner or later, he's going to be finished. Just like Rāvaṇa, he was very much puffed up by his material opulence. And he did not care for Rāma. And he wanted the potency, energy of Rāma, spiritual energy, Sītā. And he kidnapped. He wanted that "I..." that he did not like Rāma, but he liked Sītā. Sītā is energy. Woman and money, these are energies of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is puruṣa, and all other things are prakṛti. Prakṛti is enjoyed by the puruṣa. So Kṛṣṇa says, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. He's bhoktā. He's the enjoyer. This... In the, in the material world, or spiritual world, the same thing is there. The woman is there, the money is there, and the puruṣa is there, enjoyer is there. But here the puruṣa is imitation. Imitation. Because one who is playing the part of puruṣa, enjoyer, he's not actually puruṣa, but he's prakṛti.

Falsely, he (is) representing himself as puruṣa, as enjoyer. Therefore we have got trouble. Artificially... Just like a woman, if he's artificially trying to be man, as it is botheration, it is not possible. If a woman is dressed like a man, does it mean that he's man, she is man, or she can enjoy like man? No. False dress. Similarly, here, in this material world, we are falsely dressed with this material body and imitating Kṛṣṇa, enjoyer. Exactly like the woman dressed in male's dress wants to enjoy. That is not possible. Similarly, here, the living entity, either dressed in male dress or female dress... This outward body is dress. Somebody is dressed like a female, somebody is dressed like a male, but none of them are male. Both of them are originally female, prakṛti. Prakṛti means feminine gender. Prakṛti. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find, aparā, apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām: "This material energy, earth, water, fire, air, these are...they are also My energy," Kṛṣṇa says. "But they are inferior energy. But there is another energy, jīva-bhūtaḥ, the living entities, and that is superior energy."

So the superior energy is dressed in two ways, as male and female. Because without male and female, there is no enjoyment. Therefore they have been dressed falsely by the material nature as enjoyer. Here, either a woman or a man, everyone is trying to enjoy. Nobody is trying to become enjoyed. Everyone is trying to enjoy. But he cannot. He or she... Everyone is she, but someone, some of them, are dressed like he. Because everyone is prakṛti. But this mentality, that "I shall enjoy," that is false, I mean to say, propensity of the living entity. That is called māyā. He cannot enjoy, but he is posing himself as enjoyer. That is the disease. He's po... up to the end, he's trying to become God. The so-called tapasvī, jñānī, yogi, they are trying to come to the liberated position, but thinking that "I shall become God."

The same disease. Up to the end, the same disease. God means "enjoyer." So this disease can be cured only by surrender. That is the only medicine. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Here, also, the same thing: bhāraḥ paraṁ paṭṭa-kirīṭa-juṣṭam. A princely order, a king, he has been given the chance of ruling over, over a kingdom, but if he forgets his position, he actually becomes the proprietor, then this kingdom will be burden. Just like it became so in the case of Rāvaṇa, and he was finished. Similarly, as soon as the kings of the world became puffed up with their false power, the monarchy is now finished. All over the world. Otherwise, say, five hundred years ago, all over the world, there were kings, monarchy, monarchical government. But they misused their power. They did not surrender. Therefore their turban or crown became very burdensome, and they had to give it up. Still in some countries the so-called king or queen are existing. And they have no power. It is simply a show-bottle. So they have lost their power.

So we should be very much careful, not become puffed up by a princely order, turban, but we must know that this opulence, this kingdom, this power... Everyone. Anyone who has got some power, he must know that "This power is given by Kṛṣṇa unto me, and to execute His will, not my sense gratification." Otherwise, it will be burden, and he will be finished. This is laws of God. Nobody can become the enjoyer. The only enjoyer is God. And if we want to enjoy falsely, then we will be in trouble. Similarly, those who are rich, have got ornaments, bangles, if the hand is not engaged in the service of the Lord... Therefore we should always engage our hands. Not only hands. Hands, legs, eyes-everything should be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. Either you wipe the floor of the temple, or you type, or anything, or you do something... hands must be engaged for the service of the Lord. Similarly, legs should be engaged also for the service of the Lord.

The legs can be engaged... If you are living in a distant place, engage your legs to come here. That is the engagement of the legs. Eyes should be engaged to see very beautiful Deity, well decorated. Then you'll feel satisfaction. Otherwise, your eyes will draw you to see something nonsense beautiful. So all our senses should be engaged. Then there is no māyā. If you have got good engagement, then there is no scope for wrong engagement. The wrong engagement is māyā, and good engagement is Kṛṣṇa. So try to engage yourself always in Kṛṣṇa's service, and māyā will not be able to touch you. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. If you engage your tongue for talking about Kṛṣṇa, to taste kṛṣṇa-prasādam, then there will be no scope of your tongue for being engaged in nonsense talking, for going to restaurant and take nonsense food. You may... The Māyāvādī philosophy is to stop by force, to make it zero. "My senses are giving me trouble. To... So put out, pluck out the eyeballs."

This is their treatment. That is not possible.

Because we are living entity, we have got all our senses. Then because we have got senses, therefore we are living. A dead stone has no senses. So there, that is the distinction between living entity and matter. But the so-called rascal philosophers, scientists, they do not know this distinction. Still, they philoso... philosophize, they theorize. They think that the dead stone and the human being or living entity is the same. That is their fault. The living entity is a different entity. It is not dead stone. Therefore it is called superior energy. It has got will. It has got little independence. Therefore he is selecting different types of bodies for enjoyment. So the modern material scientists, so-called scientists, actually, they are fools and rascals. As it is mentioned in the Bhāgavatam, sa eva go-karaḥ. Why big scientists and philosophers have been described in the Bhāgavatam as fools and rascals? Because, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13].

Because they consider this body as self. That is their fault. That is their ignorance. The Darwin's theory, this theory, that theory, simply they are bewildered, thinking this body is the self. The body's developing or evolution ... No. So all our senses should be engaged in the service of the Lord. That is perfection. It is indirectly being said in these verses that if our senses are not engaged in the service of the Lord, then it is dead. Śāvau. Śāvau karau no kurute saparyām. Just like a dead man, he has got his legs and hands, but he cannot employ it for any service. It is now flat. Actually, it is flat, but because within the body there is the soul, who is eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, if he does not come to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness platform and does not engage himself in the service of the Lord, then his hands, legs, heads, everything is dead body's head. The decoration of dead body. This is the conclusion. Now go on reading.

Pradyumna: "As stated herein before, there are three kinds of devotees of the Lord. The first-class devotee does not see at all anyone who is not in the service of the Lord, but the second-class devotee makes distinctions between devotees and nondevotees. The second-class devotees are therefore meant for preaching work, and as referred to in the above verse, they must loudly preach the glories of the Lord. The second-class devotee accepts disciples from the section of third-class devotees or nondevotees. Sometimes the first-class devotees also come down to the category of the second-class devotee for preaching work. But the common man who is expected to become at least a third-class devotee is advised herein to visit the temple of the Lord and bow down before the Deity, even though he may be a very rich man or even a king with a silk turban or crown. The Lord is the Lord of everyone, including the great kings and emperors, and as such, rich men in the estimation of mundane people must therefore make a point to visit the temple of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and regularly bow down before the Deity."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This bow down... Even the children, they are imitating, bowing down, but it has got the effect. Not that the children, they have no seriousness about... Seriousness or no seriousness, simply if he bows down, he gets the result. He gets the... Dancing, he's dancing. He's getting the result. He's becoming a devotee. This is called ajñāta-sukṛti. These are the statements in Bhakti-rasām... Nectar of Devotion. You'll find. The temple is meant for giving chances to the nondevotees. Some way or other, if he comes in the temple, bows down, and dances with us, takes the prasādam, takes caraṇāmṛta, that means he is becoming spiritually advanced. Therefore this is a chance. And actually, our Society is giving this chance. In the beginning they come as a inquisitive visitor. Then dances, then chants, then take prasādam, and, say, after a week, he becomes shaven. So this is the process. Association of the devotee, coming to the temple, will give him impetus to make further progress.



Go on.

Pradyumna: "The Lord in the temple, in the worshipable form, is never to be considered to be made of stone or wood because the Lord in His arcā incarnation as the Deity in the temple shows immense favor to the fallen souls by His auspicious presence. By the hearing process, as mentioned hereinbefore, this realization of the presence of the Lord in the temple is made possible. As such, the first process of hearing in the routine work of devotional service is the essential point. Hearing by all classes of devotees from the authentic sources like Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is essential. The common man who is puffed up with his material position and does not bow down before the Deity of the Lord in the temple, or who defies temple worship without any knowledge of the science, must know that his so-called turban or crown will only succeed in further drowning him in the water of the ocean of material existence. A drowning man with a heavy weight on his head is sure to drown more swiftly than others, who have no heavy weight.



A foolish puffed-up man defies the science of God and says that God has no meaning for him, but when is in the grip of God's law and is caught up with some disease like cerebral thrombosis, that godless man sinks into the ocean of nescience by the weight of his material acquisition. Advancement of material science without God consciousness is a heavy load on the head of human society. So one must take heed of this great warning.

The common man, if he has no time to worship the Lord, may at least engage his hands for a few seconds in washing or sweeping the Lord's temple. Mahārāja Pratāparudra, the greatly powerful king of Orissa, was always very busy with heavy state responsibilities, yet he made it a point to sweep the temple of Lord Jagannātha at Purī once a year during the festival of the Lord. The idea is that however important a man may be, he must accept the supremacy of the Supreme Lord. This God consciousness will help a man even in his material prosperity. Mahārāja Pratāparudra's subordination before Lord Jagannātha made him a powerful king, so much so that even the great Pathan in his time could not enter into Orissa on account of the powerful Mahārāja Pratāparudra. And at last, Mahārāja Pratāparudra was graced by Lord Śrī Caitanya on the very grounds of his acceptance of subordination to the Lord of the universe. So even though a rich man's wife has glittering bangles made of gold on her hands, she must engage herself in rendering service to the Lord."

Prabhupāda: So this is an actual fact, that Mahārāja Pratāparudra ... He was the King of Orissa, and in the fifteenth century, India was conquered by the Muhammadans, Pathans, but they could not conquer that portion of the country, Orissa. Because Mahārāja Pratāparudra was very strong king. But his strength was on the basis of his devotion to Lord Jagannātha. So even if we want to enjoy material world ... The devotee does not want to enjoy, but Kṛṣṇa keeps his devotee in all comfortable situation. There is no question about it. So we should not desire separately for material comfort. We should simply depend on Kṛṣṇa and be satisfied; in whatever condition He keeps, be satisfied. Then He will look after whether you are comfortable or uncomfortable. If you try, yourself, independently, to become comfortable, that is māyā. You cannot become so. Otherwise, you see everyone is trying to be comfortable in this material world. Do you think that everyone is comfortable?



Who is trying for discomfiture? No, nobody's trying. Everyone is trying to be very happy, but why there are so many discrepancies? Somebody is very poor, somebody is very rich, somebody is in the middle. That means there is superior supervision. If you simply try to become rich, that is not possible. Therefore śāstra says, intelligent men, they should not bother about this so-called happiness and distress of the world.

tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



Distress and happiness, they're already destined, according to our body. We have discussed this point. Take, for example, you American boys and girls, you have got a body, by your previous activities. So your standard of living is better than other country. So actually I see that even if you go outside your country, your standard of living is maintained. Because you have got already the body. Deha-yogena dehinām.



Just like a hog. A hog, if he changes his country or position, if he's taken to heavenly planet, then what he will be? He will try to find out, "Where is stool?" Because the body is hog's body. Similarly, an Indian, because he has got Indian body, even if he goes to America, he'll try for spiritual upliftment. That is the nature. A tiger, if you take in a civilized human society, he'll try to hunt. So they do not understand that by superior management, every living entity has been offered a different type of body for material distress and happiness. Everyone. It is not possible to change. Therefore, if we are intelligent enough, we should know that "My distress and happiness in this material world is already fixed up because I have got a particular type of body. Then when it is fixed up, then why, why I shall waste my time for so-called distress and happiness, when it is fixed up?" Just like you are running in a train. You have already purchased a ticket for third class.

Then how you can run on the first class? That is not possible. If you want to run on the first class compartment, you must purchase a ticket. Similarly, we have already purchased a ticket according to our body. Therefore, śāstra says that don't bother about this so-called distress and happiness. They are already fixed up. If you have got some energy, please utilize it how to develop in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Don't spoil your energy for so-called distress and happiness. That is mistake. But the modern civilization is so foolish. They are simply trying for bodily distress and happiness and spoiling the energy which he could utilize for understanding God. This is the defect of modern civilization. Actually, foolish civilization... They do not know what is the value of life, how we can realize our ultimate goal of life, what is this body, what is God. There is no education. There is no enlightenment. Simply, just like animals. The animals... trying, animal also trying to become comfortable.

But it is not possible. Because he's animal, he cannot be as comfortable as a human being. That is not possible. It is destined. So everyone is destined and fixed up, his comfortable life. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Therefore, one who is intelligent, he should simply spend his energy how to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is intelligence. All right. Have kīrtana. (end)



720619SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.22

-

Los Angeles, June 19, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



Prabhupāda: That's all right. So,



barhāyite te nayane narāṇāṁ

liṅgāni viṣṇor na nirīkṣato ye

pādau nṛṇāṁ tau druma-janma-bhājau

kṣetrāṇi nānuvrajato harer yau

[SB 2.3.22]



Word meaning?



Pradyumna: (reads synonyms, then:) Translation: "The eyes which do not look at the symbolic representations of the Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, His forms, name, quality, etc., are like those printed on the plumes of the peacock, and the legs which do not move to the holy places, where the Lord is remembered, are considered to be like tree trunks."



Prabhupāda: So, the peacock plumes, they look like eyes, painted. But it has no power to see. Similarly, if we do not see the forms of the Lord, just like in this temple we are seeing, then these eyes are to be considered as painted eyes. Not real eyes. Simply just appearing like eyes. It has no use. The human form of life, the eyes are there, particular eyes, to see the forms of the Lord eye to eye. And because our present position is that with these material eyes we cannot see the Lord in His spiritual form, therefore the Lord has kindly appeared before us in a manner in which we can see Him. The forms of the Lord is not imagination. They say that they imagine some form. Sādhakānāṁ hitvārthāya brahmaṇo rūpa-kalpanaḥ. The Māyāvādī philosophers, due to their poor fund of knowledge, they think that "The Absolute Truth is formless, but because we cannot meditate upon formless, something formless, let us imagine some form." Imagine. Nirviśeṣa-vādī, nirākāra-vādī, they imagine forms.



Therefore, their philosophy, that "Any form you like, you can concentrate. Because after all, there is no form. But for your present facility, you can imagine some form." But there is also mistake on their part, because they say "Imagine any form." Generally, they prescribe the form of Lord Śiva, the form of Lord Viṣṇu, the form of Durgā, the form of the sun, and the form of Gaṇeśa. Pañcopāsanā. These five forms. But ultimately, you become "form-less." The example given by them is that you rise up to a upper place with a wooden stair, and as soon as you reach there, you throw it away, so that you'll not be able to come back again. Similarly, their philosophy is: "With some imagination of form, you worship, and as soon as you realize Brahman, throw it away. No more." These are all imagination; actually there is no fact. They do not know the actual position of spiritual life; therefore they are personally misled, and they mislead others also. Here it is particularly mentioned, liṅgāni viṣṇoḥ, the form of Viṣṇu, not of this rascal imagination of Durgā, Kālī, or Lord Śiva.

So we are not concerned with the imagination form. They are also not imagination. Actually, everyone, all the demigods, they have got their forms. But the difference is Viṣṇu, the form of Viṣṇu, is eternal; and the forms of demigods or the form, our forms... Just like we have got now some form. They're not eternal-temporary. We all sitting here, we have got different forms, but as soon as these forms will be changed, we shall accept another form-this form's gone forever. It will never come again. But Viṣṇu form, Lord Viṣṇu's form, viṣṇu-tattva. Viṣṇu-tattva means the forms of the original Lord, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the original form. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. But He expands in different forms. The original form is Kṛṣṇa. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said, Kṛṣṇa, advaita, one. There is no second, I mean to say, counterpart. But He expands. Advaitam acyutam. Acyuta. Acyuta means which does not fall down. Acyuta. Cyuta means "fall down." So God's another name is Acyuta, never falls down. Just like we living entities, we fall down. From spiritual world, we fall down. Because we have fallen down, therefore we have got this material body. But Kṛṣṇa, or God, never falls down. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta, endless. You cannot count how many forms are there of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They have been compared with the incessant waves of the river. Just like, in the river you stand, on a flowing river, you will find the waves are day and night flowing, flowing, flowing, flowing.

Similarly, God, Kṛṣṇa, from Him, ananta-koṭi, innumerable incarnations are coming out, coming out. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Then next question may be that "If all the forms are coming from Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa also must have come from some other form." Because we see ... Suppose I have got hundred children, so I was also born by some father. No. Kṛṣṇa is not like that.

Anādi. He is not emanation from anyone. He's original. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. All others are emanations from Kṛṣṇa. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyam [Bs. 5.33]. He's the original. Ādyaṁ Purāṇa, the oldest. Then why Kṛṣṇa does not look like old man? Just like in some other religious sects they present God as very old man. But Kṛṣṇa is, although the oldest... Because He's the origin of all emanations, He must be oldest, but He's nava-yauvanaṁ ca, just like a young man, sixteen to twenty years old. That is Kṛṣṇa. Yogeśvara. Kṛṣṇa, the oldest of all, still He appears nava-yauvana. Nava-yauvana, just youthful life is beginning. That is called nava-yauvana. So according to our human society, the youthful life begins at sixteen years. So Kṛṣṇa is like that. He'll look always sixteen to twenty years old, not more than that. We have never seen Kṛṣṇa has become old. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Liṅgāni. Liṅgāni means form. So Kṛṣṇa has many forms.

As Kṛṣṇa, as Viṣṇu, as Nārāyaṇa, as Baladeva, as Jagannātha. So many. Govinda. There are thousands and thousands of forms. So we must see at least one of such forms. Either you see Kṛṣṇa form or Rāma form or Viṣṇu form or Nārāyaṇa form or Baladeva form, or His incarnation, Nṛsiṁhadeva form, Matsyāvatāra, Mīnāvatāra... So many. If we do not increase our anxiety or inclination to see one of the forms of Viṣṇu... Here it is specifically mentioned, Viṣṇu. Not others. Liṅgāni viṣṇor na nirīkṣato ye. If we do not see, then our eyes are exactly like the painted eyes on the plumes of the feathers, or plumes of the peacock. It looks very nice, but it has no value. No, it has no seeing power. So our, these eyes are also painted, because it is material. These eyes will remain when I shall give up this body, but it will have no more seeing power. The seeing power is gone when the spirit soul gives up this body. So in spite of the beautiful eyes, it is unable to see. Similarly, so long we have got this instrument... This is an instrument to work. Māyayā... In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said,

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



Īśvaraḥ the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, is sitting within everyone's heart, and He's witness, anumantā-upadraṣṭā. Upadraṣṭā means He's seeing our activity. He's noting what I desire, because our desires are coming one after another, one after another. So according to our desire, Kṛṣṇa is so kind, He gives you a body. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Īśvara, the Supreme Lord, is sitting within the heart of everyone. So... And sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati bhrāmayan. And He's giving us chance to transmigrate to different types of bodies or species of bodies. He's noting down that "This soul is very much fond of fresh blood and raw meat. All right. You take the body of a tiger. Yes. This soul feels pleasure being naked. All right, you take the body of a tree. You stand up naked for ten thousand years.



Satisfy your desire for being naked for ten thousand years." Why two years, three years, or five years, ten years? Remain naked. Human body is meant for covering, not to become naked, but if anyone develops the idea of becoming nudie, naked, "All right, next life you get tree. Stand up." The example is there, Yamala-Arjuna, They wanted to be naked. Nārada gave them opportunity, "All right, you remain naked as trees." So therefore, our business should be to go to the temple as it is prescribed here, pādau nṛṇāṁ tau druma-janma-bhājau. Those who are not moving, they're just like trees, they do not move. So, if we do not move to the places where Viṣṇu's forms are there... Just like in India, we have got many places of pilgrimage. Just like Vṛndāvana. There are... A small city, about fifty thousand utmost population. But there are five thousand temples, big and small. Out of that, about one dozen temples are very, very big, just like fort. And there are small temples.

So altogether, it is a city of fifty thousand population, but there are five thousand temples, Kṛṣṇa. All Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. So this is a chance, that "Come to Vṛndāvana, and wherever you go, you see Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That will make your life successful." By seeing, seeing, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, seeing, seeing, you'll get an impression. And if you continue... The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, you'll find if, when you go there, that in the morning and evening, all of them, they are going different temples and seeing the Deity Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. So there is no need of education, there is no need of philosophy, there is no need of science. Simply if you visit temples of Viṣṇu, then your life is successful. This is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness process. Simply if you move to the temple and see with your eyes; very simple process. Our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness program is so simple, at the same time sublime, that you become liberated at the end. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. If you simply think of Kṛṣṇa in that way.

If you cannot read, then sit down and simply see the Deity's form. That will also give you. Anything, anything done. Little dancing, little, a little ringing the cymbals or singing Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... Anything you do. These children... Just like they are dancing. They are also being spiritual profited. It will never go in vain. Somehow or other he has shown some jubilation in front of the Lord, it is noted immediately. Therefore this verse is there, pādau nṛṇāṁ tau druma-janma-bhājau. If you do not move to the temples, then what is the difference between your legs and the trees which are standing without legs? They have legs, but they cannot move. Tree's another name is pādapa. They drink water with their legs. Just like we drink water in our mouth... So it is not that all animals act in the same way. No. Just like there is a bird (which) is called bat. They pass stool through the mouth. You know? Yes. So there are different processes. The fishes in the water, they touch with the wings.

Their wings are so perfect that three miles off, another big fish is coming to eat them, they can understand by the wings. Immediately, they take protection. These are all described in the Bhāgavata. You get so much perfect knowledge, scientific knowledge, of different species of life, how they are acting, how they are eating, how they are moving. All, everything is perfect there. Vidyā bhāgavatāvadhi. If you study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam perfectly, then all your education is complete. You don't require any other book to read; you get from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam all material and spiritual knowledge, and at the end, Kṛṣṇa. This is the profit. Kṣetrāṇi nānuvrajato harer yau. Kṣetrāṇi. Kṣetra means pilgrimage. This temple is pilgrimage. It is not ordinary house; it is Vaikuṇṭha. In the śāstra it is said that to live in the forest is living in goodness. There are three qualities, you know-goodness, passion, ignorance-in this material world. So when you live in the forest, you live in goodness.

When you live in a city, in a town, then you live in passion. And when you live in a liquor shop, in a brothel or Bowery street, then it is living in ignorance. There are three kinds of living. Everything, three kinds. Sattva, rajas, tamas, goodness, passion ... But if you live in temple, you live in Vaikuṇṭha. Above goodness. So all of you should be very careful that you may not fall down again from the Vaikuṇṭha place. That should be your first business, that you have been given opportunity to live in Vaikuṇṭha, but don't fall down again. Either you fall down on goodness, passion... That is material. They go to forest for meditation, but that is goodness, material goodness. But one who lives in temple, he's not concerned with material goodness, passion, or ignorance. He lives in Vaikuṇṭha. In this age it is not possible. You can imagine that "Now I shall go to Himalaya and forest and practice meditation." They're all bogus; you cannot do that. That is not possible.

Because the age is different. We are not trained in that way. Formerly, the brahmacārīs, they used to go to the forest, to the teacher, to the spiritual master, and they acclimatized with the atmosphere. But here, from the very beginning, in school, college, dormitories mixing freely, doing all nonsense. How it can go? That's not possible. That is not possible. Therefore, take advantage of this temple, the centers we are opening, and live in Vaikuṇṭha. And the authorities of the temple should be so careful that it does not turn into something else besides temple. Then you are safe. The māyā cannot touch you. What is this? Hm. Then? Read.

Pradyumna: "Especially for the householder-devotees, the path of Deity worship is strongly recommended. As far as possible, every householder, by the direction of the spiritual master, must install the Deity of Viṣṇu, forms like Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, or Sītā-Rāma especially, or any other form of the Lord, like Nṛsiṁha, Varāha, Gaura-Nitāi, Matsya, Kūrma, śālagrāma-śilā and many other forms of Viṣṇu, like Trivikrama, Keśava, Acyuta, Vāsudeva, Nārāyaṇa, Dāmodara, etc., as they are recommended in the Vaiṣṇava tantras or purāṇas, and one's family should worship strictly, following the directions and regulation of arcanā-vidhi."



Prabhupāda: Hm. Now, this is the important point. I understand that some of our householder devotees are ordering for Deities in India. But here is the point. The point is that they "worship strictly, following the direction and regulation of arcanā-vidhi." Don't make a play. If you follow strictly the Deity worship method, then you establish; otherwise, don't establish. It will be offense. One who is able to manage... Just like we are showing the example, how to worship Deity in the temple. In the same way, if one can... The idea is, as here, our devotees are engaged in the worship of the Deity, similarly, a householder, when all the family members are trained up how to worship the Deity, then they can establish. Not that make a farce. Cleanliness, and the rules and regulation, that must be... That is the duty of every... Actually, the higher castes in India still, everyone-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya-they must have Deity worship at home. Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41].



Anyone who is rich in India still, they have got Deity worship at home. Very nicely. A separate house, a small house attached to their big buildings, and there is Deity worship, and the all the members should go there, offer prayers. Just like we are doing, the similar, same thing there. In Kanpur there is one temple, Dvārakādhīśa. The temple belongs to a very rich man, Singhania. The, all the members... It is order of the lady, the mother of Mr. Singhania, that "You all of you, you must visit the Deity..." Very rich men, always busy in business. But still, they have to come to the temple and offer respect, take caraṇāmṛta and prasādam. Then go to office. If one misses one day, then he will be fined. Still. The head man will be fined ten dollars, and the next man five dollars, like that, according to position. So if one day somebody misses, immediately the priest will go with the bill of fine: "Sir, you have to pay this fine." "Yes. You take immediately."

Still there are such rules and regulations. So Deity worship, it is the duty of all householders, Deity worship. That means automatically all the members become devotees. But it must be done according... there are sixty-four kinds of offenses. In The Nectar of Devotion you'll find. Deity worship... For chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, there are ten kinds of offenses. But Deity worship, there are so many offenses. These are described. "You cannot sit down before the Deity like this, you cannot yawn before the Deity, you cannot talk nonsense before the Deity." So many things are there. So therefore it is said that "strictly following the direction and regulation of arcanā-vidhi." So you are being trained up. In India they are trained up since centuries. Their culture is different. They automatically can adopt, immediately. They're trained up. You are not trained up as yet. You are being trained. So unless you are fully trained, don't establish Deity to make a farce. Better learn it perfectly in the temple, and when you think that the members of the household are also now as good as the devotees in the temple, then you must establish the Deity. That is required. Next.

Pradyumna: "Any member of the family who is above twelve years of age should be initiated by a bona fide spiritual master, and all the members of the household should be engaged in the daily service of the Lord, beginning from morning, 4 a.m., till night, 10 p.m. ..."



Prabhupāda: Hm. This is Deity worship. Not that sleeping up to 9:00 and Deity worship. This is farce. That is not allowed. That will be offense. All the members must rise early in the morning, just we are doing in the temple. At 4 a.m. take bath, cleanse, and offer ārātrika. That is the beginning of Deity worship. And all the members should be so trained up... Suppose one is absent for some business, the other members should take it. There will be so many assistants, but the Deity worship must go on very nicely. Then?



Pradyumna: by performing maṅgala-ārātrika, nirañjana, arcana, pūjā, kīrtana, śṛṅgāra, bhoga-vaikāli, sandhyā-ārātrika, pāṭha, bhoga (at night), śayana-ārātrika, etc. Engagement in such worship of the Deity, under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master, will greatly help the householders to purify their very existence and make rapid progress in spiritual knowledge. Simple theoretical book knowledge is not sufficient for a neophyte devotee. Book knowledge is theoretical, whereas the arcana process is practical. Spiritual knowledge must be developed by a combination of theoretical and practical knowledge, and that is the guaranteed way for attainment of spiritual perfection. The training of devotional service for a neophyte devotee completely depends on the expert spiritual master who knows how to lead his disciple to make gradual progress towards the path back home, back to Godhead. One should not become a pseudo spiritual master as a matter of business to meet one's family expenditures; one must be an expert spiritual master to deliver the disciple from the clutches of impending death. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has defined the bona fide qualities of a spiritual master, and one of the verses in that description reads:





śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-

śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau

yuktasya bhaktāṁś ca niyuñjato 'pi

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam **





Śrī-vigraha is the arcā, or suitable worshipable form of the Lord, and the disciple should be engaged in worshiping the Deity regularly by śṛṅgāra, by proper decoration and dressing, as also by mandira-mārjana, the matter of cleansing the temple. The spiritual master teaches the neophyte devotee all these kindly and personally to help him gradually in the realization of the transcendental name, quality, form, etc., of the Lord.



Only attention engaged in the service of the Lord, especially in dressing and decorating the temple, accompanied by musical kīrtana and spiritual instructions from scriptures, can save the common man from the hellish cinema attractions and rubbish sex-songs broadcast everywhere by radios. If one is unable to maintain a temple at home, he should go to another's temple where all the above performances are regularly executed. Visiting the temple of a devotee and looking at the profusely decorated forms of the Lord well dressed in a well-decorated, sanctified temple naturally infuse the mundane mind with spiritual inspiration. People should visit holy places like Vṛndāvana where such temples and worship of the Deity are specifically maintained. Formerly all rich men like kings and rich merchants constructed such temples under the direction of expert devotees of the Lord, like the six Gosvāmīs, and it is the duty of the common man to take advantage of these temples and festivals observed in the holy places of pilgrimage by following in the footsteps of great devotees (anuvraja). One should not visit all these sanctified pilgrimage places and temples with sightseeing in mind, but one must go to such temples and sanctified places immortalized by the transcendental pastimes of the Lord and be guided by proper men who know the science. This is called anuvraja. Anu means to follow. It is therefore best to follow the instruction of the bona fide spiritual master, even in visiting temples and the holy places of pilgrimage. One who does not move in that way is as good as a standing tree condemned by the Lord not to move. The moving tendency of the human being is misused by visiting places for sightseeing. The best purpose of such traveling tendencies could be fulfilled by visiting the holy places established by great ācāryas and thereby not being misled by the atheistic propaganda of moneymaking men who have no knowledge of spiritual matters.



Prabhupāda: So you can keep (indistinct) (devotees offer obeisances-end)



720620SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.23

-

Los Angeles, June 20, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



jīvañ chavo bhāgavatāṅghri-reṇuṁ

na jātu martyo 'bhilabheta yas tu

śrī-viṣṇu-padyā manujas tulasyāḥ

śvasañ chavo yas tu na veda gandham

[SB 2.3.23]



Translation: "The person who has not at any time received the dust of the feet of a pure devotee of the Lord upon his head certainly is a dead body. And the person who has never experienced the flavor of tulasī leaves from the lotus feet of the Lord is also a dead body, although breathing."

Prabhupāda: So... Prahlāda Mahārāja was asked by his father, "How did you develop this Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" So he replied that naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghrim: [SB 7.5.32] "This Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be developed..." Spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ. Kṛṣṇa consciousness, development of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, means anartha apagama. Anartha means things we do not require. Anartha. Artha, anartha. Artha means which is essentially required, and anartha means which is not required, artificially we have requisitioned. So when one grows his Kṛṣṇa consciousness, immediately his artificial life becomes finished. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. This is the symptom of development of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that he's not anymore interested for material, unnecessary things. This is the test. If one is increasing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, at the same time he has got full attachment for material things, that means he's not developing. Material things means āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca.



Eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. So sometimes the karmīs are afraid of this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement because they know that as soon as one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is no more interested in these material things. Just like we say "Don't eat meat." So actually, if all people become Kṛṣṇa conscious and give up meat-eating, then the slaughterhouse will be closed. Automatically. We say no meat-eating and no intoxication. So if all people become Kṛṣṇa conscious and give up drinking and smoking, the big business, breweries and cigarette manufacturers, will be closed. Similarly, no illicit sex. If people take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then so many brothels and clubs and nudies and everything will be closed. So they are afraid of their business; therefore they don't encourage this movement. Because ultimately, if this movement goes on, then where they stand? Everywhere we go, the advertisement is for intoxication, for sex, and for meat-eating. These are the advertisements.

Business is going on very nicely. But Kṛṣṇa consciousness means viraktir anyatra syāt. If one takes Kṛṣṇa consciousness, like the dust of a pure devotee, if he takes the dust of the lotus feet of a pure devotee, immediately he becomes freed from all these unnecessary demands.

naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekhaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat

[SB 7.5.32]



Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be developed unless one takes the dust of the lotus feet of a pure devotee. This is these words, Prahlāda Mahārāja's remark. In other words, unless one comes in contact with a pure devotee, Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be developed. It is not possible. Therefore here it is recommended by Sūta Gosvāmī that jīvañ chavo bhāgavatāṅghri-reṇuṁ na jātu martyo 'bhilabheta yas tu. Reṇu, reṇu means dust. If one does not try to secure the dust of the lotus feet of bhāgavata... Bhāgavata means pure devotee of the Lord.

One bhāgavata is this book Bhāgavata, another bhāgavata, the person bhāgavata. Who lives on the book Bhāgavata, he is person bhāgavata. Two kinds of bhāgavata. So we have to learn Bhāgavatam from the living bhāgavata. Caitanya Mahāprabhu's secretary, Svarūpa Dāmodara, he advised one brāhmaṇa. One brāhmaṇa wrote something about Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There were many poets and writers used to come and visit Caitanya Mahāprabhu when He was at Jagannātha Purī, and they would present some writings, but these writings would not be presented before Caitanya Mahāprabhu unless it was sanctioned by His secretary Svarūpa Dāmodara. That was the system. So one brāhmaṇa, he wrote one poetry that... The purport of the poetry was that "Jagannātha is Kṛṣṇa. But He cannot move. He's wooden Kṛṣṇa. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu is also Kṛṣṇa, but He is moving Kṛṣṇa." That means he distinguished between Jagannātha and Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So this is not siddhānta.

This is not conclusion of the śāstra. Śāstra conclusion is: the Deity and Kṛṣṇa, the same. There is no difference. We have many times explained this. Deity, the worshipful Deity in the temple, is not different from Kṛṣṇa. So Svarūpa Dāmodara did not approve of the poetry to be presented to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. At that time, he chastised him that "You do not know the conclusion, and you dare to write some poetry. Don't do this." And he said, bhāgavata para giya bhāgavata-sthāne:(?) "If you want to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, then you go and study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the pure devotee. Then you'll understand. Otherwise, you'll write all these nonsense." Bhāgavata para giya bhāgavata-sthāne. So one bhāgavata... The two bhāgavatas. You study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from living bhāgavata. So if one does not take or does not surrender unto the living bhāgavata, he cannot understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Many scholarly, learned scholars, Sanskrit scholars, they cannot understand Bhāgavatam.

I have seen many scholars, they cannot understand Bhāgavata. Sanskrit scholars, they will read, but they will not be able to understand. Similarly, Bhagavad-gītā also. If anyone studies Bhagavad-gītā from scholarly point of view, a-b-c-d, he'll not understand. Kṛṣṇa therefore says that "Arjuna, I shall speak the lessons of Bhāgavata unto you because you are My very dear friend and you are My devotee." Kṛṣṇa did not want to speak Śrīmad-SB.. Bhagavad-gītā to a scholarly student. No. These books are not to be understood by mundane scholarship. That is not possible. All the Vedic śāstras, all the Vedic śāstras. There is a big commentary on Bhagavad-gītā by a great scholar and political leader, Lokamanya Tilak. So one of his devotees, he's also politician. When I was in London in 1968... So he has got a society there. They're preaching the Tilak's political view, like that. He has got a... So he came to see me, and he was very much eulogizing Lokamanya Tilak, that he has written his big commentary, Karma-yoga.

So he wanted to invite me in talk on Tilak's great task. So I told him that "Tilak does not understand Bhagavad-gītā." So immediately he was surprised. Then we had a talk, and I convinced him that "Tilak was a politician, maybe a big scholar, but that does not mean he can understand Bhagavad-gītā." Bhagavad-gītā is understood by devotee. He may be illiterate. It doesn't matter. Still... As Caitanya Mahāprabhu certified the illiterate brāhmaṇa who was reading Bhagavad-gītā in Raṅganātha temple... You know the story. The brāhmaṇa was illiterate. His guru ordered him that "You read Bhagavad-gītā daily, eighteen chapters." So he could not refuse the order of guru mahārāja; so he was taking the book and simply seeing. So those who knew that he was illiterate, they were criticizing, "Well, brāhmaṇa, how you are reading Bhagavad-gītā?" He could not answer because he knew that "I am illiterate. I do not know." Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw this fun and approached him, "Well, brāhmaṇa, what you are reading?"

So he could understand that this Caitanya Mahāprabhu has not come to criticize him: "He's serious." So he informed Him, "Sir, I am reading Bhagavad-gītā, but I am illiterate. I am illiterate, but my spiritual master has ordered to read. So what can I do? I have taken this book and moving these pages. That's all. What can I do? Actually I cannot read." Then Caitanya Mahāprabhu inquired, "But I see you are sometimes crying." "Yes, sir, I sometimes cry." "Why?" "Now, because as soon as I take this book in my hand and I see the picture that Lord Kṛṣṇa is driving the chariot of Arjuna, I cry. 'Oh, Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He has taken the service of His devotee. He should have been seated on the chariot-Arjuna should have driven the chariot-but He's driving the chariot and Arjuna is sitting on the seat. So Kṛṣṇa is so kind and beloved that He can serve His devotee. It is the duty of the devotee to serve Him, but He's so kind and affectionate that He serves His devotee.' So as soon as I think of this-Kṛṣṇa's magnanimity-I cry."

Then immediately, Caitanya Mahāprabhu embraced him, that "You are... Your reading of Bhagavad-gītā is perfect. Because you have understood the essence of the Bhagavad-gītā." The scholars, they will say... When Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], the scholars will say "It is not to Kṛṣṇa the person, it is to the impersonal Brahman which is within Kṛṣṇa." They cannot conceive that the Supreme Absolute Truth can become a person. They cannot conceive. Such a huge cosmic manifestation is created by a person like us, resembling like us, two hands, two legs-their poor brain cannot accommodate. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. That is stated in Bhagavad-gītā. Mūḍhāḥ. "Fools and rascals," avajānanti, "deride at Me, thinking Me as ordinary man." Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ, "He does not know what is the transcendental potency behind Me."

Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. So the Māyāvādīs and poor fund of knowledge, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa unless he becomes a devotee. And how he can become a devotee? That is stated here: bhāgavatāṅghri-reṇum. One has to surrender himself to His representative, bhāgavata. Bhāgavata means... God is called Bhagavān. Bhagavat, the original word is bhagavat, and one who has got intimate relation with Bhagavān, he is called bhāgavata. So here it is recommended, bhāgavatāṅghri-reṇuṁ na jātu martyaḥ. Martya means one who will die. Every one of us will die. But abhilabheta yas tu. But we can achieve a great success. Although this body's mortal, we can get, we can achieve a great success. And what is that? To take the dust of the lotus feet of a bhāgavata. Simple thing. Therefore it is said, jīvañ chavaḥ. Jīvañ chavo bhāgavatāṅghri-reṇuṁ na jātu martyo 'bhilabheta yas tu. After all, this body is dead. Everyone knows. It is simply moving on account of the presence of the spirit soul.

As soon as the spirit soul is out of this body, out of this bag of flesh and bone ... We are so much attached to this bag of flesh and bones, but those who are learned, they know that this body is nothing but flesh and bones. The real person, the real force, is the soul. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. A bag of bones and fleshes. This is not our identification. I am not this body. Do you think if you take some bones and flesh and accumulate them and bundle them, will they produce any intelligence? If I am this body, then this body means a bundle of flesh and bones. So the flesh and bones can be had outside. The scientists can take them and bind them together and then see that it is coming, a scientist, another scientist, Professor Einstein is coming from the bones and flesh. Is it possible? It is not possible. The bones and flesh are bones and flesh. The real identity is the soul. According to his karma, he manifests his intelligence. Although this intelligence is coming out through his bones and flesh.

Just like I am seeing through this glass. That does not mean the glass is seeing. The seeing power is different from the glass. Similarly, those who are thinking that they are this body, under bodily concept of life...

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiśu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Bhāgavata says, "One who accepts this body as the self, he is no better then the cow and the ass." Foolish animal. I have several times explained why ass is called foolish, why cow is also foolish. Simple. Cow is simple; cow is... So they are compared with animals, one who accepts... Therefore this body continues to be animal body or a dead body unless in the human form of life one takes advantage of touching the dust of the lotus feet of a devotee. Jīvañ chavo bhāgavatāṅghri-reṇuṁ na jātu martyo 'bhilabheta yas tu... (aside:) She is sleeping. Śrī-viṣṇu-padyā manujas tulasyāḥ śvasañ chavo yas tu na veda gandham.

The nostrils... We smell. So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness smelling means we should offer all nice flowers and tulasī on the lotus feet of the Lord. And we shall accept prasādam. The priest will offer, and if we smell that, then our smelling power is fulfilled. That means... These Kumāras, catuḥsana Kumāras, Sanaka-kumārādi, they were first of all impersonalists, but after smelling the tulasī leaves which were offered to the lotus feet of Viṣṇu, they become personalists. So this is an opportunity. If anyone comes, smells the flowers and the tulasī offered to Viṣṇu, tastes the viṣṇu-prasāda, and sees the Lord's form, in this way he develops Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So this is opportunity. This temple means an opportunity, a process, a simple process. Not simple for ordinary man, but actually it is simple. Anyone can smell the flowers offered to Kṛṣṇa. Anyone can eat the foodstuffs offered to Kṛṣṇa. Anyone can see the Deity so nicely decorated. Anyone can hear Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

So we have got these senses. So if we engage our senses in this way-our seeing power, our hearing power, our talking power, our smelling power, our touching power, our tasting power-in this way, if we engage everything in connection with Kṛṣṇa, very easily we become Kṛṣṇa conscious. And as soon as we become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then our life is successful. We become liberated from this bondage of birth and death. So this is the process. Now read.

Pradyumna: "According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the breathing dead body is a ghost. When a man dies, he is called dead, but when he again appears in a subtle form not visible to the present vision and yet acts, such a dead body is called a ghost. Ghosts are always very bad elements, always creating a fearful situation for others. Similarly, the ghostlike nondevotees who have no respect for the pure devotees, nor for the Viṣṇu Deity in the temples, create a fearful situation for the devotees at all times. The Lord never accepts any offering by such impure ghosts. There is a common saying that one should first love the dog of the beloved before one shows any loving sentiments for the beloved. The stage of pure devotion is attained by sincerely serving a pure devotee of the Lord. The first condition of devotional service to the Lord is therefore to be a servant of a pure devotee, and this condition is fulfilled by the statement "reception of the dust of the lotus feet of a pure devotee who has also served another pure devotee." That is the way of pure disciplic succession, or devotional paramparā.



Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa inquired from the great saint Jaḍa Bharata as to how he had attained such a liberated stage of a paramahaṁsa, and in answer the great saint replied as follows (SB 5.12.12):

rahūgaṇaitat tapasā na yāti

na cejyayā nirvapaṇād gṛhād vā

na cchandasā naiva jalāgni-sūryair

vinā mahat-pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam





"O King Rahūgaṇa, the perfectional stage of devotional service, or the paramahaṁsa stage of life, cannot be attained unless one is blessed by the dust of the feet of great devotees. It is never attained by tapasya [austerity], the Vedic worshiping process, acceptance of the renounced order of life, the discharge of the duties of household life, the chanting of the Vedic hymns, or the performance of penances in the hot sun, within cold water or before the blazing fire."

In other words, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the property of His pure unconditional devotees, and as such only the devotees can deliver Kṛṣṇa to another devotee; Kṛṣṇa is never obtainable directly. Lord Caitanya therefore designated Himself as gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80], or "the most obedient servant of the servants of the Lord, who maintains the gopī damsels at Vṛndāvana." A pure devotee therefore never approaches the Lord directly, but tries to please the servant of the Lord's servants, and thus the Lord becomes pleased, and only then can the devotee relish the taste of the tulasī leaves stuck to His lotus feet. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said that the Lord is never to be found by becoming a great scholar of the Vedic literatures, but He is very easily approachable through His pure devotee. In Vṛndāvana all the pure devotees pray for the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the pleasure potency of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is a tenderhearted feminine counterpart of the supreme whole, resembling the perfectional stage of the worldly feminine nature. Therefore, the mercy of Rādhārāṇī is available very readily to the sincere devotees, and once She recommends such a devotee to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Lord at once accepts the devotee's admittance into His association. The conclusion is, therefore, that one should be more serious about seeking the mercy of the devotee than that of the Lord directly, and by one's doing so (by the good will of the devotee) the natural attraction for the service of the Lord will be revived."



Prabhupāda: All right, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





720622SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.24

-

Los Angeles, June 22, 1972





Prabhupāda: I've seen your article; you can see me after. Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad gṛhyamāṇair hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ

[SB 2.3.24]



Translation: "Certainly that heart is steel-framed which, in spite of chanting the holy name of the Lord with concentration, does not change when ecstasy takes place and tears fill the eyes and hairs stand on end."



Prabhupāda: So here is one word, "steel-framed." Nowadays, the medical science is changing the heart, steel-framed. So this modern science is making steel-framed hearts, but we can understand that formerly, also, there were steel-framed hearts. Otherwise how this word comes? Tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedam. So just like stone or steel does not melt very easily, similarly, anyone's heart which does not change after chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra regularly, then it is to be understood that it is steel-framed, made of stone or iron. Actually, hari-nāma... Harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. It is especially meant for cleansing the heart. That every... All misconception is within our heart, beginning from the wrong identification, that "I am this body." That is the beginning of all misconception. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. So as you go on chanting, gradually the heart will be cleansed, and you'll be able to understand that you are not this body.



That is the... That is called jñāna-vairāgya. Jñāna. Jñāna means to know thoroughly that "I am not this body." This is jñāna. And as soon as you know that you are not this body, naturally you become disinterested with anything which has got bodily relation. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam. Bhava. Bhava means repetition of birth and death. "You become," bhava means. So "you become" means you die also. Because this is the world. To become does not mean that you stay forever. That is not possible. "You become" means you die also. So... But under wrong impression, as soon as I become, I think that this world is very nice. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings that "My dear Lord, when I was in the womb of my mother, at that time I saw You once, became visible." Those who are spiritually advanced, they can see God within the womb of the mother. When a child remains packed up and the consciousness is gained, he feels very uncomfortable. So at that time, one who is pious, spiritually advanced, he prays to God, "Please rescue me from this bondage. I am too much suffering. And this time I, after taking my birth, I shall simply be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness," promises. But Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, janama hoilo poṛi' māyā-jāle.

As soon as birth is taken, the māyā is there; we forget. Immediately, father, mother, other relatives, they take up the child and pats very nice. So in this way we forget that we were in such a precarious condition, almost suffocating. Almost, it is suffocating. After coming out from the womb of the mother, if you are packed up again in such airtight bag, within three seconds you will die. We live under the protection of the Supreme Lord; otherwise that is not a living condition. Just imagine within the womb. So this we forget, and being taken care of, affectionate father and mother, on the lap, we think life is very nice, this life. But this is māyā, this is illusion. Actually, this bhava, to take birth, is very, very unpleasant task. It is blazing fire, bhava-mahā-dāvāgni.

So if we can cleanse our heart during this life ... This is that opportunity. It is not possible ... When I take birth as an animal, cats and dogs, that is not possible. But as I have got now this human form of body, we should not be again misled. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni ... [Cc. Antya 20.12]. If we can cleanse our heart, then this blazing fire of repetition of birth and death can be extinguished. But the illusory energy is so strong that we forget our last death-time miseries. At the time of death we suffer very much, so that ... Just imagine, when we give up our life, how much difficult position at that time. So we forget. Birth and death. As soon as there is birth, there is death also. Death means ... The more you are advancing in age, that means you're dying. You are advancing in death. The child is born ... "When this child is born?" "Just yesterday." That means he has already died one day. So in this way death is progressing. As soon as there is birth, the death is there immediately, side by side.

I am one day old means I have died one day. I am seventy-six years old means I have already died seventy-six years. Suppose I live, say, eighty years, ninety years. So I have already died seventy-six years. So death is sure. They say "We are advancing." What is that advancement? Death is sure. You cannot control birth. Birth, death, old age. You cannot stop old age. And disease. You can manufacture nice medicine, but you cannot stop disease. So we have become steel-hearted, steel-framed heart. We do not consider all these things. These are practical. And still, we are under the impression that we are advancing in material civilization. So we are advancing in the art of cutting stone and wood. That's all. This is our advancement. Just like in your country, within two months they can build one wood house. Means expert in cutting wood. This is advancement. Wood-cutter, stone-cutter. But we are not meant for cutting wood and stone. We are meant for understanding our spiritual identity.

There are many birds, the wood-cutter birds. So that is not very expert manifestation of our intelligence. So this cleansing of heart will be possible by hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ, this chanting of hari-nāma,

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



Anything, any spiritual process, is meant for cleansing the heart. Either you take karma-yoga or jñāna-yoga or dhyāna-yoga or bhakti-yoga, the ultimate goal is that cleansing the heart. At the present moment I am under misconception, dirty things accumulated on my heart, that "I am this body," and therefore I do not try to realize that I am soul, and under bodily concept of life... As the animals they are also in bodily concept of life, they are busy eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. Similarly, human civilization has become like animals. They are interested only in eating, sleeping, mating, and defense. That's all. But that is not our position. It is a chance to get out of the entanglement of birth, death, old age, and disease.



This is our real business. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. We are misguided. Our so-called leaders are mis-leaders. They do not know what is the aim of life. That is the difficulty at the present moment. Not at the present moment. In the material world this problem is always existing, but due to this Kali age, that problem is more acute. That's all. So this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, without offenses, ten kinds of offenses, will cleanse the heart, and then you will be liberated. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvā... Because we know the path how we can get out of these clutches of birth and death. There are so many big, big scientists, philosophers. They don't talk of this important subject matter, how to get out of birth and death. They have no solution. Neither they can think of. But our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving us the knowledge that "You can get out of these clutches of birth and death, old age and disease." That is our desire.

Nobody wants to die, nobody wants to go again into the womb of the mother. Nobody wants disease, nobody wants old age. But the so-called scientists, they have no proposal to get out of these clutches. Here Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives you hint that hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ. By chanting hari-nāma, harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21], you can get out of this. And when hari-nāma will be perfect, that symptoms are given here. Netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ. By chanting, when you will, not always ... Sometimes, out of ecstasy, when tears will come down and there will be shivering on the body, that means you are coming to perfection. This is not to be artificially practiced. When you actually come to the perfectional stage, these will automatically appear. So this verse suggests that if a person is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but his eyes are not tearful or there is no ecstatic shivering of the body, then that means he's not coming to the perfectional point.

So if we chant this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without offense, according to, and observing the regulative principles and numerical strength ... Saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ. The Gosvāmīs, in Vṛndāvana, they used to chant keeping in numerical strength. They were all liberated persons; still, for teaching us an example, they also used to chant keeping a numerical strength. Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he used to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra keeping a numerical strength-300,000 times. 300,000 times. So our prescription is only 25,000. Not 100,000. So it is not very difficult; it takes utmost 2 hours. We can find out, out of 24 hours, 2 hours. We can find out time. So if we actually follow the rules and regulations and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then these symptoms will come. Netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ. When this comes then you know that "I am coming to perfection." And if it is not coming, then it is to be understood the heart is steel-framed. Steel-framed. So it is steel only. Stone. Stone, if we keep our heart stone or steel-framed, then it cannot be melted. This... These symptoms mean heart is melting or changing. Purport, read.

Pradyumna: "We should note with profit that in the first three chapters of the Second Canto a gradual process of development of devotional service is being presented. In the First Chapter the first step in devotional service for God consciousness by the process of hearing and chanting has been stressed, and a gross conception of the Personality of Godhead in His universal form for the beginners is recommended. By such a gross conception of God through the material manifestations of His energy, one is enabled to spiritualize the mind and the senses and gradually concentrate the mind upon Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme, who is present as the Supersoul in every heart and everywhere, in every atom of the material universe. The system of pañca-upāsanā, recommending five mental attitudes for the common man, is also enacted for this purpose, namely gradual development, worship of the superior that may be in the form of fire, electricity, the sun, the mass of living beings, Lord Śiva and, at last, the impersonal Supersoul, the partial representation of Lord Viṣṇu. They are all nicely described in the Second Chapter, but in the Third Chapter further development is prescribed after one has actually reached the stage of Viṣṇu worship, or pure devotional service, and the mature stage of Viṣṇu worship is suggested herein in relation to the change of heart.

The whole process of spiritual culture is aimed at changing the heart of the living being in the matter of his eternal relation with the Supreme Lord as subordinate servant, which is his eternal constitutional position. So with the progress of devotional service, the reaction of change in the heart is exhibited by gradual detachment from the sense of material enjoyment by a false sense of lording it over the world and an increase in the attitude of rendering loving service to the Lord. Vidhi-bhakti, or regulated devotional service by the limbs of the body (namely the eyes, the ears, the nose, the hands and the legs, as already explained hereinbefore), is now stressed herein in relation to the mind, which is the impetus for all activities of the limbs of the body. It is expected by all means that by discharging regulated devotional service one must manifest the change of heart. If there is no such change, the heart must be considered steel-framed, for it is not melted even when there is chanting of the holy name of the Lord. We must always remember that hearing and chanting are the basic principles of discharging devotional duties, and if they are properly performed there will follow the reactional ecstasy with signs of tears in the eyes and standing of the hairs on the body. These are natural consequences and are the preliminary symptoms of the bhāva stage, which occurs before one reaches the perfectional stage of prema, love of Godhead.

If the reaction does not take place, even after continuous hearing and chanting of the holy name of the Lord, it may be considered to be due to offenses only. That is the opinion of the Sandarbha. In the beginning of chanting of the holy name of the Lord, if the devotee has not been very careful about evading the ten kinds of offenses at the feet of the holy name, certainly the reaction of feelings of separation will not be visible by tears in the eyes and standing of the hair on end.

The bhāva stage is manifested by eight transcendental symptoms, namely inertness, perspiration, standing of hairs on end, failing in the voice, trembling, paleness of the body, tears in the eyes and finally trance. The Nectar of Devotion, a summary study of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, explains those symptoms and vividly describes other transcendental developments, both in steady and accelerating manifestations.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has very critically discussed all these bhāva displays in connection with some unscrupulous neophyte's imitating the above symptoms for cheap appreciation. Not only Viśvanātha Cakravartī but also Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī treated them very critically. Sometimes all the above eight symptoms of ecstasy are imitated by the mundane devotees (prākṛta-sahajiyās), but the pseudo symptoms are at once detected when one sees the pseudodevotee addicted to so many forbidden things. Even though decorated with the signs of a devotee, a person addicted to smoking, drinking or illegitimate sex with women cannot have all the above-mentioned ecstatic symptoms. But it is seen that sometimes these symptoms are willfully imitated, and for this reason Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī accuses the imitators of being stonehearted men. They are sometimes even affected by the reflection of such transcendental symptoms, yet if they still do not give up the forbidden habits, then they are hopeless cases for transcendental realization.

When Lord Caitanya met Śrīla Rāmānanda Rāya of Kavaur on the bank of the Godāvarī, the Lord developed all these symptoms, but because of the presence of some nondevotee brāhmaṇas who were attendants of the Rāya, the Lord suppressed these symptoms. So sometimes they are not visible even in the body of the first-class devotee for certain circumstantial reasons. Therefore real, steady bhāva is definitely displayed in the matter of cessation of material desires (kṣānti), utilization of every moment in the transcendental loving service of the Lord (avyārtha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]), eagerness for glorifying the Lord constantly (nāma-gāne sadā ruci [Cc. Madhya 23.32]), attraction for living in the land of the Lord (prītis tad-vasati sthale Prītis tad vasati sthāle), complete detachment from material happiness (virakti), and pridelessness (māna-śūnyatā). One who has developed all these transcendental qualities is really possessed of the bhāva stage, as distinguished from the stonehearted imitator or mundane devotee.

The whole process can be summarized as follows: The advanced devotee who chants the holy name of the Lord in a perfectly offenseless manner and is friendly to everyone can actually relish the transcendental taste of glorifying the Lord. And the result of such realization is reflected in the cessation of all material desires, etc., as mentioned above. The neophytes, due to their being in the lower stage of devotional service, are invariably envious, so much so that they invent their own ways and means of devotional regulations without following the ācāryas. As such, even if they make a show of constantly chanting the holy name of the Lord, they cannot relish the transcendental taste of the holy name. Therefore, the show of tears in the eyes, trembling, perspiration or unconsciousness, etc., is condemned. They can, however, get in touch with a pure devotee of the Lord and rectify their bad habits; otherwise they shall continue to be stonehearted and unfit for any treatment. A complete progressive march on the return path home, back to Godhead, will depend on the instructions of the revealed scriptures directed by a realized devotee."



Prabhupāda: So this positive progress will be possible if we follow the instruction of the Vedas. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has therefore said,



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



Śruti means Vedas, śāstras. Śruti-smṛti. And smṛti means books which follow the Vedic principles. Vedas... Suppose you write one book, or anything. If it is just according to the Vedic conclusion, then it is also... It is called smṛti. By remembering the Vedic conclusion... You cannot go beyond the Vedic conclusion. Then it is useless writing. Vedic conclusion must be there. The guide must be there. On that conclusion, if you write something, that is right, and if you deviate from that conclusion, then it is wrong. So we want to read authorized, right books. Not by imagination. You can write so many nonsense things by imagination. That is useless. You must remember what is the Vedic conclusion. So śruti-smṛti-pañcarātra-vidhim.



Pañcarātra-vidhi, this arcanā, temple worship, under the direction of Nārada. So if one gives up all these regulative principles and wants to become a devotee, a writer, then Rūpa Gosvāmī says, without the conclusive statement of the Vedas, smṛtis and pañcarātra-vidhi... Śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā [Brs. 1.2.101], without following, aikāntikī harer bhaktiḥ, the show of a devotee, the aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate, it is simply disturbance. Simply disturbance. So such things are happening. Now anyone is manufacturing his own way of self realization, and there are rascals who are supporting, that "Everyone, we are independent. We can find out our own way of worship." But Rūpa Gosvāmī says, "This is simply creating disturbance." That is very natural to understand. Suppose here, in our temple, we have got some regulative principles. But if everyone says that "I can manufacture my own way of worshiping the Deity," then what will be the condition?

It will be simply pandemonium. You see? So that is going on. Everyone is manufacturing a type of religion, meditation, without any reference to the authorized books. Śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi [Brs. 1.2.101]. Therefore, people are becoming atheists, no religion, no principles, and the whole world is in chaos due to this. So Rūpa Gosvāmī has forbidden. And in Bhagavad-gītā also it is said, yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ: [Bg. 16.23] "Anyone who does not give respect to the authorized śāstras, but he lives whimsically, according to his own way," na sa siddhim avāpnoti, "Such kind of discovering new path of religious system, new path of this or that, he never gets perfection," na sa siddhim avāpnoti, na sukham, "neither happiness." Na parāṁ gatim. Because our whole aim is how to get out of this material encagement and go back to the spiritual world, go back to home. That is the aim. That is called parāṁ gatim. Parā means transcendental; gati means aim of life. Parāṁ gatim.

So those who are not following the authorized instructions, they are simply creating disturbance, and by such process one cannot be happy, neither perfect, and what to speak of going back to home, back to Godhead? We do not therefore accept anything which is not authorized by the disciplic succession. We reject immediately. There is example that in India there is a tree, sāgu, sāgu(?) tree. I do not know whether it is in your country. That, that tree has a very, I mean to say, thick trunk. But a little jerking, it will break. A little jerking. Sāgu. And there is another tree which is called tamarind tree. So even a fingerlike stem, you cannot break. It is so strong. So our policy should be that when we are falling down, we must take shelter of this tamarind tree, not that sāgu tree. The tamarind tree is Vedic instruction, infallible, without any mistake. As I have given you several times the example that Vedas says that stool of animal is impure, and in another place it says that stool of cow is pure.

Now, if you, if you are a good logician, you can argue that "Stool of animal is impure. That is already said. Why you make 'The stool of cow is pure'?" Oh, but that's a fact. You analyze the stool of cow. You'll find it is full of antiseptic properties. That is Vedic knowledge. It gives you right knowledge. You cannot conclude that "Stool of animal is impure, so why this animal's stool can be pure?" No. Vedic knowledge is so perfect that you can accept it as it is and you'll be profited. You'll profit. In the Vedic knowledge, the viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. The supreme goal is Viṣṇu. Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. This Ṛg Veda mantra. The, some rascals, scholars, so-called, they say, "These Vedas, these mantras, are some primitive. Now we are advanced. We shall create our own mantra." You see? This is going on. The primitive... Primitive, we have to study. Primitive means very, very old. So whether in the days gone by, people were actually happy or now they are happy?

Even if you say "primitive," the primitive life is very nice. Primitive life means simple life. Keeping pace with the nature's law. It is very nice. Primitive life ... It gives you anxiety-free life, and therefore, even if you take it as primitive, the saintly persons, sages, they used to live long, long years, and their brain was so sharp, because they were taking natural food, fruits, grains, and milk that helps to develop human brain for understanding subtle subject matter. So even Vyāsadeva... You have seen the picture of Vyāsadeva. He's writing books just near a cottage only. But he's writing. Nobody can create such literature. But he was leading very simple life, in a cottage. Even, say, 2,000 years ago or little more, there was Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, he was a brāhmaṇa, but great politician. His politics are studied even now in M.A. class. And because he was a great politician, diplomat, under his name in our India, in New Delhi, the capital, there is a neighborhood which is called Cāṇakya Purī, and all the foreign embassies are there.

Your American embassy is also there. So he was a great politician. But still, he was living in a cottage. He was not accepting any salary because he was brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa cannot accept any salary. Just like you have accepted me as your ācārya, but you do not pay me any salary. This is forbidden. The teacher will not accept salary. Then he comes down to the śūdra platform. The śūdra accepts salary. "I serve you, you pay me." And the brāhmaṇa will distribute knowledge freely, and the kṣatriya will give protection to the brāhmaṇa. This is the system of Vedic system. Even in fifty years ago, education in India, there was no charges. A learned brāhmaṇa will sit down in corner of a neighborhood and all the children will come there. They will learn primary education. And the parents of the children will send, somebody will send rice, somebody will send ḍāl... Just like we are maintaining, by collecting. Not here, but in Bombay, our center is collecting and distributing.

The whole system was that. Love exchange. I give you some service; you give me something, out of your love. Dadāti pratigṛhṇāti. Love means six symptoms. I give you something, you give me something. I give you something for eating, you also give me something for eating. Dadāti pratigṛhṇāti bhuṅkte bhojayate, guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati. If I am in trouble, I express my mind, I open my mind before you, and you also try to help me. These are the six signs of love. That is Vedic civilization. Everything exchange of love. No business, mercantile. All right, let us have kīrtana. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720623SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.3.25

-

Los Angeles, June 23, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



athābhidhehy aṅga mano-'nukūlaṁ

prabhāṣase bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ

yad āha vaiyāsakir ātma-vidyā-

viśārado nṛpatiṁ sādhu pṛṣṭaḥ

[SB 2.3.25]



Translation: "O Sūta Gosvāmī, your words are pleasing to our minds. Please therefore explain this to us as it was spoken by the great devotee Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who is very expert in transcendental knowledge, and who spoke to Mahārāja Parīkṣit upon being asked."



Prabhupāda: So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was asking and Śukadeva Gosvāmī was replying. Both of them were fit to ask and to reply. Bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was disciple, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī was his spiritual master. If both of them become fit, are fit, then the discussion of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is very pleasing. The student and the master. If the master is learned and the student is foolish, then it will be not very much pleasing. Or the master is foolish and student is also foolish, that will also not be ... Both of them should be ... Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. Vīrya, vīrya means potency. Just like if a potent husband and potent wife have sex intercourse, immediately there will be pregnancy. Therefore this word is used. Potent. Formerly, this was being used. Both the husband and the wife remained potent, not impotent and sterilized. They remained potent, voluntarily. But when they wanted to beget a child, that one sex intercourse is sufficient. There is child.



Therefore it is said, satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. If the Bhāgavata discussion is done between the two potents, the disciple and the master, then immediately, sadyaḥ hṛdi avarudhyate. As it is said in the beginning. Have you got Bhāgavata? The first, beginning? Sadyo hṛdy avarudhyate. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3], Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Sadyo hṛdy avarudhyate, śuśrūṣubhis tat-kṣaṇāt. Śuśrūṣubhiḥ, those who are serious about understanding about the Supreme Absolute Truth, so for him, immediately God becomes entrapped within the heart. God is there, but especially... Hṛdi avarudhyate, kiṁ vā paraiḥ... Avarudhyate means you capture God. If there is discussion between devotees... Tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca. In Bhagavad-gītā it is said. Tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca. When Bhāgavata discussion is there amongst devotees... It is the business of the devotees, not the business of the nondevotees. Unfortunately, India, it has become a profession.

Some unscrupulous persons, they recite Bhāgavata-saptāha, and the audience gather also for some material benefit. They take it as auspicious activity, śubha-kārya. They don't care for neither the speaker nor the devotee. They don't care for understanding the science of God. They are after some material profit. The professional reader, he reads, he takes some contribution, some money, some clothing, some umbrella, some shoes, some food, some money. In this way, he collects a very lump sum for his maintenance of his family, and the audience also thinks that "By hearing Bhāgavatam, I'll be very much profited materially." This is going on. Bhāgavata-saptāha. Bhāgavata-saptāha, imitation. Parīkṣit Mahārāja heard for one week Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Śukadeva Gosvāmī. So they are imitating this one week. But where is Parīkṣit and where is Śukadeva? Both of them have got some ulterior purpose to hear Bhāgavata. Therefore it is not affecting. They are hearing Bhāgavata for thousands of years, but still, they are where they were formerly.

But actually, if Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is heard... Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja is hearing... Śrī-viṣṇoḥ smaraṇe. Śrī-viṣṇu, abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣit. Parīkṣit Mahārāja got salvation simply by hearing about Viṣṇu. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ smaraṇe, śravaṇe. Parīkṣit Mahārāja he was king, he was politician. So he had no much knowledge about Vedic instruction. But when he was cursed that he would die in seven days, he became very serious, and all the sages and saintly persons agreed that "Mahārāja Parīkṣit, for the last remaining days of his life, seven days, he should hear attentively Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." So śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣit. He got salvation simply by hearing about the glories of the Lord or activities of the Lord, which is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣid abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane. And Vaiyāsaki... Vaiyāsaki's name is mentioned here. Vaiyāsakir ātma-vidyā. Vaiyāsaki means Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

He simply went on narrating. In the middle, there were some questions, intelligent questions, by Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Question is also required. If you simply hear, do not understand, just like dumb stone, that's not good. You should hear attentively, and as soon as there is some difficulty, you should question. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that you should understand... First of all surrender. Praṇipāta. Tad viddhi praṇipātena. Praṇipātena means you must find out an able teacher, where you can surrender. So nobody wants to surrender, but if he sees that there is a greater personality than him, he surrenders. That is nature. So this praṇipāta word means that you do not go for understanding Bhagavad-gītā and Bhāgavata to a store-keeper. You should go to a person where you can surrender. Tad viddhi praṇipātena [Bg. 4.34]. And paripraśnena. And inquiry. And sevayā. You should not take... You should not inquire gratis; you must give service.

Just like if you purchase something, you must pay for it. Therefore it is called sevayā. You cannot pay by returning the value which is taught by the spiritual master. That is not possible. Therefore it is called sevayā. Dedicate your life for his service. You cannot pay. What you have got to pay to a spiritual master? Just like our King Pṛthu Mahārāja. When the Kumāras preached to him about transcendental knowledge, he very humbly submitted, "My dear spiritual master, you have taught me so nice. I require to give you some dakṣiṇā." Dakṣiṇā, that is required. After initiation, one should pay dakṣiṇā. That is a system. "I should pay dakṣiṇā, but what shall I pay? I haven't got anything as my personal possession. It is already by the mercy of the brāhmaṇas that I am enjoying this kingdom. So it is already belonging to you. My kingdom, it is already belonging to you." That was the system. If any saintly person, brāhmaṇa, will ask from a kṣatriya king, he cannot deny.

Karṇa, he gave his son to be sacrificed. A brāhmaṇa asked that "I want your son to be sacrificed by you." He was incarnation of God. He tested Karṇa's charity. He was very charitable, so he asked him that "I want your son, and you shall sacrifice, you both, husband and wife." He agreed, Karṇa, "Yes, I'll do that." So there was some test like that. So actually, formerly, the kings, they possessed their kingdom just to manage, not thinking "It is my property. I am the king." As soon as the kings thought like that, the monarchy finished. The king never thought like that. He thought himself as appointed agent of God, king. So he never thought. So Par... Śuka. . . Pṛthu Mahārāja said that "Nothing belongs to me, and even if I can pay from my treasury, so I cannot actually pay for the benefit I have derived from you. Therefore, the only way I can pay-that I surrender unto you. You can utilize me in any way." So, tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Therefore the disciple's duty is to be ready always to serve the spiritual master, at any cost.

That is the disciple's duty. Sevayā. Upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ. So real knowledge can be achieved in this process. Praṇipāta... Not that I can challenge, "Oh, I can know. I have got so much education and degrees. I can understand what is God," or "There is no need of God. I am God. We are the controller." So these are all rascaldom. Real thing is tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena, as Parīkṣit Mahārāja, the emperor of the world, he's hearing from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, you have seen that picture in our Bhāgavata, newly published, how Parīkṣit Mahārāja humbly asking and sitting before Śukadeva Gosvāmī. So bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ. Bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī is the chief bhāgavata. Bhāgavata, there are two kinds of bhāgavata: grantha bhāgavatam and this person bhāgavatam. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī was person bhāgavatam, bhāgavata, chief. Bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ. Bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ means realized souls. We should not hear Bhāgavatam from a professional man, who are observing the Bhāgavata-saptāha.

I know, in Bombay there is a big speaker of Bhāgavatam. He preaches that "You remain in your family life very peacefully. This is the instruction of Bhāgavata." He never teaches that you have to give up this nonsense family life and you have to go back to home, back to Godhead. He never preaches that. There are so many examples. He comes to the conclusion that "You live peacefully," as if to live peacefully in this material world is the highest achievement of life. They will never disclose the actual fact that nobody can live in this world peacefully. It is not possible at all. But they want money. So they'll flatter or they'll go to Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā, presenting Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being and the gopīs are ordinary girls. So this is very palatable for us, kissing, embracing young girls. So Kṛṣṇa is doing, but they take it that their embracing and kissing is supported by Kṛṣṇa. This is going on. That is a different subject matter; they do not know that.

Therefore the Kṛṣṇa's dealing with the gopīs have been described in the middle of Tenth Canto. And nine cantos have been devoted, describe, so that one may understand what is Kṛṣṇa. What is Kṛṣṇa. The beginning of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Begins, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. What is this Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa? Janmādy asya yataḥ. "He the origin of everything." And we, if we take Kṛṣṇa as ordinary person and He's dancing with the gopīs just like ordinary thing, then what Bhāgavata he will understand? He will go to hell. He's deriding, taking Kṛṣṇa very insignificantly. Avajña. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. "These rascals, because I observe My pastimes just like human being, they're accepting Me as human being, ordinary." Mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. They do not know what is the background of Kṛṣṇa. The background of Kṛṣṇa is in the beginning said janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The first aphorism of Vedānta-sūtra.

That means, Vedānta means to understand Kṛṣṇa. These rascal Vedantists, they try to kill Kṛṣṇa. They want to become himself Kṛṣṇa, the so-called Vedantists. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. The purpose of reading Vedānta means to understand Kṛṣṇa. So without understanding Kṛṣṇa, without being trained up how to understand Kṛṣṇa, if one reads about Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā, he'll go to hell. Because he has got the tendency of this easy sex, so he thinks, "Kṛṣṇa is like us." And therefore, for ordinary men, this kṛṣṇa-līlā... Kṛṣṇa-līlā means they simply understand kṛṣṇa-līlā means Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā. That's all. And Kṛṣṇa's killing the Kaṁsa, that is not līlā. Because Kaṁsas, the rākṣasas, they are afraid of being vanquished by Kṛṣṇa. So they do not like that līlā. They'll like this līlā. So therefore the idea is that if we want to understand Kṛṣṇa, we should... Kṛṣṇa understanding is not so easy.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



So like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, you should hear patiently, submissively, with service and question. So in that way Mahārāja Parīkṣit attained salvation in seven days. If it is, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, actually heard in that seriousness... Where is that seriousness? That seriousness was there in Parīkṣit Mahārāja because he knew it certainly that he was going to die within seven days. So "I have to finish my God realization, self-realization, with seven days." We are not so serious, because we are thinking that "We shall live for seven millions of years, so let me go slowly. Better utilize the time by sleeping." That is our position. If you have got some time, "Let me take this opportunity by sleeping, not by reading the books." So if you do not become serious, then it will take many, many years. But we should be serious more than Śukadeva or Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Parīkṣit Mahārāja had at least time limit seven days, but we do not know whether we will live again seven minutes. Any moment your heart can failure.



You do not know. You are going to the street... Just like the two boys were coming. They did not know that they were going to be killed. So our life is so jeopardized. Any moment I can die. That's a fact. If you don't take seriously like that, that "Any moment, I can die." So Parīkṣit Mahārāja had the opportunity of hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for seven days, so I do not know whether we'll have, I have opportunity for reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for seven minutes. So let me read it very seriously." That should be our attitude. Not that, "Seven... Oh, Parīkṣit Mahārāja was given seven days notice. Oh, I have no such notice. I may live for seven millions of years." That is our disease. Here the most wonderful thing is that everyone is seeing that everyone is dying every moment, but the man seeing, he's thinking that he will live forever. This is the most wonderful thing. Nobody thinks, "No. He is dying, so I will have to die." No. He thinks "I'll live. He is dying." This is the most wonderful thing.

He does not think that "I have seen. My father has died, my mother has died, my brother has died. So everyone has died. So I'll die. So what I am doing before death?" They're not serious. Not at all serious. But death is... "As sure as death." And we do not know when that death is coming to take place. So how much serious we should be. We should be very serious. Labdhvā su-durlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte. We have got this human form of body, human consciousness, advanced consciousness, after many, many births, after through the evolutionary process. Many millions of years we have passed through many species of life. Aśītiṁ caturaś caiva lakṣāṁs tāñ jīva-jātiṣu. Aśītiṁ caturaḥ, eighty-four lakhs or 8,400,000's. Bhramadbhiḥ puruṣaiḥ prāpyaṁ mānuṣyam. In this way, going through so many species of life, we have got this human form of life.

tad apy abhalatāṁ jātaḥ

teṣām ātmābhimāninām

varākāṇām anāśritya

govinda-caraṇa-dvayam

(Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa)



In this valuable life, it will also be spoiled if we don't surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is canvassing personally,



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



Kṛṣṇa personally comes to canvass. Because we are all Kṛṣṇa's children, He's very sorry that we are in this miserable condition of life. He's very sorry. But we are so fool, we do not know that what is the condition of our life. We are thinking we are very much happy. This is called māyā. He's suffering, he's kicked by the shoes of māyā every moment, and still, he's thinking "I am very happy. Why shall I go back to home? I shall remain in America." But you cannot be allowed to remain in America. You are thinking, "All right... You are born of a very rich family, a rich nation, you have got opulence. You have... Your roads and your houses are very nice, but who is going to allow you to live here? Why don't you think like that? You may live for fifty years, or sixty years, or utmost 100 years; then you'll be kicked out. But they do not know that life is eternal.



When I am kicked out, then what life I am going to accept? They are in oblivion. There is no education in the university. This is going on. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is a boon to the human society. You should take it very seriously and utilize your human form of life to understand it and be happy. Thank you very much. (pause) Why not begin immediately?

(end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 2.4: Lectures





720624SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.4.1

-

Los Angeles, June 24, 197



Pradyumna: We chant all the verses in this chapter, all together, starting from the beginning. Śrī-śuka-everyone can chant together-śrī-śuka uvāca... (Śrīla Prabhupāda and devotees chant together all verses in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Second Canto, Chapter 3.)



Prabhupāda: So it takes not more than five minutes. If you practice, then you become learned scholars, simply by chanting these mantras, and the translation, transcendental vibration, will keep you fit for spiritual advancement. Every verse in Vedic literatures, especially Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, they are not ordinary sounds. Simply if you chant the mantras, you become purified. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Simply by hearing and chanting you become pious. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Even you don't understand the meaning, the very sound vibration will help you. Now we have finished one chapter within five minutes. How much time it took? I don't think more than five minutes. So everyone should chant every day at least one chapter. Then? Next chapter? Which chapter?



Pradyumna: Text number one (leads chanting, etc.)



sūta uvāca

vaiyāsaker iti vacas

tattva-niścayam ātmanaḥ

upadhārya matiṁ kṛṣṇe

auttareyaḥ satīṁ vyadhāt

[SB 2.4.1]



Translation: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the son of Uttarā, after hearing the speeches of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, which were all about the truth of the self, applied his concentration faithfully upon Lord Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: So here is, vacas tattvam ātmā ni,...ātmā, vacas tattva, niścayam ātmā. Vacas tattva-niścayam ātmanaḥ. Vaiyāsaki. So ātma-tattva, self realization, this is required. So we have to approach a person like Vaiyāsaki, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Niścayam. Vacas tattva-niścayam. If you want to know positively, niścayam, without any mistake, then you have to approach a person like Śukadeva Gosvāmī or the paramparā system, who is coming in disciplic succession of paramparā system. The paramparā system means... Just like we claim paramparā system from Kṛṣṇa. So whatever Kṛṣṇa says or He said 5,000 years ago, we are repeating the same thing. That is called paramparā system. Not that "The world has changed. Scientific advancement is very great. Now we can interpret in this way and that way." This is all nonsense. All nonsense. You cannot change a single alphabet. They are all unmistakable. They cannot be changed. So that is niścayam ātmanaḥ.



If you want to know positively, what is God, then we should take lesson from a self-realized soul who has understood, who has seen. Jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ [Bg. 4.34]. Just like here it is tattva-niścayam ātmanaḥ. So tattvam, the truth, so one must have seen the truth, realized the truth. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. That is guru. Means one who has seen the truth. How he has seen the truth? Through the paramparā system. Kṛṣṇa said this, and then Brahmā said the same thing, then Nārada said the same thing, Vyāsadeva said the same thing, and then disciplic succession, Madhvācārya, Mādhavendra Purī, Īśvara Purī, Lord Caitanya, Ṣaḍ-gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. In this way. Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī, Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. Then we are speaking. The same thing. Not that "Because we are modernized... Your modern science has changed." Nothing has changed.

It is all foolishness. That change is a scheduled change. Just like day after night. And again, night after day. Again, day after night. This is not change; this is a system. So because our poor fund of knowledge... Just like there are many insects. Their birth, death, marriage, and everything is finished within night. They never see the day. So if they see day by chance, they will say, "Oh, it has changed." Because their experience is they have never seen day. Their experience with night. So all of a sudden, if he sees that there is daylight, "Oh, what is this? Oh, the whole world has changed." No. You have not seen. The so-called scientific discovery, they are seeing something, but the next stage, they have no power to see, and they think, when they see the next item, "Oh, the world has changed." There is no question of changing. It is on the process. Just like another example can be given: the film. If you see the film as it is, each picture you will see different picture.

But actually, it is not different. It is the scene. It is the process. How the hands and legs will move, the picture is made in such a way that when it is put into the machine, you'll find the hands and legs are moving. So change... Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya, sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya. There are three kinds of changes. First of all change is the sṛṣṭi. Sṛṣṭi means creation, creation. This material world... There was no material world. Simply there was spiritual world. Just like when all of a sudden cloud appears in the sky. The sky was there, the cloud has appeared. Similarly, this material creation is like that. It is just like a cloud in the vast spiritual ocean, sky. The sky is spiritual. This sky in which we are now existing, that is not spiritual. Just like the sky, covered by the clouds, is the same sky, but it is covered. Similarly, we are living within the covered sky, and if you penetrate the cover, then you go to the spiritual sky. While going to the spiritual sky, you have to give up your body.

The body is a combination of five elements. So there is stock in the... This universe is covered by seven layers: earth, water, fire, air, like that. When we shall be going to the spiritual sky, we have to pass through the seven layers. And each layer is ten times bigger than the first. Suppose we pass the air layer; the next layer, the fire, is ten times bigger. Then water, ten times. In this way, we have to pass through. We are so much tightly packed up. It is not so easy that I take a sputnik and go anywhere. No. That requires sādhana-bhajana, practice, how to give up this encagement of seven layers and then completely pure spirit soul, you enter into the spiritual sky. That is merging in the spiritual effulgence. Brahmajyoti. Then you can go further and enter into the spiritual planets, if you are fit for that. Otherwise you'll remain in the brahmajyoti. Nirviśeṣa, without any variety. Simply light. As the jñānīs, they want. But you cannot stay there.

Because you are a living entity, you are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, so actually you are trying to go to Kṛṣṇa. Just like a child is crying. The idea is that the child wants mother. Or mother's breast milk. That is his demand. But sometimes we do not know. We try to make the child comfortable in different ways. Similarly, all of us are searching after Kṛṣṇa. That is the fact. Kṛṣṇa, being the Supreme, we are all, being parts and parcels, our natural tendency is to approach Kṛṣṇa. Manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ. Mama vartmānuvartante manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find this. Mama vartmānu... "They are all trying to come to Me." But they are being hampered by different types of māyā. So the spiritual advancement means ultimately to approach Kṛṣṇa. This is very nicely explained by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The bhakti-latā, the creeper of bhakti, is growing, but it will go on growing, growing, growing, until the bhakti-latā, I mean to say, catches the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

You'll see, the creepers they grow, they try to catch something, small. As soon as they get a feeler or root, immediately, by nature... Similarly, you go on increasing your bhakti creeper. The bhakti creeper...

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



Bīja. Bīja means seed. Guru-kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa and guru. When both of them are merciful, then you can get the seed of bhakti-latā creeper. Mālī hañā kare sei bīja āropaṇa [Cc. Madhya 19.152]. When you get a nice seed... Just like you are growing, nursing the tulasī seed very carefully... Tulasī seed, that is the example of bhakti seed. Similarly, you have to nurse the bhakti seed by giving all protection, watering daily. So what is your watering process? This watering process. (devotees chant Hare Kṛṣṇa...) śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana.



mālī hañā kare sei bīja āropaṇa

śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana

[Cc. Madhya 19.152]



You have to become a gardener and... Where is that Pravīṇacandra? He's not here? Yes. That's all right. Śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana. Hearing. If you want to come to the right conclusion, then you have to hear from persons authorized, not from the nonsense rascals, politicians, diplomats. No. Just like here it is said, vaiyāsakeḥ. You have to hear from Vaiyāsaki or his representative. Vaiyāsaker iti vacas tattva-niścayam ātmanaḥ. If you hear from the right person, then tattva-niścayam, then positively you can realize self. And if you hear from some rascals, they have no connection with Vaiyāsaki, simply by dint of mental speculation, interpreting, "I think this may be this, I think this,"... What you are, nonsense? You think? We don't accept such nonsense things. It must be positively authorized. As it is said here, vaiyāsaker iti vacas tattva-niścayam ātmanaḥ. When we hear from the right person...



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



Jñāna and tattva-darśī. Simply jñānī, simply a-b-c-d knowledge, academic education will not help. You must be jñānī, at the same time, tattva-darśī. That tattva-darśana cannot be possible by mental speculation. Ciraṁ vicinvan.



athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



Who knows the tattva? Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta. "One person who has got a slight benediction from Your lotus feet." Not that all. A slight. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. If you get a slight, a glance, then your life is perfect, immediately. Not that you have to get all the mercies of the Lord. Even little, very insignificant part. That means, insignificant part, that is, Kṛṣṇa is teaching Himself, "Just surrender." So this much mercy every one of us we can take. How? "Kṛṣṇa, I was wandering throughout the whole universe in so many lives. I did not know that You are my supreme master. Now, from this day, I surrender unto You." Kṛṣṇa is ready: ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. "Yes, you do it. I shall give you protection from all sinful resultant action. Immediately." A simple process. So this much mercy we can take, if we will. But we are not willing. We surrender to some rascal, but not to Kṛṣṇa. That is our position. We shall surrender to this man, that man, this man, this one ... Why not Kṛṣṇa? "No," māyā will say. "No, no, no. What is Kṛṣṇa? You surrender to such big politician, big yogi, big bluffer, cheater. You surrender there." Māyā is always after you to bewilder you. Because we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa by our independence, misusing our independence, so māyā wants to give us some good lesson, that "Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, you are trying to be happy. All right, I shall give you nice happiness." This is going on. Therefore, māyā is very strong. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. You cannot get out of the clutches of māyā so easily.



Then? How it is possible? Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. The same thing. "If anyone fully surrenders unto Me, then he can get out of the clutches of māyā." So here, Parīkṣit Mahārāja is fully surrendered to his spiritual master. Vaiyāsaker iti vacaḥ. Whatever he said... Vaiyāsaki, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he placed the whole thing before him, how to concentrate one's mind on Kṛṣṇa. So upadhārya matiṁ kṛṣṇe. Then immediately this is the result. If you approach a bona fide representative, then, taking lessons from him, the result will be upadhārya matiṁ kṛṣṇe, your surrender will be on Kṛṣṇa. Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "The word satīm is very significant. This means "existing" and "chaste," and both imports are perfectly applicable in the case of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. The whole Vedic adventure is to draw one's attention entirely unto the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa without any diversion, as it is instructed in the Bhagavad-gītā (15.15). Fortunately Mahārāja Parīkṣit had already been attracted to the Lord from the very beginning of his body, in the womb of his mother. In the womb of his mother, he was struck by the brahmāstra atomic bomb released by Aśvatthāmā, but by the grace of the Lord he was saved from being burnt by the fiery weapon, and since then the King continually concentrated his mind upon Lord Kṛṣṇa, which made him perfectly chaste in devotional service. So by natural sequence he was a chaste devotee of the Lord, and when he further heard..."



Prabhupāda: Here, one important matter is there, that Parīkṣit Mahārāja, while he was in the womb of his mother, there was brahmāstr a targeted on him by Aśvatthāmā. And he was to be killed. Practically he was killed. His mother felt a miscarriage and immediately approached Kṛṣṇa, that "I am feeling like this. The only son of the Pāṇḍava dynasty is going to be lost." So Kṛṣṇa immediately entered the womb of Uttarā and saved the baby. Now, Parīkṣit Mahārāja is recognized devotee; otherwise Kṛṣṇa would not have taken so much trouble. He wanted that Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Now, when he was cursed by a brāhmaṇa to die within seven days, why Kṛṣṇa did not save him, or why he did not seek Kṛṣṇa's protection? This question may be raised. He was young man. He was not old man. He could live. That question was made also: "The Parīkṣit Mahārāja, such a nice king, his life was dedicated for the welfare of his subjects. So actually, his body was meant for the benefit of others.



Why did he leave it, did he quit it?" This question was there. Because anyone who has dedicated his body for the service of all humanity, that is, means, that means he has dedicated the body for Kṛṣṇa, because Kṛṣṇa, He is suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. Kṛṣṇa is the sincere friend of everyone, so one who is trying to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that means he's also trying to make others to feel that Kṛṣṇa is the supreme friend. So that body is Kṛṣṇa's body. Now, why Parīkṣit Mahārāja decided that? He could counteract the brāhmaṇa boy. It was not difficult for him. But he did not act it counter, and he agreed to die. And Kṛṣṇa also, from within dictated, "Parīkṣit, now agree to die." Why? If Parīkṣit Mahārāja was not in this position, that he was to die within seven days, this Bhāgavata would not have come. This is the purport. That was the purpose. Otherwise, he could counteract. He could save himself, personally or with the help of Kṛṣṇa.

He didn't care for any curse, but if he would not have taken this position, this Bhāgavata would not have come. It was for Parīkṣit Mahārāja. So we have to study in this way. Thank you very much. (pause) Begin. (end)



720625SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.4.2

-

Los Angeles, June 25, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



ātma-jāyā-sutāgāra-

paśu-draviṇa-bandhuṣu

rājye cāvikale nityaṁ

virūḍhāṁ mamatāṁ jahau

[SB 2.4.2]



Prabhupāda: (interrupts a devotee chanting śloka) Purport of the last śloka was done? Yesterday?



Pradyumna: Uh, part of it.



Prabhupāda: The balance, first of all read.



Pradyumna: On page 170. "To become a pure devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, two things are very much essential, namely having a chance of being born in the family of a devotee and having the blessings of a bona fide spiritual master. By the grace of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Parīkṣit Mahārāja had both opportunities. He was born in a family of such devotees as the Pāṇḍavas, and just to continue the dynasty of the Pāṇḍavas and show them special favor, the Lord specifically saved Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who later on, by the arrangement of the Lord, was cursed by the boy of a brāhmaṇa and was able to get the association of such a spiritual master as Śukadeva Gosvāmī. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that a fortunate person, by the mercy of the spiritual master and Lord Kṛṣṇa, achieves the path of devotional service. This was perfectly applicable in the case of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. By way of being born in a family of devotees, he automatically came in touch with Kṛṣṇa, and after being so contacted he constantly remembered Him.



Consequently Lord Kṛṣṇa gave the King a further chance for development in devotional service by introducing him to Śukadeva Gosvāmī, a stalwart devotee of the Lord with perfect knowledge in self-realization. And by hearing from a bona fide spiritual master, he was perfectly able to concentrate his chaste mind further upon Lord Kṛṣṇa, as a matter of course."

Prabhupāda: So superficially, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, king, the emperor of the world, he was cursed to death. A brāhmaṇa boy cursed him that "You will die within seven days." And as a result of this, he left his home, his kingdom, and here, next verse, it is said, ātma-jāyā. Jāyā means his one wife. He was young man. Suta, children; āgāra, āgāra means residence, house. Ātma-jāyā-sutāgāra. Paśu, animals. He was king. So he had many animals: horses, elephants, cows, bulls. These are household animals, domestic animals. And draviṇa. Draviṇa means wealth, riches. And bandhu, bandhuṣu, friendship. So our... These are our material assets: wife, children, nice house, nice bank balance, and some paśus, animals. Here of course, you keep only one animals, dog. "The best friend." But in India they keep many animals. Those who are rich, they keep elephants, horses, bulls, cows. Dogs are also there, but dogs are not so important there. Asses also. These are domestic...



And cats also. These are domestic animals. These animals, they like to live with human beings... They do not go to the forest. So superficially, Parīkṣit Mahārāja... Upadhārya matiṁ kṛṣṇe. For becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious... Matim. Mati means consciousness; kṛṣṇe, in Kṛṣṇa. Practically he was bereft of everything. Just try to understand. He was cursed to death, and because he was preparing for next life, so he had to leave everything. And so..., what people will think? "Oh by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one has to lose all, everything? His kingdom, his everything." Therefore people are afraid to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. "Oh, we shall be lost of everything. Even up to life." This is the example of Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Parīkṣit Mahārāja... (reads purport) "To become a pure devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, two things are very much essential, namely having a chance of being born in the family of a devotee and having the blessings of a bona fide spiritual master. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja had both blessings.

He, from the very childhood, from the womb of his mother, he was Kṛṣṇa conscious. And he had the opportunity of taking birth in a family where every member was Kṛṣṇa conscious, especially his grandfather Arjuna. So that chance was there. From the very beginning of his life, he was given the chance of worshiping Kṛṣṇa Deity. Not only that. He was king. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Yoga-bhraṣṭa means one who falls down from the path of spiritual advancement. For them, the facility is that they are given another chance to take birth in the human society. Not only in human society... Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe, in very rich family and very pure family. Śucīnām means pure, brāhmaṇa. So in India still, if one is born in a very nice, rich and pure family, he is considered to be very pious in his past life. That's a fact. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. These four things, janma, high grade birth; aiśvarya, riches. Janmaiśvarya... śruta, education; and śrī, means beauty.

These four things are obtained by pious activities in one's past life. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja had all these assets. That means in his previous life he was also a great devotee. So now, in this life, he's bereft of everything. After executing spiritual life so strenuously, life after life, in this life we see that he's bereft of his kingdom, he's going to die within seven days, and he had to leave his beautiful wife, children, home, kingdom, his animals. Everything we keep, there is affection. It is not that animals are meant for killing. They are also treated like children. (aside:) Don't move your leg like that. So anything you associate, you get affection. That's a fact. Therefore here it is stated, rājye cāvikale nityaṁ virūḍhāṁ mamatāṁ jahau. And his kingdom was very safe kingdom. It was not that there was disturbance in his kingdom. Somebody has attacked, so he was bereft... No. Cāvikale, without any disturbance. Very nice kingdom. So what people will think?

That "To become Kṛṣṇa conscious means to lose everything, up to life? Does it mean?" Sometimes, superficially, they take it like that, but actually that is not the fact. There is another story in which one saintly person came in an assembly. So he blessed... A saintly person, they, everyone expects some blessings. So there was a king's son. So he blessed him, rāja-putra rāja-putra ciraṁ jīva. "My dear king's son, you live forever." And there was another's son, he was muni's son, saintly person's son, and he blessed him, muni-putra muni-putra mā jīva. "You muni-putra, son of a saintly person, you don't live. You die." Rāja-putra rāja-putra ciraṁ jīva. "The king's son, you live forever," and muni-putra, ma jīva, "You don't live." Muni-putra muni-putra mā jīva. And there was a hunter also, and there was a saintly person also. The saintly person he blessed, mā jīva, jīva vā māra vā. "Either you die or live, it is all the same." And there was a hunter.

He blessed him, mā jīva mā māra, "Don't die don't live." This is very instructive. "You don't die, you don't live." One was blessed that "You don't die," the rāja-putra, "Don't die." And the muni-putra, he was blessed, "You die." And the saintly person was blessed, "Either you die or you live." And the hunter was blessed, "You don't live, don't die." So this was a puzzle. So the king, he invited his ministers, that "What is the meaning of this?" The ministers were very intelligent, so he explained that "Your son has been blessed"ciraṁ jīva " Because your son is so licentious that as soon as he dies he is going to hell. So therefore he has blessed 'You better live forever; otherwise you are going to hell. (laughter) Your life is so sinful that next life is hellish. So better you live forever.' " Then, the next, muni-putra. Muni-putra means... Just like our disciples. They have to undergo austerities: no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no intoxication, so many no's.

But similarly, muni-putra, he is also execute all these functions, and there is no comfortable life. A muni-putra lives in a cottage. There is no good bedstead, and eating simple fruits and flowers. So from materialistic point of view, this is a miserable condition of life. So he was blessed that "You have sufficiently undergone austerities. Now your next life is in Vaikuṇṭha. So better you die and go to Vaikuṇṭha. Why you should suffer any more?" So therefore he was blessed that muni-putra muni-putra mā jīva. And the saintly person, he was blessed by the words jīva vā māra vā. "Either you die or live, the same thing." Because, a saintly person is engaged in the service of the Lord so his life is so blissful. So either he lives or when he dies, he goes back to home, back to Godhead. He'll do the same business. So there is no difference. Just like you are engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. You are getting the same service, eternally. This is a progressional period only.

Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaun... [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says, anyone who can understand Kṛṣṇa as He is, then after leaving this body he comes to home, back to home, back to Godhead. Mām eva. So saintly persons, their life is so pure that in this living condition, they are in Vaikuṇṭha, and after leaving this body, they are going to Vaikuṇṭha. So jīva vā māra vā. Both ways they are benefited. And the hunter was said, mā jīva mā māra, "You don't live, don't die." What is that? "Now you are hunter, butcher. So nasty life you are living. It was better death. Better for you to death, die. But if you die, then you go to hell. Therefore don't die, don't live." So... (aside:) Don't close your eyes. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja's... This was blessing. Parīkṣit Mahārāja... Don't think that Parīkṣit Mahārāja lost everything. Because he has understood Kṛṣṇa, so according to the statement of Bhagavad-gītā, it is fact that he is going back to home, back to Godhead.

Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja... What is the value of this kingdom, of the wealth of this material world? They are temporary. Even if you have got very good kingdom, very nice wife, very nice society, very... How long? And if there is any mistake, next life you can get something else. But so Parīkṣit Mahārāja's life... Because he's born devotee. From the childhood, he's a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Now, when he was cursed, it was blessings for him and for all others because he was cursed, there was necessity of the recitation of this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And after hearing this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣit. Parīkṣit Mahārāja simply by hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he got salvation. So this superficial awkward position that he lost his life, lost his kingdom, he had to leave his wife and children and everything, don't take in that "By Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he became bereft of all assets. No. He was going to be rewarded very highly, going back to home, back to Godhead.

So another instruction is, in this connection, that one should be ready. If one is serious to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then one should be ready to give up all sorts of material enjoyment. That is the fact. If you become Kṛṣṇa conscious for your material improvement... You can get it. Kṛṣṇa is all powerful. But that is not the desirable thing. To become Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to make our materialistic way of life nil. That is the... That is the purpose. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. If you want from Kṛṣṇa that "Give me material happiness..." As you have studied,

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.10]



Either you are materially desirous, anxious to get so many things, karmī... Akāma means devotee. Sarva-kāma means karmī. Karmīs, they are simply wanting, "Give me this, give me that, give me this, give me that." So many things. There is no end of their demands. That is called karmī. And jñānīs means they also want...



They want salvation, to merge into the impersonal Brahman effulgence of the Lord. And yogis, they also want some mystic power. So karmī, jñānī, yogi-everyone wants something, but a devotee does not want anything. That is devotion. They know, "What shall I do with all these things?" They have no attraction for anything material. These are all material. Some, a better position, and in some lower position. That's all. Karmīs are entangled in this materialistic way of life, and the jñānīs, they are also some or less entangled. Because they have no idea what is God, they think God is impersonal. God is impersonal means there is no God. So if they have no idea of God, how to go back to kingdom of God? So they are also materialistic. Negation of material, negation. Because they are very much frustrated. Just like in your country, the hippies. The hippies means negation of a positive materialistic life. That's all. Negation. They are simply denying that "I, we don't want the way of life as our father and grandfathers are going on."

That's a negation, but there is no positive gain. So negation is no good. You must have some positive gain. So our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is negation of the materialistic way of life and regain the blissful eternal life of spiritual understanding. So simply negation is no gain. With something, if you are disgusted, "I don't want it," but... Just like sometimes a man commits suicide, "I don't want this life." So what is the gain? And that is ignorance. He does not know that committing suicide... He's eternal. He's eternal. Living entity is eternal. He thinks that "By killing this body, I am free from this bodily miserable condition of life." No. He's immediately..., either he has to accept a next abominable body or he'll have to become a ghost. One who commits suicide. Ghost means no material gross life, but the mental, material subtle life is there. A ghost is carried by the subtle body: mind, intelligence and false ego. And one who gets a body, gross body...

Upon this mind, intelligence and ego, one develops a gross body of five elements: earth, water, air, fire. This is the two kinds of body, a condition. And when he's actually Kṛṣṇa conscious, he's transcendental to this gross and subtle body. He attains a spiritual body which is never to be finished, eternal, blissful life. So sometimes, when Kṛṣṇa, He's especially kind to a person who thinks that "By... I shall execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness; at the same time, I shall enjoy this material life," this is foolishness. This is foolishness. If you want Kṛṣṇa, go to home, back to home, back to Godhead, then you have to finish your material desires. Because Kṛṣṇa is so kind that even if you have a pinch of material desire to enjoy in this material world, He will give you a chance, "All right, you do it." That means we become entangled. Therefore, those who are executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they should try to become free from all material desires. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11].

Jñāna means knowledge. Or the jñānīs, they also want to be become one with the Supreme. And karma. Karma means karmīs, those who want to enjoy. So one should be uncovered, to covered by this jñāna, by karma or by any material desires. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam, ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Simply favorably serving Kṛṣṇa. Favorably, not unfavorably. Consciousness favorably. Just like Kaṁsa. Kaṁsa was also Kṛṣṇa conscious, but he was simply planning how to kill Kṛṣṇa. That kind of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not good. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is so kind, so any way one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, he gets the benefit, at least, of liberation. Just like Kaṁsa was liberated. Although he was unfavorably Kṛṣṇa conscious, but he was thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Hiraṇyakaśipu, he was also thinking of Kṛṣṇa. But unfavorably. So that is not bhakti. We must think of Kṛṣṇa favorably. And that is bhakti. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. Culture of Kṛṣṇa consciousness favorably.

Bhaktir uttamā, that is pure bhakti. So a person who is thinking of Kṛṣṇa haphazardly, namely that "By executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I'll be materially happy," He can be materially happy because... As Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ [SB 2.3.10]. His desire will be fulfilled. Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. He went to worship Kṛṣṇa in the forest with material desires, that "I may get the kingdom of my father or better kingdom." That was his determination. So he got it. But when he got it... By executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he was intelligent. He was very sorry that "What I have asked? This material happiness I have asked..." So when he actually saw Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, he was offered, "Now you take benediction as you desire." He was very sorry. He said, "My Lord, I have no other desire now. I have finished all my desires." Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]. "I don't want any this, any kind of benediction. I have got You. I have no more necessity of any benediction."

But Kṛṣṇa is so kind, He gave him both, that "Dhruva, you desired for some material prosperity, a kingdom. So I have created one kingdom, Dhruvaloka, for you, which is so many times bigger than your father's kingdom. So you will... So that is especially for you. That is Vaikuṇṭha. You will go there. But you wanted your father's kingdom. So you take your father's kingdom also." So he enjoyed his father's kingdom for 35,000 years. In those days, a man used to live for 100,000's of years. Satya-yuga. So Kṛṣṇa is so kind that whatever desires you have got within, He'll give you all facilities. Akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ [SB 2.3.10]. But intelligent persons, they will not ask anything from Kṛṣṇa. Just like a dependent child, he's fully dependent on the father. So father knows how to raise him to be a perfect man. He knows what is his necessities. Similarly, we have to give up to the care of Kṛṣṇa, without any condition. That is perfection of life. That is perfection of life.

So sometimes Kṛṣṇa favors a devotee when He is in doubts, "Whether this or that? This or that?" So sometimes He takes away the sources of his material opulence and gives him shelter under His own lotus feet. So you can read the word meaning?

Pradyumna: (reads synonyms) Translation: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit, as a result of wholehearted attraction for Lord Kṛṣṇa, was able to give up all deep-rooted affection for his personal body, wife, children, palace, animals, horses, and elephants, treasury house, friends and relatives, and his undisputed kingdom."



Prabhupāda: So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Upadhārya matiṁ kṛṣṇe. So it is a great sacrifice. It is not like that, dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa. No. It is above. People are generally become religious to get some material benefit. Dharma artha. And as soon as he gets material benefit, he enjoys his senses, kāma. Dharma artha kāma. And when he fails to satisfy his senses, then he wants to become one with the supreme. That's mokṣa. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is above these four principles, dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is transcendental. Therefore one can give up, immediately. Just like sometimes Bharata Mahārāja, under whose name India is called Bhārata-varṣa. He also gave up. He gave up is kingdom at the age of twenty-four years. Young wife, young, nice children, big, whole empire. And it is said that he gave up everything just like one gives up his stool, evacuates. Immediately goes away. So he gave up. So this is actually Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that we become completely free from any material possession, any material possession.



It is very difficult. But just see, here Parīkṣit Mahārāja, due to his association with his spiritual master, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he understood... He, according to his instruction, he gave his mind and everything to Kṛṣṇa and he gave up the idea of enjoying his wife, children, palace, kingdom, or animals, and so many things. So it is little difficult also. But by Kṛṣṇa's grace, if we continue regularly these Kṛṣṇa consciousness rules and regulations, then automatically we shall be disinterested. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. These are not to be artificially attained. You cannot give up your wife, children, kingdom, artificially. Artificially, if you give up, then you will again fall down. Artificially, I give up my wife, and then I seek another's wife. This is nonsense. This is nonsense. This is falldown. When you are actually mature, then you give up. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was mature. From the very childhood, he was Kṛṣṇa conscious. So when he was cursed by a brāhmaṇa, he took it as an opportunity, "Now give up everything. Let me go back to home, back to Godhead." This is the philosophy. Thank you. (end)



720626SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.4.2

-

Los Angeles, June 26, 197



Prabhupāda: This, you can recite this, verse number two?



Pradyumna: Two. (leads chanting)



ātma-jāyā-sutāgāra-

paśu-draviṇa-bandhuṣu

rājye cāvikale nityaṁ

virūḍhāṁ mamatāṁ jahau

[SB 2.4.2]



Prabhupāda: That's all right. So, virūḍhāṁ mamatām. Virūḍhām. Just like you have seen some big trees, standing for so many, many years. The root is firmly captured. You have seen, experienced. The business is to stand up for 10,000 years, but the root is capturing the earth like anything, strong. This is called virūḍhām, attraction. Suppose when you have got sense, improved consciousness, human being, if one asks you to stand up here for one hour, it will be so troublesome. And even if you are forced to stand up for one hour, you'll feel so much uncomfortable. But this tree, because it has not developed consciousness, it is standing up for 10,000's of years, and in open atmosphere, tolerating all kinds of excessive heat, rain, snowfall. But still, it is capturing. This is the difference between developed consciousness and undeveloped consciousness. A tree has also consciousness. Modern science, they have proved, they have got consciousness. Very much covered, almost dead.



But it is not dead. There is consciousness. So the more you develop your consciousness, the more you become a freedom lover. Just like in the human society, there is fight for freedom. But in the animal society, they do not know what is freedom. Ours also, the so-called freedom. But still, we have got some consciousness that we fight for freedom. And they fight for eating. That's all. So here, Parīkṣit Mahārāja... This emancipation... Kṛṣṇa consciousness means emancipation from this material attachment. So he became so much advanced... Because from his childhood, from his birth, from the womb of his mother, he was Kṛṣṇa conscious. So as soon as he understood that "Kṛṣṇa is my goal," immediately, virūḍhāṁ mamatāṁ jahau, immediately gave up. Jahau means "gave up." What kind of things he is giving up? The empire. Formerly the emperor in Hastināpura, they were ruling over the earth, the whole world, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, at least, 5,000 years ago when Parīkṣit Mahārāja was the king.

He was emperor of the whole world. So he's giving up that. Not that a teeny village or something. No. And that empire also, without any disturbance. He was so powerful that nobody could go against him. Rājye ca avikale. Avikale. Vikala means "broken" or "disturbed." But his kingdom was never broken or disturbed. Now the whole world is broken and disturbed, at the present moment. They have got so many countries, independent countries. That means the world is broken into pieces. Formerly there was no such piecework. One world, one king. One God, Kṛṣṇa. One scripture, Vedas. One civilization, varṇāśrama-dharma. Not very far away. They are giving history of... They are studying the earth layer, but while they were studying earth layer from millions years, and millions of years there was perfect civilization. Perfect civilization, God conscious. Happy civilization. Now they are broken, disturbed. It was not the case formerly.

So this virūḍhāṁ mamatām. Mamatā means "It is mine." That is called mamatā. Mamatā. Mama means "mine." The consciousness of "mine" and "I," this is called mamatā. "I am this body, and in relationship with this body, everything is mine. My wife, my children, my home, my bank balance, my society, my community, my nation, my country, my." This is called mamatā. So how this mamatā, or the consciousness of "my," grows? There is a machine, manipulated by māyā, illusory energy. The beginning. What is that? Attraction. A man is attracted by woman, and the woman is attracted by man. This is the basic principle. Here, in this material world, there is no attraction for God, but there is attraction. That attraction is, on the whole, sex attraction. That's all. The whole world, not only human society, animal society, bird society, beast society, any society, any living being, the attraction is sex. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. The attraction here, the center of attraction, is sex. So, boys and girls or any, in younger age there is that sex impulse increase and want mating.

A female wants male, a male wants female. This is the attraction. This is the basic principle of binding the conditioned soul in this miserable life of repeated birth and death. This attraction. Therefore Vedic civilization is based on how to get out of this attraction. The varṇāśrama-dharma... There is attraction, you cannot avoid it. To best, to make the best use of a bad bargain. Therefore, from the very beginning, a child is trained how to become brahmacārī. Brahmacārī. No sex life. Up to twenty-five years. Throughout the whole life, but at least for twenty-five years. That is called brahmacārī-āśrama. But if one is still persistent for sex life after being trained for twenty-five years, he is allowed to marry. That is called gṛhastha-āśrama. And because he has been trained up to be detached from sex life, so, for some time he enjoys, then he gives it up. Just like Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Jahau. Virūḍhāṁ mamatāṁ jahau. There was training; therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja could give up.

It is not so easy to give up attraction for kingdom, wife, children, and motorcar, and paśu, and animals, and so many... He was king, emperor. How much possessions he had! So it is not very easy to give up the attraction for these possessions. Therefore it is called virūḍhām, virūḍhāṁ mamatām. The attraction is so deep-rooted. The example is this, a tree standing. It does not want to give it up, capture. So the attraction begins from this sex attraction. Puṁsaḥ mithunī-bhāvam, puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ [SB 5.5.8]. In the beginning there is attraction. A man wants woman, woman wants man. But as soon as they're united, that attraction becomes deep-rooted. First of all desire. At that time, the attraction is not deep-rooted, but as soon as they are united, either legally or illegally, that attraction becomes deep-rooted, virūḍhām. Puṁsaḥ mithunī-bhāvam, puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ tayor mithaḥ, as soon as they unite, hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ, is, they, now that attraction becomes a hard knot into the heart.

Always thinking of "Oh, he's my lover," "She is my lover," like that. That attraction. So then, after they're united... Just like one married couple. As soon as they're married or united, ataḥ gṛha. Gṛha. Gṛha means apartment, home. They must live very nicely. Then kṣetra. Kṣetra means field. Formerly there was no industry. The earning, means of livelihood, was agriculture. Everyone must have some land to produce grains, fruits. That's all. Milk. First of all, apartment; then, to maintain the expenditure, now we have invented industry or trade and so many things. Pickpocketing, killing. So many things. Formerly the means of livelihood was very simple. Take some land and work little, produce your grains, and the cows are there. You take milk. So milk, vegetables, grains, your economic question is solved. So first of all, gṛha, home, then kṣetra. Kṣetra means "field." I must produce my food. Ato gṛha-kṣetra, then child. Because married life without any issue, that is not very happy.

Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has said, putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam: "Family life without a child is zero." It is zero. There are... He has calculated some zeros. First zero is: avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyam: "One who is not educated, his life is zero." Avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyaṁ diśaḥ śūnyā abāndhavāḥ. You are going to some touring, visiting, but if where you are going, if there is no temple or friend, then your touring will be zero. Therefore Indian system is when they are tourist, they go to different pilgrimages, or some friends' house. Avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyaṁ diśaḥ śūnyā abāndhavāḥ putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam. And you have married, but if there is no issue, then it is zero. Putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam. Sarva-śūnyā daridratā. And if you have no money, then everything is zero. Even in spite of having a home or child or education... There are so many educated. If they have no employment, their life is zero. So, ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ. As soon as we are united, male and female, then these things are required: nice home or apartment, some field for producing food, then some friends, suta, then children. Children, friends... Then money also. Without money... because without money, everything will be zero. In this way, just like a tree gradually expands his root, so our attraction, that male-female attraction, becomes deeply rooted by these things. Gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam. This is illusion. This is illusion. Janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This mamatā. "This is 'I,' this is mine." And one day, the Mr. Death will come, he'll break everything, smash everything. We forget that. But we want to remain here with this sense of "I" and "mine," but Bhagavad-gītā says, Kṛṣṇa says, that "These rascals who are not God conscious and creating ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], very, very big scheme to become happy, the whole happiness is dismantled by Me as death." Kṛṣṇa ultimately comes as death. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He was planning so many things, but Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared as death and smashed everything, everything.

Therefore, when Prahlāda Mahārāja was offered material benediction, so he said, "My dear Lord, what You are offering me? I have already seen all these things. My father was so powerful that even demigods would be threatened by his red eyes, and he expanded his influence all over the universe. But You have finished it within a second. So why shall I ask for such benedictions? If You want to give me some benediction, please engage me in some service of Your servant. That is real benediction." Caitanya Mahāprabhu also recommended: gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. To become a servant of servant of servant of servant of Kṛṣṇa. This is paramparā system. In that way one can give up the deep attachment for all these, our creation, our developing attachments, gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ. At any moment, all these production of attachments can be dismantled, and it is being done so. But they have no knowledge. They have no knowledge. They are thinking that they will be able to enjoy this expansion of attachment, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. No. You cannot enjoy. Even if you enjoy, it is for a few years only.

But your existence is not for few years. You are eternal. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. You'll not die after your destruction of this body. Death means sleeping for 7 months. That's all. Then again you get another body. As soon as I give up this body, I enter in the womb of another mother to get another body. The mother creates the body, and as soon as the body's fit, it comes out. So the period when I give up this body, enter into the womb of mother and manufacture another body and come out, it takes about seven months. So during that seven months, we do not know what is happening. That is death. Death means that. Otherwise, there is no death. The spirit soul is eternal. So we do not know what is our eternal need. We do not know. There is no such education, neither these rascals know that they're eternal. They think that "By chance, we have got this body, some way or other, and as soon as the body's finished, everything's finished. So long this body is there, the senses are there, let us enjoy sense enjoyment."

This is the civilization. Because there will be no more sense. They give importance to the senses, that this is an opportunity of sense gratification. But they do not inquire wherefrom this sense came, and it is so important, and we are taking, giving so many importance to the sense enjoyment program. That they do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Neither do they know what is living entity, what are the senses, what is the goal of life. Durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ. They are simply making plans for driving car and flyways and so on. Plan is going on, one after another, one after another. But the problems are increasing. Therefore, Parīkṣit Mahārāja's example is very nice. As soon as he understood from his spiritual master that "Kṛṣṇa is the goal of life" and he became Kṛṣṇa conscious, he immediately, oh, the mamatāṁ jahau, virūḍhāṁ mamatāṁ jahau. This is required. Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "To become liberated means to become free from dehātma-buddhi, the illusory attachment for personal bodily coverings and everything connected with the body, namely wife, children, and all other entanglements. One selects a wife for bodily comforts, and the result is children. For wife and children one requires a dwelling place, and as such a residential house is also necessary. Animals like horses, elephants, cows, and dogs are all household animals, and a householder has to keep them as household paraphernalia. In modern civilization the horses and elephants have been replaced by cars and conveyances with considerable horsepower. To maintain all the household affairs, one has to increase the bank balance and be careful about the treasury house, and in order to display the opulence of material assets, one has to keep good relations with friends and relatives, as well as become very careful about maintaining the status quo. This is called material civilization of material attachment.



Devotion for Lord Kṛṣṇa means negation of all material attachments as detailed above. By the grace of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Mahārāja Parīkṣit was awarded all material amenities and an undisputed kingdom in which to enjoy the undisturbed position of king, but by the grace of the Lord he was able to give up all connections with material attachment. That is the position of a pure devotee. Mahārāja Parīkṣit, due to his natural affection for Lord Kṛṣṇa as a devotee of the Lord, was always executing his royal duties on behalf of the Lord, and as a responsible king of the world he was always careful to see that the influence of Kali would not enter his kingdom. A devotee of the Lord never thinks of his household paraphernalia as his own, but surrenders everything for the service of the Lord. Thereby living entities under a devotee's care get the opportunity for God realization by the management of a devotee-master. Attachment for household paraphernalia and for Lord Kṛṣṇa go poorly together.

One attachment is the path of darkness, and the other attachment is the path of light. Where there is light, there is no darkness, and where there is darkness, there is no light. But an expert devotee can turn everything to the path of light by an attitude of service to the Lord, and the best example here is the Pāṇḍavas. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and householders like him can turn everything to light by dovetailing so-called material assets in the service of the Lord, but one who is not trained or is unable to turn everything to the service of the Lord (nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe) must give up all material connections before he can be fit to hear and chant the glories of the Lord. Or in other words, one who has seriously heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for even one day, like Mahārāja Parīkṣit, from a fit personality like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, may be able to lose all affinity for material things. There is no utility simply in imitating Mahārāja Parīkṣit and hearing Bhāgavatam from professional men, even for seven hundred years.

To take Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as a means of maintaining family expenditure is the grossest type of nāmāparādha offense at the feet of the Lord (sarva-śubha-kriyā-sāmyam api pramādaḥ)."

Prabhupāda: So Parīkṣit Mahārāja could give up the attachment within a few days. Not abruptly, but he was prepared. His training was there. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe. That is our philosophy, Rūpa Gosvāmī's definition.



anāsaktasya viṣayān

yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe

yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate



Anāsaktasya viṣayān. Viṣaya means necessities of the body: eating, sleeping, mating, and defense. So one should understand that "I am this body. I am not this body, but because I am now encaged within this body, so I must maintain the body also, without being attached." Just like you have got a nice car. You require it for movement. But you should, you know very well that "I am not this car. I am taking service from the car. The car should be maintained to give me regular service, not that I shall identify with this car." Similarly, this body is just like car, mechanical car. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni yantrārūḍhāni māyayā [Bg. 18.61].



Māyā has given us this car for satisfying our desires. Sometimes it is called field. Kṣetra. We want to work on this, just like agriculturist work on his field and produce some results. Similarly, we are working on this field, we are moving by this car, but I am not this field, I am not this car. If one has understood this philosophy that "I am not this body..." But "I am not this body," that does not mean I shall neglect it. I must maintain it because ... The same example: if I want to move nicely, my car must be maintained very nicely. So our business should be not to be attached by the car or the body, but to maintain it for our work, and our real business is to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is our... Just like we move by the car to go some business. So car is not my business. I have got a different business.

Similarly, our real business is this human form of life, how to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is our real business. And to execute that real business, we take help of this car. That's all. Maintain it nicely. Cleanse it, give gasoline and Mobil oil, and tire tube. That is required because you have to move. So don't, we don't say that "It is mithyā, it is false." That is Māyāvādī's ver... Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. "This material world is false." We don't say false. We don't say false, because we have to take work from it. Why shall I say false? When I take some work from the typewriter or some other machine, why shall I say it is false? It is real. So our philosophy is, we don't neglect this material world as false. That is pseudo, pseudo renunciation. You cannot give up. Why should you call it false? Sometimes ... Just like some materialists, they criticize that "You are using material things. Why do you say false?" So that criticism is applicable to the Māyāvādī philosophy, who says jagan mithyā, "This whole material world is false." Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. We don't say false. We say, "It is temporary. It is temporary, and I have to take some benefit out of it."

Because I am in this material world. How can I say it is false? I must eat. How can I say eating false? That is not our business. But we must eat something which will help me in my real philosophy. But we must eat something which will help me in my real business. My real business is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore I must eat kṛṣṇa-prasādam. That will maintain my body and help my business. This is our philosophy. Thank you very much. (end)



720627SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.4.3-4

-

Los Angeles, June 27, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



papraccha cemam evārthaṁ

yan māṁ pṛcchatha sattamāḥ

kṛṣṇānubhāva-śravaṇe

śraddadhāno mahā-manāḥ



saṁsthāṁ vijñāya sannyasya

karma trai-vargikaṁ ca yat

vāsudeve bhagavati

ātma-bhāvaṁ dṛḍhaṁ gataḥ

[SB 2.4.3-4]



Translation: "O great sages, the great soul Mahārāja Parīkṣit, constantly rapt in the thought of Lord Kṛṣṇa, knowing well of his imminent death, renounced all sorts of fruitive activities, namely acts of religion, economic development, and sense gratification, and thus fixed himself firmly in his natural love for Kṛṣṇa and asked exactly all these questions, as you are asking me."



Prabhupāda: So, kṛṣṇānubhāva-śravaṇe śraddadhāno mahā-manāḥ. Vāsudeve bhagavati ātma-bhāvaṁ dṛḍhaṁ gataḥ. Kṛṣṇānubhāva-śravaṇe. When we hear from right source, the natural result will be Kṛṣṇa consciousness, kṛṣṇānubhāva, kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta. Śraddadhāno mahā-manāḥ. One who hears with attention, with faith, mahā-manāḥ. Just like the great sages in Naimiṣāraṇya, they did. Real purpose is vāsudeve bhagavati ātma-bhāvaṁ dṛḍhaṁ gataḥ, to increase our affection or love for Kṛṣṇa. Vāsudeve bhagavati. Vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ, janayaty āśu vairāgyam [SB 1.2.7]. Purpose, sannyasya, renounced... People cannot renounce. They are very much attached to this material body and anything in relationship with this body. But the real purpose of human life is to become renounced, no more material body. That is required. Vairāgyam. This is called vairāgyam, or renounced. Because we want this material body, therefore we get it, life after life. This will continue so long we'll be overpowered by material thought.



Material thought means these fruitive activities. "I shall work very hard, and I shall get so much wealth, and for this purpose I can go to church and temple. If God gives me millions of dollars, then I am ready to go there." So real purpose is sense gratification. "If I take to religious principles, then I'll get more money without any hard work, and if I get more money, then I'll be able to satisfy my senses." This is called dharmārtha-kāma. And there is another stage, which is called mokṣa, liberation. So people are not interested for liberation. They want to become religious for material benefits. But that is not the real purpose of life. Material benefit, you cannot get more than what you are destined to have; that is already fixed up. According to your body... You get the body. We get different types of body, and according to the body, our material sufferings and enjoyment are fixed up, already. You cannot have more or less. Otherwise... you'll see, one man is working so hard, day and night, and he could hardly maintain himself or his family. And another man, he's going to the market, sits down for one hour, and earns 100,000 dollars, immediately. You can see. Simply by touching the phone, he simply asks, "What is the rate of this? What is the rate of that?" and he makes one transaction, and immediately he gets one thousand dollars. And this man is working hard, day and night, he could not get even two sufficient meals.

So that means the, according to the body, the material happiness and... Just like you are. You have got this American body. So automatically your country's facilities... You are more comfortable than other countries because you have no scarcity, enough production. Everything is enough. So according to the body, you are getting comforts of life. And in another country, deserted country, very hard living, cannot get nice foodstuffs, only living on animals. That is also very rarely. So these are different. Just like in Greenland. It is filled up with ice. They cannot get any nice food. Still they live there. This is māyā. They will not think, "Oh, here the life is very difficult. Let me go away from here. Let me go to some other, better place." No. He'll not go. Janani janma-bhūmiś ca svargād api garīyasī. Our birthplace, even it is hell, it is better than heaven. That is māyā. Just like hog. Hog is living most abominable condition of life, with stools and filthy water, but still, he is thinking he's living in heaven. Janani janma-bhūmiś ca svargād api garīyasī. So therefore, the conclusion is that so far material comforts are concerned, you cannot get more. Or less. You will get. It is already fixed up. Deha-yogena dehinām. Sukham aindriyakaṁ daityā deha-yogena dehinām, sarvatra labhyate... eh? Yathā duḥkham ayatnataḥ. Prahlāda Mahārāja says. Sarvatra labhyate. So far material comfort is concerned, what you are destined to get, you'll get it, in wherever you may live. It doesn't matter. Your allotment is already there. That is your body.

And our sense pleasure means this material bodily pleasure. That is all. Sukham aindriyakam. We have got these senses: hands, legs, eyes, ears, and five working senses, and knowledge-gathering senses. They are all constitute the whole body. So bodily comfort means this sense gratification. Dharma, artha, kāma. But here it is said trai-vargikam. Saṁsthāṁ vijñāya sannyasya karma trai-vargikaṁ ca yat. When you are ready for death, there is no more this trai-vargikam. Trai-vargikam means religion and economic development and sense gratification. This is human civilization. This is not human civilization, in one sense, because there is question of dharma. Dharma means religion. Religion... not exactly in the same way as we understand in English language: "a kind of faith." Dharma. Generally, people understand that "I have got my own dharma." "I am Hindu; I am Christian; I am Muslim; I am this; I am that." But in Sanskrit language, dharma does not mean like that, "a kind of faith." No. Faith is blind. Today you are Hindu, tomorrow you are Christian, today you are Christian. So this faith-changing is not dharma. Dharma means "which you cannot change." That is dharma. Not that whimsically I change. That dharma is service. Every one of us rendering some service to others. That is dharma. Every one of us. Jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya dāsa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu gives us immediate information what is a living entity. He immediately gives the definition that a living entity means who is rendering service to the Lord. So we are rendering service. Somebody's rendering service to the countries, society, family, and at least, to dog, to cat. That is our general inclination, because we want to give service to the Supreme. But because we have forgotten the Supreme, our service attitude is now distributed in so many ways. But I am serving. That's a fact. Either you serve dog or either you serve God; the service is there. That you cannot avoid.

You cannot say, nobody can say that "I am not serving anyone." Even becoming God, so-called God... As there are so many rascals, say, they say that "We are God" or "I am God, everyone God." God is never servant. God is enjoyer; God is master. God does not serve anyone. Just like you see, we have God here, Kṛṣṇa. He's not serving, He's enjoying. That is God. You'll always find God enjoying. God is not servant. Master. Kṛṣṇa says bhoktā. Bhoktā means enjoyer. Everyone should be engaged for His service, and He's the only enjoyer. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. The only enjoyer, only master, is Kṛṣṇa, and all others, they are servants. Now, there may be gradation of servant, just like in your country, President Nixon is also a servant. And ordinary constable, he is also a servant. Everyone is servant; nobody is master. So there is gradation of service. That's all. Somebody is serving as President, somebody is serving as constable, somebody is serving as dog, somebody is serving as cat. And similarly, somebody is loving reciprocally.

In this way, the whole situation is there. But the central point is, master is Kṛṣṇa, or God, and our love should be reposed unto Him. This is the point. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Śraddadhāno mahā-manāḥ. So one who has fixed up his goal of life in this way, that "I am rendering service. That's a fact. But I am not satisfied. Why? I am rendering so much service."... Just like in our country, Mahatma Gandhi rendered so much service to his country that at the end he was killed by his countrymen. Just see. This is the return. Your country also. President Kennedy, he was a nice president, but he was killed. So here in this material world, or māyā, if you render service to māyā, illusion, you'll never be satisfied. Neither the person to whom you are giving service, he'll be satisfied. There is no satisfaction, either to the so-called master or to the servant. Because Kṛṣṇa is missing. That's all. One should understand this.

This is the actually fact. Here the service is going on, but the master and the servant, both are not satisfied. But there is another platform, spiritual world, where service rendered, both the master and the servant become satisfied, immediately. Tasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭaḥ. The same example. Just like if (you) put your eatables into the stomach, so the stomach is satisfied and all the servants, the hands, legs, and others who acquire their foodstuff and put into the mouth, they are also satisfied, automatically. The hands, legs, fingers, eyes-every part of my body, immediately satisfied. Yathā prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇām. We are, at the present moment in the material existence, we are trying to be satisfied. That is also... The example is there. Just like a child is crying. You give him something eatable, he puts it in the mouth, and he's satisfied, no more crying. Similarly, actually if we want to be satisfied, then, as it is said here, saṁsthāṁ vijñāya sannyasya karma trai-vargikam, give up this, saṁsthām, saṁsthāṁ vijñāya ...

Saṁsthām means death. Death is sure. Death is the best surety as... "As sure as death." Nobody can say that "I can avoid death." That's a fact. So one who actually understands that "I'll have to die,"... People do not understand. Everyone thinks that he will not die. He'll not die. That is called māyā. He's seeing that everyone is dying; still, he's thinking that "I shall not die" or "I shall live for millions of years. There is no question of death." But it is a fact. You may be advanced in science, but he, this death is sure. That's a fact. Therefore it is advised here that saṁsthāṁ vijñāya, one who is actually intelligent, he should know that he will die. But the karmīs, the rascals, he knows also that he will die-at least, theoretically accept-but he wants to enjoy, since the death does not come, to the fullest extent. That is the present condition of the society. He knows that will he die. "So, so long my senses are there, let me gratify." Now, yesterday, when I went to the bank, there was a cinema signboard, what is that?

Karandhara: "Is there sex after death?"



Prabhupāda: Yes. (laughter) You see? Because this material life means sex. So, they are seeking sex after death, also. (Laughter) This is, I mean to say, plain acceptance of the materialistic... He'll, "Is there sex after death?" they're inquiring. If there is sex after death, then they are not fearful of death. (laughter) There is a story that one man was drinking. So, drinking in India is a great sin. So his friend advised that "You are drinking. You'll go to hell." So he said, "Oh, my father also drinks." So he said, "Your father also will go to hell." "Oh, my brother also drinks." "Oh, he also will go to hell." In this way, he continued to say, "My father, my brother, my sister, my this, my that..." So... And he was replying, "Yes, he will also go to hell." "Oh, hell is heaven. Because we're all drinking here and drinking there. So what is the hell? That is heaven." Similarly, this is, this signboard is like that. "If sex is there after death then that is not death. That is life." (laughter) You see? So actually, you have got sex after death. Because you'll get into another body. Now you are having sex as human being in very nice apartment or on the street, on the beach, as you like. In the next life also, as cats and dogs, you will have sex life. The sex life is not denied, because the life is there. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. This maithuna, maithuna means sex life. Eating, sleeping, and sex life, and defending. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhir narāṇām. So this is now inquiry. Now, if this inquiry is taken scientifically, "Is there sex after death?" it is not joking, if it is taken seriously, so people should be informed that "Yes, there is sex after death. Why there is no sex? Because there is life after death. You get another body. Maybe a god's body, demigod's body, or dog's body, you'll get another body, according to your own work. And as soon as you get body, these four things are there: eating, sleeping, sex, and defending."



So there is, actually. So the higher inquiry should be that "Then what is the position of this sex life?" The position of this sex life is eternal. The sex life is from Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Cin-mithuna, cin-mithuna, spiritual. But there the sex life is not like this abominable sex life. There is sex impulse in the original. Otherwise how we have got this sex impulse? In the Vedānta-sūtra it is said, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. "Supreme Brahman, Absolute Truth, is there, is that from whom everything comes." So if there is sex life there in the Absolute Truth ... There must be sex life. Otherwise where you have got it? Wherefrom we get it? Everything is there, but the difference is that here, everything is contaminated, abominable, and there, everything is without inebrieties; it is happy, healthy, and eternal blissful. That is the difference. The things are there.

Just like Kṛṣṇa's mother. Motherly affection of mother Yaśodā upon Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa is playing as child, pleasing mother Yaśodā. So that thing is also in this material world. Here also, the mother likes to raise his beloved child, the child also plays to give pleasure to the mother. The rasa... Rasa means the humor or mellow. Exchange between the mother and child is there and here also. Similarly friendship, similarly conjugal love. Everything, all the five rasas, mellows, are there. The impersonalists cannot understand. They're afraid of... As soon as they hear "love," "Oh, love? Here is love, frustrated. Then it is māyā. Then Kṛṣṇa's love is also māyā." Therefore they are called Māyāvādī. They are carrying this material idea to the spiritual idea. And when they cannot accommodate, they make it zero or impersonal. Śūnyavādi. That is their position. They cannot understand that these very things are existing in the spiritual world in a blissful way. So there is sex, but there is blissful sex. Not that... Here, we want to enjoy sex life, but at the same time want to get out of the result of sex life; therefore we use contraceptive tablets.

Because result of sex life is very, I mean to say, miserable. So we want to avoid the miserable condition of sex life, but there is another life, where there is no miserable condition of sex life. That is spiritual life. But the ordinary poor fund of knowledge, they cannot understand it. They think that "Here, the sex life is miserable, conditional sex life. So if in the spiritual world there is also sex life, then it is also miserable." So this conception of sex impulse, just like Rādhā Kṛṣṇa and gopīs' dealing with Kṛṣṇa, they think it is māyā. Therefore they are called Māyāvādīs. They have no knowledge. Their brain cannot accommodate this idea that all these activities can be very blissful, supreme. Without any difficulty, without any miserable condition. They cannot understand it. But ... Therefore it requires higher intelligence to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is trying to give the people the happiness to which is simply blissful, without any inebrieties.

That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So here, vāsudeve bhagavati ātma-bhāvaṁ dṛḍhaṁ gataḥ. Vāsudeve bhagavati. Vāsudeva, the son of Vasudeva, Kṛṣṇa, bhagavati, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here... Just like if I give one's father's name, then you know the man particularly. So here, bhagavati. There are many expansions of God. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. But He is particularly mentioned here: vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's name is Vāsudeva. Vāsudeve bhagavati ātma-bhāvaṁ dṛḍhaṁ gataḥ. We are trying to enjoy life by making friends, ātma-bhāvam. Ātma-bhāvam means very intimate. Intimate, near relative, or beloved. So we have to change our consciousness. Instead of trying to make this material world as beloved, you have to make Kṛṣṇa as beloved. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The everything is there. You get everything in return, as here, you are trying to enjoy, but without any inebriety. That is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja attained this stage. Therefore he could give up all his kingdom, all his family, all his animals and everything, and he simply became Kṛṣṇa conscious. Read the purport?

Pradyumna: "The three activities of religion, economic development, and sense gratification ..."



Prabhupāda: Oh, there is no time. All right, have kīrtana. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 2.8: Lectures





750210SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.8.7

-

Los Angeles, February 10, 19



Prabhupāda: Where is karatāla? My karatāla is in that... Where is Nitāi?



Jayatīrtha: It was planned for you to lecture this evening, rather than this morning.



Prabhupāda: Management?



Devotee: He thought you were lecturing this evening.



Prabhupāda: Evening? Not in the morning?



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Where is Nitāi?



Prabhupāda: I was lecturing in the morning at...



Devotees: Jaya! Haribol!



Prabhupāda: If you like, I can speak in the evening also.



Devotees: (very loud) Jaya! Haribol!



(Prabhupāda sings Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava) [break]

Nitāi: (leads chanting) Yad adhātu-mato brahman... [break]



Prabhupāda: ...being completely aware of Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth, not a bogus. If you want to receive knowledge, then you must approach a guru who is brahma-niṣṭham. That is the qualification of guru. Brahman, brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam. These words are there. He is living in Brahman, Absolute Truth. He has no other business. That is guru.



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



Tattva-darśinaḥ, "who has seen the truth," not imagination. He cannot be guru. Who has actually seen, tattva-darśinaḥ... These are the injunction in the śāstras, and Parīkṣit Mahārāja is strictly following the same principles and asking Śukadeva Gosvāmī, bhavanto jānate yathā: "As you have learned from your predecessor." So that is perfect knowledge. The knowledge is coming from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is all-perfect, and Arjuna is hearing directly from Him, and the statement of Arjuna is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. He understands that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead; that is, he acquired knowledge from Kṛṣṇa.



So here the question is... This question is almost inquired by intelligent persons, that "We have come to this material world and suffering, but the living entity is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, or God. How he has come to this material world?" That is very intelligent question. Therefore it is said here, yadṛcchayā: "It is automatically, by nature's law," or hetunā, "or there is some cause? Whether there is any cause about the living entities coming down in this material world? Which one is correct?" So without any cause, there cannot be anything. That is logic. And the rascal philosopher's statement, "It happened automatically. There was a chunk, and the creation came...," this is rascal's philosophy. Jagad āhur anīśvaram [Bg. 16.8]. The rascals, they do not accept that there is a cause of this creation. That they do not understand. They do not know, and they theorize. You'll find mostly in the Western countries all these philosophers... The Darwin's theory... He cannot give any reasonable cause. Some theory: "It may be, perhaps, for millions of years there was no..." Speculate. And he admits that "Whatever I am presenting, it is all my speculation." We have seen his letter, some, from 150 years ago. He wrote a letter to a friend. He admitted that "Whatever I am presenting, that is speculation." But science is not speculation. Science cannot be speculation. That is not science. "Two plus two equal to four"-this is science. And if you speculate-"Two plus two equal to five" or "Two plus two equal to three"-that is not science.

So the science of Kṛṣṇa is not speculation. It is exactly science. Tad-vijñānam. Tad-vijñānam. Tad-vijñānārtham. Vijñāna means science, not speculation. So one should understand God scientifically. That is required, not imagination. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they say, "You can imagine your God." This is rascaldom. How you can imagine your God? God is God. God means the supreme controller, the Supreme Being. In the dictionary you'll find this word: "God means the Supreme Being." He is also a being like us, individual. Just like we are here face to face. You are one individual; I am one individual. We are talking or hearing. Similarly, God is also individual. Just like Kṛṣṇa said,

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



So He's individual person. He instructed the sun-god millions and millions of years ago. So Arjuna inquired, "How it is possible that millions of years ago...? Because You are my contemporary. You are of the same age." So Kṛṣṇa said that "Millions of millions of years ago, when I spoke this philosophy to the sun-god, you were also present because you are My intimate friend. Whenever I descend, you are also there. But the difference is that you have forgotten; I remember that I said like this."



So that is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and ordinary living being. Kṛṣṇa remembers everything, knows everything. Vedāhaṁ samatītāni: [Bg. 7.26] "I know everything." That is Kṛṣṇa. But we do not know. That is the difference. Kṛṣṇa is not impersonal. He's also a person, but He is not a person like us, like you, like me. His personality is supreme. Nobody is greater than Him. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate. These are the Vedic information. He's individual, but He has nothing to do. He's such individual. Just like Kṛṣṇa is here. The whole world is going on under Kṛṣṇa's direction, but He has nothing to do. He's enjoying with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. That is Kṛṣṇa's position. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). He has to create one universe or destroy one universe-He hasn't to take any attention. He's engaged in His pleasure-Kṛṣṇa, the reservoir of pleasure. His pleasure is never disturbed by all these activities. He's so perfect. Just like in our society, we are not perfect. Still, you boys and girls, you love me. Whatever I say, immediately done. So if an ordinary person like me, he can do things without his personal endeavor, how far..., how Kṛṣṇa is great, that na tat-samaḥ, there is nobody equal to Him. How great He is, how powerful He is, you can just imagine. If the ordinary person can have some power that he hasn't got to do anything personally-simply by his desire everything is done-so why not Kṛṣṇa also? Where is the difficulty?

In the Bible I think it is said, "God said, 'Let there be creation,' and there was creation." Is it not? So that is Kṛṣṇa. He simple desires, "Let there be creation," and immediately everything is ready. That is Kṛṣṇa. How it is being done? Automatically? No automatically. It is done regularly, as you do. Hetunā: there is cause. But the original cause is Kṛṣṇa's desire. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1].

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



The original desire is Kṛṣṇa's. What we are doing also, that is also... The original cause is Kṛṣṇa. We cannot do anything independently. If I go to heaven or go to hell, that is also sanctioned by Kṛṣṇa. Without Kṛṣṇa's desire I cannot do anything. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:



sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

[Bg. 15.15]



So this theory, that the world is going automatically or we have come into this material world without any reason, without any cause... Kim anyat kāma-haitukam. They say, the rascals say, that our coming to this material world is to the lusty desires of the father and mother. Therefore the child has no meaning. It is a by-product of the lusty desire. So if I don't want it, kill it. Destroy it. This is going on. But that is not the fact. The child has come into the womb of the mother, a particular type of mother-not the sa..., every mother is producing the same type of child. No. Why? There is cause. There is cause, hetunā. Without cause there cannot be anything. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1], the cause is his activities. According to the activities, he is producing the next body automatically. That is automatically. But there is cause, his activity.



That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu [Bg. 13.22]. Kāraṇam. Kāraṇam means cause. What is the cause? The cause is that as he's associating with a particular type of the modes of nature, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa... If he's associating with tamo-guṇa, then next life he's preparing in the lower animal kingdoms or most degraded family. Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ. If one is associating with tamo-guṇa, ignorance-no knowledge, in the darkness-then he is gliding down to the lower species of life: animal, birds, beast, trees, plants, aquatics, insects, serpents, so many. Adho gacchanti. Adhaḥ means going down. Tāmasāḥ. And ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Those who are in the goodness, those who are associating with the modes of material nature in goodness, just like satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42], brahminical qualification, truthful, controlling the mind, controlling the senses, simplicity, tolerant, full faith in scripture and God, full knowledge, practical application of knowledge... This is called sattva-guṇa. So if you cultivate sattva-guṇa, then you are elevated to the higher planetary system. Why there are so many planets? The moon planet, the sun planet, so brilliant planets-why there are? There are also different places for different kinds of living creature. There is hetu. There is cause. And similarly, rajo-guṇa, passionate...

So madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ. So there is hetu. Hetu means cause. Not without cause. Nobody has taken birth in this material world without any cause. And according to the cause, the particular type of body is built up. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. A big science there is. Unfortunately there is no education for this science. Maybe in future they will take interest. As we are publishing the books and going to the universities and to the professors, there may be. There is possibility now. Otherwise these rascals did not know what is this science. They did not care. Big, big professors, big, big scientists, they are putting the theories that life has come from chemicals, chemical evolution, and they are getting Nobel Prize. And if they are offered that "Take these chemicals. Produce a life," they'll deny.

So this ignorance is going on. Therefore for future guidance, Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired this question, that "How the living entity got this body, material body? Whether it is automatically, without any cause, or with cause?" But with cause... It will be explained. It is not... When the cause is there... Just like if you infect some disease, automatically you'll suffer from the disease. It will come automatically. That is automatically. But your becoming infected, that is cause. So if you become cautious not to be infected, then the cause of lower birth or suffering you can avoid. Therefore we have started this society, society. Society means that you'll get here the cause of being elevated. Just like there are so many societies, equal class of men. "Birds of the same feather flock together." So here is a society. Who will flock here? Who will come here? Because this society is meant for liberation... People are suffering so much on account of material condition of life. Nobody is happy. That is a fact. But because they are in ignorance, they are accepting unhappiness as happiness. This is called māyā. This is called māyā.

Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. This māyā is very much manifest in sex life. They accept the sex life is very nice, but after that, there is so many distresses. Legal or illegal, it doesn't matter. Legal distresses or illegal distresses, but it is distress. Every one of us, we know. Therefore everything-to make the best use of a bad bargain. We have got this material body. The cause was there. The cause was there that because we wanted to enjoy and did not like to serve Kṛṣṇa. This is the cause. Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. We are serving Kṛṣṇa. That is our, I mean to say, place, constitutional position, to serve Kṛṣṇa, but sometimes we desire: "Why shall I serve Kṛṣṇa? Why shall I serve the spiritual master? I shall enjoy. I shall enjoy." But that enjoyment was there by serving Kṛṣṇa, but he wanted to become enjoyer independent of Kṛṣṇa. That is the cause of falldown. With Kṛṣṇa, you can enjoy very nicely. You have seen the picture, how with Kṛṣṇa the gopīs are nicely dancing, enjoying; the cowherd boys are playing. Enjoy with Kṛṣṇa, that is your real enjoyment. But without Kṛṣṇa, when you want to enjoy, that is māyā. That is māyā.

So māyā is there always, and... Because unless there is darkness, you cannot appreciate the quality of brightness; therefore Kṛṣṇa has created darkness, māyā also, so that you can appreciate what is brightness. Two things are required. Without brightness, the darkness cannot be appreciated, and darkness... Without darkness, the brightness cannot be appreciated. The two things are there, side by side. Just like there is sunlight, and here is shadow, side by side. You can remain within the shadow; you can remain within the sunshine. That is your choice. If we remain in the darkness, then our life is miserable, and if we remain in the light, brightness... Therefore Vedic literature instructs us, tamasi mā: "Don't remain in the dark." Jyotir gama: "Go to the light." So this attempt, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is an attempt to bring people from darkness to the light. So don't misuse this opportunity. Some way or other, you have come in contact with this movement. Properly utilize it. Don't go to the darkness. Always remain in bright light.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 2.9: Lectures





720420SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.1

-

Tokyo, April 20, 1972



Pradyumna: (chanting verse) Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Devotees: Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Prabhupāda: It is sandhi? Na ghaṭeta artha. It has been lost? Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Again, recite the whole śloka.



Pradyumna: (devotees repeating)



śrī śuka uvāca

ātma-māyām ṛte rājan

parasyānubhavātmanaḥ

na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ

svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā

[SB 2.9.1]



Svapna. Draṣṭur. Svapna-draṣṭur. Iva. Añjasā. Ivāñjasā.



Prabhupāda: Svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā.



Pradyumna: Svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā.



Prabhupāda: Now read again.



Pradyumna: Whole thing?



Prabhupāda: No, this same verse. Practice it. In this way you practice one mantra daily. Each mantra will purify you hundred yards daily. Go forward. These mantras are very powerful, given by Vyāsadeva Gosvāmī, vibrated. And spoken by... Śuka-mukhād drava-saṁyutamrtam. That is explained in the beginning. Just like a ripened fruit in the tree is already very sweet, and if it is touched by the beak of the parrot, it becomes sweeter. These are natural course. If the parrot touches the fruit, he cuts little by his beak, beak. Beak, you call beak? Then it becomes still sweeter. Śuka-mukhād drava-saṁyutam. Similarly, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is already sublime, transcendental. And when it is spoken through the mouth of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, it becomes still sweet, just like the fruit. The parrot is also called śuka. It is called śuka-pakṣi, śuka bird. So this comparison is given. As the fruit becomes still sweeter by the touch of the beak of the parrot, similarly, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, because it is already spoken by Vyāsadeva, ripened fruit, the experienced contribution of Vyāsadeva, all the Vedic literatures, but when it is spoken through the paramparā system of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, it becomes still sweeter.



Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended to study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from bhāgavatam. Bhāgavata para giyā bhāgavata sthāne. Bhāgavata means the grantha-bhāgavata, book bhāgavata... Bhāgavata means about Kṛṣṇa. Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. And anything in relationship with Kṛṣṇa is called Bhāgavata. So the devotee is also in relationship with Kṛṣṇa. He is also called bhāgavata. Mahā-bhāgavata. Those who are highly advanced, or first-class devotees, they are called mahā-bhāgavata. So this Bhāgavatam, it is the essence of the Vedic knowledge and when it is received through the paramparā system of pure devotee, then it becomes still more sweet than before. That is the purport.

So we should try to learn, get it by heart, at least one śloka, two ślokas in a week. And if we chant that... Just like you are chanting so many songs, similarly, if we chant one or two verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that will make you very quickly advanced for spiritual realization. We are therefore taking so much trouble to get this transliteration, the meaning, so that the reader may take advanced step, full advantage of the mantra. It is not that to show some scholarship, that "I know so much Sanskrit." No. It is just offered with humility to learn the mantra because one who will chant the mantra... They are all transcendental vibration. Just Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... This is mahā-mantra, but they are also mantras, all the verses from Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, spoken by Kṛṣṇa, spoken by... Bhāgavata also, spoken by Kṛṣṇa. Vyāsadeva is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. They're also mantras, infallible instructions. So try to get it by heart, chanting. Either you chant by seeing the book or get it by heart, it is all the same. But try to chant one, two ślokas daily. Chant.

Pradyumna: (chants with devotees responding)



śrī śuka uvāca

ātma-māyām ṛte rājan

parasyānubhavātmanaḥ

na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ...

[SB 2.9.1]



Prabhupāda: (correcting) Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Like that. It is written like that?



Pradyumna: Ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Prabhupāda: artha, artha separated?



Pradyumna: No. Together. Ghaṭetārtha.



Prabhupāda: No. Ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. It should, should not be. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Like that. Tā should be long. Tā. Ghaṭeta artha-sambandhaḥ. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Is that all right?



Pradyumna: Yes.



Prabhupāda: So pronounce like that.



Pradyumna: Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Loud. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Pradyumna: Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Devotees: Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ.



Pradyumna: Svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā.



Prabhupāda: Oh. Again pronounce.



Pradyumna: Śrī śuka uvāca (repeats verse)



Prabhupāda: Very important verse. Now we shall go to the words and meaning. Again recite. Śrī śuka uvāca.



Devotees: (repeat verse)



Prabhupāda: Once again. Do it again.



Pradyumna: (repeats verse)



Prabhupāda: Again. (devotees repeat verse again) Anyone can recite? All right. See the book and recite.



Śyāmasundara: Śrī-śuka uvāca ātma-māyām ṛte rājan parasyānubhavātmanaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Parasya. The transliteration is the long a. You have seen? You just try to follow the transliteration. That will be easier.



Śyāmasundara: Parasyānu...



Prabhupāda: Parasyānubhava, bhavātmanaḥ. Ātmā.



Śyāmasundara: Yes. Long a over a. Atmanaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Now, beginning.



Śyāmasundara: Parasyānu...



Prabhupāda: No. First line. (devotees repeating)



Śyāmasundara: Śrī śuka uvāca ātma-māyām ṛte rājan parasyānubhavātmanaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Read it again.



Śyāmasundara: Śrī śuka uvāca ātma-māyām ṛte rājan parasyānubhavātmanaḥ na ghaṭetārtha...



Prabhupāda: Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā. Next. Next. You read. Go on. One after another. (continues devotee reciting, Prabhupāda correcting) You read the transliteration. The thing is hearing the meter and repeat. That's all. The writing is already there, transliteration. Simply you have to hear the written. Just like you have chanted so many verses, songs, by hearing. The hearing is very important. A child learns another language simply by hearing, pronunciation, hearing. That is natural. If we hear one thing repeatedly, you will learn. You will learn. So one has to hear little attentively. Then it will be easy. There is no difficulty. Just like you are singing our song in tune, (sings) saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **. This is by hearing. So simply you have to hear. Therefore whole Vedic śāstra is called śruti. It is a process of hearing. (coughing) This is a disease of old age. These are the warnings that the body is getting rotten. Go on. (recitation continues) Next. Each one of you. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā. What is the añjasā spelling?



Devotee: I-v-a-n-j-a-s-a. Ivāñjasā.



Prabhupāda: Long a or short a?



Devotee: Long a.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Ivāñjasā. Añjasā. Añjasā means wholesale. Go on. (recitation and corrections continue) Na ghaṭeta artha sambandhaḥ, combined together it becomes na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. Tārtha. What is the spelling? Tārtha?



Devotee: T, long a, r-t-h-a.



Prabhupāda: Of tha? What is the...?



Devotee: T-a-r-t-h-a. Na ghaṭa...



Prabhupāda: T-h-a. There must be r.



Pradyumna: Yes. Ghaṭetārtha. G-h-a-t-e-t-a-r...



Prabhupāda: T-a-r. Yes. T-a, artha. So you were missing that r. Na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. All right. Next. (recitation continues) Get it next. Come here. So you have to study like that. So many ślokas, I am taking so much labor. If you do not read it carefully... It is not for that I am making business, for selling only, and not for my students. You must all read like this, practice. Why so much trouble is being taken, word to word meaning and then transliteration? If you chant this mantra, that vibration will cleanse the atmosphere. And wherever you go, in any part of the world, if you can chant this mantra, oh, you'll be received like God. It is so nice. And in India he'll actually receive like Gods if you chant this mantra. They will so offer their respects, so many. Veda-mantra. Next chant. (another devotee recites verse) Very good. Next, next. Bhanu prabhu (Bhanu recites) Thank you very much. He has pronounced very nicely. So he will teach you. Yes. Next. (another devotee recites verse) Very good. (another devotee recites verse) Very good. Yes. In this way, each one of you, you chant and others will follow. Then one or two days, you get the śloka by heart. You can chant. It is not difficult. Now read the word meanings and translation.



Karandhara: "Śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ātma- the Supreme Personality of Godhead; māyām-the energy; ṛte- without; rājan-O King..."



Prabhupāda: Rājan.



Karandhara: Rājan-O King.



Prabhupāda: It is address, addressing. Nominative is rāja and addressive is rājan. Go on.



Karandhara: Parasyāsya...



Prabhupāda: Parasya.



Karandhara: Parasya.



Prabhupāda: Parasya. Yes.



Karandhara: "Parasya-of the pure soul; anubhava-ātmanaḥ- of the purely conscious; na-never; ghaṭeta-it can so happen; artha-meaning; sambandhaḥ-relation with the material body; svapna-dream; draṣṭuḥ-of the seer; iva-like it; añjasā-completely."



Prabhupāda: Añjasā.



Karandhara: "Añjasā-completely. Translation: Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, unless one is influenced by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no meaning to the relationship of the pure soul in pure consciousness with the material body. It is just like the dreamer seeing his own body working."



Prabhupāda: So, purport?



Karandhara: "Purport. The question of Mahārāja Parīkṣit is perfectly answered as to how a living entity began his material life, although he is apart from the material body and the mind."



Prabhupāda: It is a very important question. Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired... Many people inquired that "How the living entity was with Kṛṣṇa, he became fallen in this material world?" Is not done? This question is raised? So this question is answered here, that "How the living entity who was with Kṛṣṇa became fallen down in contact with this material qualities?" So this is the answer. Read the translation.



Karandhara: "Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O king, unless one is influenced by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead..."



Prabhupāda: It is simply the influence of the material energy, nothing. Actually he has not fallen. Another example given is given. Just like the moon is covered with scattered cloud, the passing cloud. You have seen. Everyone has experience. The cloud passes, and it appears that the moon is moving. Have you seen this?



Devotees: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Actually the moon is not moving. It is a māyā, illusion. It appears that the moon is moving. But similarly, the living entity, because he is spiritual spark of the Supreme, it has not fallen. It has not fallen. But he is thinking, "I am fallen. I am material." That is the reason. He is thinking, "I am this body." Actually the body has no connection with me. That is experienced, that the body has no connection with the soul. The body is changing, dying. But I am the same. The same example, the moon: The cloud is passing over in different way. The moon is far away from the cloud, and it has nothing to do with the cloud, but it appears the moon is moving. [break] Try to understand. Have questions and answer. It is very important thing. Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan. Except ātma-māyā, the illusory energy... It is the maneuver or handling of the illusory energy of Kṛṣṇa. This illusory energy develops when we forget Kṛṣṇa. That's all. It is... In other words, this illusory identification of me with the body is simply due to my forgetfulness. We wanted to forget, we wanted to give up Kṛṣṇa and wanted to enjoy this material world. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is giving us...



Just like when you play some part in a drama, if you feel that "I am king," then you can talk very nicely. And if you feel that "I am Karandhara," then you cannot play nicely king. Is it not? Feeling must be there. If you are playing the part of a king, then you must have the same courage and belief that "I am king." You have to forget that you are Karandhara. Then your part will be very nicely played. It will be appreciated. But if you think simultaneously that "I am Karandhara. I am taking, playing the part of the king," then you cannot play. So because we wanted to play the part of Kṛṣṇa, enjoyer, Kṛṣṇa is giving us chance that "You feel like Me."-"I am king. I am Kṛṣṇa. I am God." (laughter) All these rascals, those who are feeling like that, "I am master. I am king. I am Kṛṣṇa. I am God," they are all simply in that feeling only. That's all. And this feeling is created by Kṛṣṇa: "All right. You want to play the part of a king. I shall train you in such a way." Just like director means, dramatic director means, he creates a feeling. His direction is nothing but how to feel.

Sometimes we played in our younger age Caitanya-līlā. I introduced. And one big director, Amrtalal Chosa, he was just like grandfather. He was one of the, just like in England Shakespeare and others, big, big dramatic, well-known persons. This Amrtalal Chosa and Girish Chandra Chosa, they introduced in India theatric... So we called him to give us direction. He was giving us direction, and repeatedly he was telling that "You feel like that," especially to me. "You feel like that." So actually, when we played according to his direction, the audience were all crying. And we could not understand how they cried. We could not understand. On the stage when we played, it was so perfect that all audience were crying. Actually we saw they were smearing over their eyes with... But the whole thing is artificial, but the effect to the audience became so nice. So similarly, we are... Actually we have nothing to do with this material world, But we have been trained by the illusory energy in such a way that we are thinking, "I am Indian. I am American. I am this. I am that. I am brāhmaṇa. I am śūdra. I have to do this. I have got so much duty," all these illusions, simply thinking. We have nothing to do with all this nonsense, but still, we are taking it very serious. "I have to do like that. I have to do like that. I am this. I am that." That's all. That is explained. Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan: "Except the influence of that ātmā-māyā, the illusory energy of Kṛṣṇa..." Ātma-māyā. Read. Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan parasyānu. Read it?

Karandhara: Parasyānubhavātmanaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Parasyānubhavātmanaḥ. Na ghaṭeta artha-sambandha. There cannot be any relation at all. Na ghaṭeta. Cannot be. Artha sambandhaḥ. Svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā. The very exact example is given, svapna-draṣṭuḥ. Just like a man seeing dream: "Oh, there is tiger, tiger, tiger, tiger! Save me!" He is crying. Another man is, "Where is tiger? Why you are crying? Where is tiger?" But he, in the dream, he is actually feeling: "The tiger has attacked me." Therefore this example is given, na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ. There cannot be any meaning of this relationship except like a man dreaming and he is creating a situation. He is dreaming there is a tiger and he is creating a situation, fearful situation. Actually there is no cause of fear. There is no tiger. That situation is created by dream. Actually there is no tiger. Similarly we have created this material world and activity. People are running, "Oh..., sonh, sonh, sonh, sonh, sonh, sonh, sonh," identifying that "Oh, I am the manager. I am the factory owner. I am this, I am that. We have got his politics. We have to defeat such competitors." All these things are created exactly like that, svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā, just like a man is creating his particular situation simply by dream. That's all.



So the answer is, when somebody asks you that "When one has become in contact with this material nature?" He has not become in contact. He is thinking by the influence of the external energy. Just like the same example: A man is dreaming; there is no contact with tiger. Actually he has no contact with that. Similarly, actually we are not fallen. We cannot be fallen. But we have created a situation that we are, become... Try to understand understand. It is very important point. We have simply created a situation. We have not created a situation, Kṛṣṇa has given us a situation. Because we wanted to imitate Kṛṣṇa, so Kṛṣṇa has given an opportunity: "All right. Imitate. You want to be imitation king in the stage. So feel like this. Play like this. Do like this. People will applaud. 'Oh, a very nice king, very nice.' " That is the... So everyone in this material world, they are playing some part. They wanted, "I want to be prime minister." "All right." "I want to become very big business magnate." "I want to be leader." "I want to be a philosopher." "I want to be a scientist." So all this nonsense, they are trying to play-Kṛṣṇa is giving him the opportunity: "All right." But it is a nonsense, all nonsense. Simple dreaming. Just like you are dreaming. Next moment when the dream is gone, everything is finished. No more tiger, no more jungle, no more... Everything is finished. Similarly, so long this body is continuing, I am thinking, "I am a responsible leader, I am this, I am that." But as soon as this body is finished, oh, these are (indistinct) gone.

Sarva-haraś cāham. The death means... Kṛṣṇa says, "I am death. I take it away, all, everything. Gone." Now just think of our past life. Suppose I was a king or something like that. From Bhṛgu-saṁhitā it was ascertained. They said-I do not know-that I was a big physician in my last life, very spotless character, no sins, like that. He explained me. So it may be. But actually I have no remembrance that I was a physician. So what do we know? I might have been a very big physician, influential physician, having a good practice, but where is all...? All gone. So this situation, our contact with matter, is just like dream. Actually we are not fallen. Therefore, because we are not fallen, at any moment we can revive our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. As soon as we understand that, "I have nothing to do with. I am simply Kṛṣṇa's servant. Eternal servant. That's all," immediately he becomes liberated. Exactly like that: as soon as you... Sometimes we do that. When the fearful dreaming becomes too much intolerable, we break the dream. We break the dream when it becomes intolerable. Similarly, we can break this material connection at any moment as soon as we come to the point of Kṛṣṇa conscious. "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is my eternal master. I am His servant." That's all. This is the way. Actually we are not fallen. There cannot be any fallen. The same example: Actually there is no tiger; it is dreaming. Similarly, our fallen condition is also dreaming. We are not fallen. We can simply give up that illusory condition at any moment. At any moment. So if you study all these verses very nicely, you get all this knowledge quickly. Now what is the purport? Come on.

Karandhara: "The spirit soul is distinct from the material conception of his life."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Distinct. Always distinct. Next?



Karandhara: "But he is absorbed in such a material conception because of being influenced by the external energy of the Lord, called ātma-māyā. This is already explained in the First Canto in connection with Vyāsadeva's realization of the Supreme Lord and His external energy. The external energy is controlled by the Lord and the living entities are controlled by the external energy."



Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇa says, mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te: [Bg. 7.14] "As soon as one surrenders unto Me, he has no more illusion." Māyām etaṁ taranti. Immediately. So people are conditioned, encaged. So many big, big words The Māyāvādīs, they are undergoing austerities or penances just to become liberated. Yogis, they are also trying to become one. So many endeavors are going on. But the simple process is, as soon as you surrender, that you are not fallen, "It was illusion. I was dreaming. I am Kṛṣṇa's," finished. All gone. "I am Kṛṣṇa's. I am Kṛṣṇa's eternal servant. These are all nonsense"-he immediately becomes liberated. Just try to understand. Immediately, within a second. Liberation can be attained within a second, provided we abide by the order of Kṛṣṇa. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is the position. We are not fallen. We are thinking fallen. So we have to give up this nonsense thinking. Then we are liberated. There is no Is there any difficulty to understand? Just see how important this verse. It is already there, but you are not reading. Each verse, read every day carefully. Try to assimilate, understand, and you will get more profit, every day, hundred yards forward, hundred yards forward, yes. They are so important verses. How nicely composed by Vyāsadeva. In two lines the whole thing is explained. This is called śāstra. In two lines. Then read the purport.



Karandhara: "The external energy is controlled by the Lord and the living entities are controlled by the external energy by the will of the Lord. Therefore, although the living entity is purely conscious in his pure state, he is subordinate to the will of the Lord, being influenced by the external energy of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gītā also the same thing is confirmed, that the Lord is present within the heart of every living entity and all consciousness and forgetfulness of the living entity are influenced by the Lord."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Because... Now, people may say that, "Why Kṛṣṇa within the heart gives one type of consciousness to one, and another type of consciousness...?" Because I wanted. I wanted to forget Kṛṣṇa, so Kṛṣṇa is giving consciousness: "All right, you can forget Me in this way." That is His kindness. Just like the Māyāvādīs, the so-called yogis and karmīs, they wanted to forget. Kṛṣṇa is giving him intelligence. "All right. You forget Me like this." That's all. Go on. And if you want to again revive your relationship, Kṛṣṇa will give you intelligence. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi taṁ yena mām upayānti te: "I shall give intelligence." So Kṛṣṇa is... Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. As you want, Kṛṣṇa gives you facility. Go on.



Karandhara: "Now the next question will automatically be made as to why the Lord influences the living entity to such consciousness and forgetfulness. The answer is that the Lord clearly wishes that every living entity be engaged in his pure consciousness as the part and parcel of the Lord, and thus be engaged in loving service of the Lord as he is constitutionally made. But because the living entity is partially independent also, he may not be willing to serve the Lord, but may try to become independent as the Lord is. The whole nondevotee class of living entities are all desirous of becoming equally as powerful as the Lord, although they are not fit to become so. The living entities are..."



Prabhupāda: They will never be God, but we see so many persons. By the influence of the illusory energy they think, "I am God. I am God. I shall become God by pressing my nose like this, doing this." So this is going on. They will never be able. That is not possible. Otherwise, there is no meaning of God. If everyone can become God, then there is no meaning of God. But by influence of... Just like karmīs are saying "I shall become millionaire. I shall become trillionaire. I shall become head of the state. I shall become prime minister." This struggle, this is another struggle: "I shall become God." This is another struggle. But it is illusion. It is illusion. So Kṛṣṇa gives them opportunity, some yogic success. Just like in India there is a rascal. He makes like that, and there is immediately some gold. And people become after him: "Oh, he is God. He is God." By producing a little gold, he becomes God. Another yogi, he gives immediately two rasagullā. So by producing two rasagullā, four annas' worth, he becomes God. You see? This is illusion. These rascals, they do not know that, "What is this rasagullā, two rasagullā? I can purchase from the market for four annas. So he is becoming God by four annas?" But they have no sense. "Oh, he is God. He can produce rasagullā." Rasagullā I can produce in our kitchen. But they are so rascal. "Oh, wonderful." So the yogic siddhis... So Kṛṣṇa gives him some power of yogic siddhi and he thinks that "I have become God," and some flatterers, they also think, "Oh, you are God." The same dream. And as soon as death comes, everything finished, your Godhood and everything finished. Now becomes doghood, come to the stage of doghood. Again, another dream: "I am dog." First of all "I am God," then next stage, "I am dog." This is going on. Therefore Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said, keno māyār bośe jāccho bhese': "Why you are being washed away by the waves of māyā? Just fix up. Stand up." Jīv kṛṣṇa-dās ei viśwās korle to ār duḥkho nāi. You simply remain fixed up on this standpoint, that, "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa." Then there is no more dream. And if you allow yourself to be washed away, Kṛṣṇa gives you facility, "All right, come on. Be washed away." Then?



Karandhara: "The living entities are illusioned by the will of the Lord because they wanted to become like Him."



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Karandhara: "As a person thinks of becoming a king without possessing the necessary qualifications, similarly, when the living entity desires to become the Lord Himself, he is put in a condition of dreaming that he is a king. Therefore the first sinful will of the living entity is to become the Lord, and the consequent will of the Lord is that the living entity forgets his actual life and thus dreams of the land of utopia where he may become one like the Lord. The child cries to have the moon from the mother and the mother gives the child a mirror to satisfy the crying and disturbing child with the shadow of the moon. Similarly the crying child of the Lord is given over to the shadow of the material world to lord it over as a karmī and to give this up in frustration to become one with the Lord. Both these stages are dreaming illusions only. There is no necessity of tracing out the history when the living entity desired this, but the fact is that as soon as he desired such, he was put under the control of ātma-māyā by the direction of the Lord. Therefore the living entity in his material condition is dreaming falsely that this is 'mine' and this is 'I.' The dream is that the conditioned soul thinks of his material body as 'I' or falsely thinks that he is the lord and that everything in connection with the material body is 'mine.' Thus in dream only the misconception of 'I and mine' persist life after life. This continues life after life as long as the living entity is not purely conscious of his identity as the subordinate part and parcel of the Lord. In his pure consciousness, however, there is no such misconceived dream. And in that pure conscious state the living entity does not forget that he is never the Lord, but he is eternally the servitor of the Lord in transcendental love."



Prabhupāda: That's all.



Devotees: All glories to you Śrīla Prabhupāda. (offer obeisances)



Trivikrama: Śrīla Prabhupāda? You were just saying that we are not fallen. Actually this is an illusion thinking that we are fallen. Yet I read...



Prabhupāda: The same example. In dream I am not attacked by the tiger, but I am thinking, "Oh, tiger is there." It is simply dreaming condition.



Trivikrama: But so many Vaiṣṇavas are praying...



Prabhupāda: So as soon as you understand that "This is not... I am not in contact with tiger. It is all a dream," then you are delivered. Similarly, as soon as you understand, "All this material condition of life we are simply dreaming; I am actually servant of Kṛṣṇa," then you are liberated. That is Kṛṣṇa conscious. If you keep in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa," then you are liberated. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyaa kalpate [Bg. 14.26], Kṛṣṇa says. Immediately brahma-bhūtaḥ. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. He has no more lamentation, no more hankering. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. He can see everyone on equal vision. Because he knows, "Here is also another living entity." He is not a Chinaman. He is a part and parcel of God. He is not a Christian. He is not a Hindu. He is simply thinking like that. So give him Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is real benefit, to bring him to the original position. Yes?



Cintāmaṇi: If, when we realize Kṛṣṇa, then we have no more desire, then how can we desire...



Prabhupāda: You create desire. If you simply keep this contact with Kṛṣṇa, then there is no more any other desire than to serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all.



Trivikrama: This feeling that we have, that we are fallen, that we are very fallen...



Prabhupāda: That is also illusion. That is also illusion. You are fallen means you have got some certain desires except service of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the conclusion is that if you keep yourself tightly in Kṛṣṇa's service, there is no question of falling down or there is no question of māyā. You see?



Devotee: Even at that state, still the body is affected by the modes of nature. We are experiencing desires.



Prabhupāda: You are not experiencing. Your body is experiencing. You are feeling cold due to this body. You are not feeling cold. You are not feeling cold.



Devotee: But I think I am feeling cold.



Prabhupāda: You are thinking. That is illusion. That is illusion.



Devotee: So rise above that.



Prabhupāda: Yes. But not artificially, but this is the fact. You have to gradually rise to that platform. The fact is this. Just like when you are feverish, actually you are healthy, but it has come. So in the feverish condition you are thinking, "I am now feverish." But this feverish will not, condition, will not stay. You will come to the healthy stage. Therefore don't be disturbed with the feverish condition. Go on with your duty. Don't misidentify, "Now I have become feverish. Everything is finished." No. That is external. It has come; it will go. That is given in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. Just like seasonal changes. Sometimes it is very hot, sometimes very cold, sometimes warm. So these are coming and going. So if there is some feeling of pain and pleasure, simply just tolerate it, but don't be absorbed in that thought. That's all. Therefore titikṣava. The first symptoms of a saintly person is titikṣava, tolerant. Tolerant. So go on reading, go on understanding. Everything will be clear. So next? There is kīrtana, or finished? (end)





720404SB.MEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.2

-

Melbourne, April 4, 1972



Prabhupāda:



bahu-rūpa ivābhāti

māyayā bahu-rūpayā

ramamāṇo guṇeṣv asyā

mamāham iti manyate

[SB 2.9.2]



Bahu-rūpa means varieties of forms, 8,400,000s of forms. Ivābhāti: "It appears like that." Therefore, when one is advanced in spiritual consciousness, he does not see the varieties of form because these varieties of form are not real. Anyone can understand that. Any form Today we have got a form. Take a photograph of it, and few hours after, the form has changed. So that is not permanent form. It is changing. Just like you see in the cloud. From airplane you can experience. The cloud You are running. You are seeing one form. After few minutes, that form is changing to different form. Therefore it is called ivābhāti. You immediately see a cloud just like big elephant, but after a few minutes you see the cloud, the same cloud, is changed into just like a big hill, another, a big tree. So this is going on. Today I am Indian, you are American, but next birth or after few years, although American, the body is changing. Body is changing. Therefore it is written there, ivābhāti: "as if it has got a body." As if. Ivābhāti: "It appears." But māyā is so strong Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti... What is the next word? Māyayā?



Bali-mardana: Māyayā bahu-rūpayā.



Prabhupāda: Bahu-rūpayā. These bahu-rūpa, these varieties of rūpa, form, is given by māyā. So this is intelligence. Just like mother, or like a small child, dressing morning in some way, in the evening another way, changing dresses. Māyā is our mother, and she is giving us a different type of dresses, māyayā bahu-rūpayā, and therefore we are changing into bahu-rūpa. But because we are attached to the dress, so according to the form, we are forming our consciousness. Now I have got a different body, different form, so I have got a different consciousness. You have got a different body; you have got a different consciousness. So everyone, all living entities The dog is thinking Because he has got a dog's body, he thinks, "I am dog." "I am American," the same way. This is all māyā. Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti māyayā bahu-rūpayā. Then next?



Bali-mardana: Ramamāṇo.



Prabhupāda: Ramamāṇa.



Bali-mardana: Ramamāṇo guṇeṣva...



Prabhupāda: Guṇeṣu. And according to the body, he is enjoying different variety of enjoyment. So when I have got a tiger's body, so my taste for food will be most abominable, fresh blood, like that. And if I have got a hog's body, then I shall feel pleasure by eating stool. And when I am a Vaiṣṇava Vaiṣṇava's also transcendental. Or a brāhmaṇa's body. Then I will be pleased with nice foodstuff, sattvic, sattvic foodstuff. Sattvic foodstuff means rice, wheat, and vegetables, fruits, milk products, and sugar. These are foodstuffs in goodness. Similarly, foodstuff in passion, foodstuff in ignorance. These are described in the Bhagavad-gītā Eighteenth Chapter. In Hong Kong I saw from the garbage one Chinese woman was finding out rejected serpent-like preparations or something. First of all, it is rejected. It is thrown in the garbage. And from the garbage, according to her taste, she is finding out some nice foodstuff. You see? Just see. Kadarya bhakṣaṇa kare, nānā yoni... So according to the body. Dehinam Deha yogena dehiṣu. According to the body, we get different taste of enjoyment. Somebody is enjoying most abominable things, somebody is enjoying very nice, but according to the body.



Therefore, if you become transcendental to your body, then your taste will be transcendental. If your taste is As the body is changing, ramamāṇa, you cannot enjoy. If you are in the transcendental position, you cannot enjoy like the woman in Hong Kong, finding out in the garbage. You see? So people are trying to give service to the humanity. What service they can take, give? I have got a taste for a certain thing. How you can change my taste? Ramamāṇa. I want to enjoy because I am under the grips of material nature. So I have got a certain type of taste. You cannot change it. If I say, "Don't drink," unless you are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is impossible to give up this drinking. That has already been tested. The American government, they are trying. They are spending so much money to stop these intoxication habits of the young men. They cannot because they are ramamāṇa māyayā. They are pulled by the ear of the person: "You must drink this." Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni [Bg. 3.27]. Prakṛti, nature, material nature is pulling you: "You must drink." So unless one is free from the management of the prakṛti, prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni, it is impossible. So they are trying to give lesson that "Don't drink." "Vegetarians." There are so many societies. In Hong Kong I saw so many societies. Hong Kong or where I saw?

Devotee: Australia.



Prabhupāda: Australia. Yes. There are so many societies, vegetarian societies, nondrinking societies. That is nice, but they cannot stay. By forming ordinary society or imposing some law by the state, you cannot stop. You have many laws to stop stealing, still there are thieves. That is not possible. You have so many laws not to do something. But because everyone is under the grip of prakṛti, material nature, how he can change? It is not possible. So that is the mistake of the modern civilization. They do not know that by passing laws or giving some moral instruction, we cannot change the habits. Prakṛti is very strong, material nature. The only solution is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unless one comes to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness platform, he cannot give up his habits. It is not possible. So if you want to Therefore it is purificatory process. The more you advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you become purified from all this influence of māyā, because it is acting by māyayā bahu-rūpayā. And as soon as you come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even if you have got a different form, a different bodily form, because you are aloof from that, your, you are not affected by the influence of māyā.



Just like anyone who is coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness in any country, they are forgetting their bodily consciousness. Just like in our society we have got members from different parts of the world. Especially in Africa we have seen. There is very much distinction between white and black. But in our society there is no such distinction. The Indians there, they hated with the Because the Africans are working as servant to Indians. So now this time they agreed to take prasādam, all in the same line. The Europeans, Americans, Indians, Africans, even brāhmaṇas, high caste, all. I also. We sat down to take prasādam. In our Māyāpur they are distributing prasādam. Perhaps it is for the first time that Hindus and Muslims are taking prasādam in the one line.

Devotee: All glories to you Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Yes. It is for the first, at least the first time. And Congress arranged during Congress session, Hindus and Muslims But that was not with heart. And after the Congress meeting was finished, they But here they daily, they are daily coming, taking prasādam. Why not? Prasādam is Kṛṣṇa's prasādam. So actually, the United Nations or united people can be possible only in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise it is not possible. The māyā. Everyone is under the influence of māyā, bahu-rūpayā. So long he is under the influence of māyā, he must think in terms of his own form. That is temporary, but he is attached to that temporary form. He must think that "I am this, I am that, I am..." So it is a very important verse. Read it again? Bahu...



Bali-mardana: Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti.



Prabhupāda: Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti.



Bali-mardana: Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti māyayā...[break]



Prabhupāda: Māyā's three guṇas, modes. So somebody is in passion, somebody is in ignorance, somebody is in goodness. Even one is in goodness, goodness is also another. It may be higher quality, but that is māyā quality. One has to go above goodness. Here there are many persons, they are very clean. That is a brahminical quality, sattva ṣama śauca, very clean, truthful, controlled, so many qualifications, but still, that is māyā. Still that is māyā. To become on the platform of brahminical, satya śama dama titikṣa ārjava, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyam brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. So even This is the platform of goodness, brahminical qualification. So even in brahminical qualification, it's still māyayā. He is thinking, "I am brāhmaṇa. I am so pure. I am better than him." But he does not know that he is identifying himself with māyā. "I am not brāhmaṇa, I am not śūdra, I am not kṣatriya, I am not vaiśya, I am not a sannyāsī, I am not a brahmacārī, I am not a gṛhastha. Nothing of the sort." Then what you are? Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. I am the's qualities. So this identification also will not help. Today I may be brāhmaṇa, and tomorrow I shall become a bhangi. A (indistinct), nothing of the sort." Then what you are? Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ. "I am the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa." This pari bhram (?) Kṛṣṇa's servant. First servant Brahmā, next servant, his servant, Nārada, his servant, Vyāsa, his servant, Madhvācārya, his servant, the servant's servant's servant, then Caitanya Mahāprabhu, then Caitanya Mahāprabhu's ṣaḍ-gosvāmīs. In this way, when we think that we are servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa, that is our perfection. Otherwise, even if we think that "I am not brāhmaṇa. I have got sacred thread. I am very clean. I am taking bath." That is required, of course, because if you are actually servant of servant of Kṛṣṇa, then these qualities will be there as subordinate.



Just like when you have earned 100,000's of dollars, it is not that the ten dollar is not there. Ten dollar is there, but it is not very important. Similarly, to become a servant of the servant of servant of Kṛṣṇa means that the brahminical qualification which is worth ten dollars, that must be also there. But even at that stage, if your ten dollar quality is lacking, then you cannot become proud of becoming the servant of the servant [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. You cannot become proud of possessing 100,000's of dollars if you cannot pay ten dollars. Do you follow? If you say, "Now I am in possession of 100,000's of dollars," and if I ask, "Give me ten dollars." "No. I haven't got." So similarly, if you actually have become transcendental servant of Kṛṣṇa, if the qualities of brāhmaṇa is lacking, then you are not perfect. The brahminical qualification must be there. Then you are falsely possessing. If you falsely say that "I possess 100,000 dollars," and if I ask, "Give me ten dollars." "No. I..." This is false prestige. So these ten dollars will not serve my purpose. I will have to acquire 100,000 dollars. That is Vaiṣṇava qualification. But when we are actually in possession of 100,000 dollars, you must be able to pay ten dollars. You cannot say, "No. I haven't got ten dollars." Then we are falsely advertising that you have got 100,000.

So the conclusion is the expert manager, the bank manager, so, if some man in the establishment, is absent, he can do the work immediately because he has learned all the things. Bank manager becomes from the lower clerk. When I was manager in Bose's laboratory there was a strike. So there was no packer. So I asked all the clerks to, "Come on. Let us pack." As soon as we begin packing, the strike was broken. So a man claiming to be in the high position, he must be expert in everything. He must be expert in everything. So therefore a Vaiṣṇava is called dakṣa, expert. Expert. So our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement being the highest, topmost quality, so in case we require to do the work, some lower quality, we cannot say that "I do not know." We must do it.

But we are not in touch with that quality. Prakṛteḥ... There is a verse, etad īśanam īśasya. Just like Kṛṣṇa comes as a human being in this material world, but He is not affected with any of the qualities of the material world. That is therefore called nirguṇa. Nirguṇa means the material qualities cannot touch you. Similarly, a devotee of Kṛṣṇa also, when he is in service of Kṛṣṇa, he is also nirguṇa. The material qualities cannot touch him. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. He immediately becomes transcendental to all the material qualities. But that does not mean I cannot act in the material quality. Kṛṣṇa is working just like ordinary prince. He was born of a king, in the royal family. But He has nothing to do. Na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti [Bg. 4.14]. Kṛṣṇa is not affected. Dhari māccha nāce pāni. There is a Bengali proverb that "You go to catch fish, but don't touch the water." You see? If you are clever, if you have that rod to catch fish, take out the fish, but don't touch the water. Similarly, for our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we have to go in so many places. They are all materialistic, but we cannot become materialistic. We will take some service from a person for Kṛṣṇa's service. So we'll do some good to him, but we don't accept his quality. That should be our position. So in this way we should know that bahu-rūpa ivābhāti. Ivābhāti. Iva means "just like." Ābhāti, "appears." Actually these are temporary. Bahu-rūpa iva Māyayā bahu-rūpayā ramamāṇo guṇeṣv asyā. Guṇeṣu, in the quality, asyā, of māyā. Eh?

Bali-mardana: Mamāham iti.



Prabhupāda: Mamāham iti manyate. Now, because we are identified with this body, therefore we are so much attached to this material world, "my" and "I." "I am this body, and I have got some bodily relation with somebody, so he is mine, she is mine." There are thousands of women, but because I have got one bodily relation with one woman, "Oh, she is my wife." There are thousands of children and because one child is bodily related, that is my child. There are many houses, but the house in which I take rest, that is my house. There are many cars, but which car I use, that is my car. So this mamāham iti manyate. The body is not mine, and in bodily relation, anything, that is also not mine. That is the conclusion. But due to the influence of māyā I am thinking, "I am this body, and anything in relation to my body, that is mine." So "My wife, my children, my house, my family, my society, my country, my nation." This is going on. This rascaldom is going on. It is very difficult. You see? The whole world is being pushed on with this "I" and "mine." That's it. The "I" is mistaken (aside:) Don't sit like that. You must not show your feet to the Deity. "I" and "mine." This is going on. Mamāham iti manyate. Janasya moho 'yam. This is called illusion.



So the māyā is acting very nicely to keep us under her control. Māyayā. Daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī [Bg. 7.14]. Māyā wants to keep you under her control, every one of us. Why? Because we are offender to Kṛṣṇa, she wants to punish us, kick us very nicely. That is her business. And therefore she wants to keep under her control everyone. And therefore she has three qualities, tri-guṇa. Just like tri-guṇa. Guṇa means rope also. You have seen? In the rope there are three fibers. And three fibers, if it is twisted nicely and again twisted together, it is very strong rope. Tri-guṇa. So guṇa means rope. So we are bound up. The verse, that? Na te viduḥ svārtha gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ..., te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Īśa tantra. By the stringent laws of superior authority, uru-dāmni baddhāḥ. You are bound up, uru-dāmni. Uru means strong, dāmni means rope. Uru-dāmni, very strong rope. Just like big ship. Immediately bound up on the pier by some rope. You have seen it?

Devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: A ship carrying thirteen thousand tons of goods, but the strong rope brings it on the pier. Then he cannot move. In spite of having good machine and in spite of so much strength, it is baddhāḥ, uru-dāmni baddhāḥ. Julius Caesar, he was a great soldier, and she(he) became captivated by one beautiful woman. What is that? Cleopatra? You see? She's an ordinary woman, but because she had some Every woman is beautiful, but it is through the eyes I see that "This woman is beautiful." Woman's nature is fair sex. By nature she is beautiful. But I see "This is beautiful." I am entrapped. Is it not? There is a Bengali proverb, dekha yāra lāge bhāla... If I like somebody, it doesn't matter what he is or she is. There are so many instances. The attachment, there is attachment. There is no such hard and fast rules and regulation that "This man should be attached with this..." No. It is māyā's action. I become attached with somebody. That is going on. So māyā is acting so nicely, māyayā bahu-rūpayā ramamāṇa, and we are enjoying, ramamāṇa. Guṇeṣu asyā. Actually, that individual living entity is enjoying the influence by guṇeṣu asyā, influence by one kind of modes of material nature. Mamāham. And in that way he has form. The whole world is going on.



Just study this analysis of the whole world, this verse. This is Bhāgavata. By two lines the whole world is analyzed. Now you see the whole world is working under these two lines. Ramamāṇa guṇeṣu asyā. Guṇeṣv asyā. Ramamāṇo guṇeṣv asyā mamāham. And whole world is struggling: "This is mine. This is my country. I am Japanese." "I am Indian." "I am German. Let us fight. We shall take For country. We shall give our life." So many And after death, where is your country? Mister? Get up. Where is your country? Just see. This is going on. Mūḍha. Mūḍha, all rascals, all rascals. All rascals from our angle of vision. Why...? It is actual fact. One who has got eyes to see who is a rascal and who is intelligent Anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is a rascal. We accept him. He may be very big man, but a very big means means amongst the rascals, another set of rascals, because they are also under the influence of māyā. Just like in the society of asses, one ass is singing. (Imitates ass noise.) They ass feeling, "Oh, how nicely he is singing." (laughter) All asses. One ass is singing, and they appreciate. "Oh, great singer." And you are all, "Stop it! Stop it! Please stop it! Stop it. Stop it." This is going on. So all these leaders, all these rascals, they are all rascals. At least you must know. You may behave gentlemanly. That is your duty. But you should know that he is a rascal number one.

We don't hate anyone. Otherwise there will be no preaching. And Lord Jesus Christ said that you hate disease, not the man who is suffering from disease. That is very nice. So we shall hate this influence of māyā but not the man who is now under the influence. Then how we can preach? That is our business. Doctor knows that this man is infected with some serious disease. But if he hates, then he cannot make treatment. He requires treatment. So if he hates, "No. He is diseased. I cannot go there," then how can So we shall hate this influence of māyā. We should know how māyā is acting, but still, we have to do our duty, preaching work on behalf of Kṛṣṇa, sometimes taking risk also. What can be done? This is the position of the world. All rascals, the so-called PhD, DAC, NAC. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung one nice song: jaḍa-vidyā saba māyāra vaibhava tomāra bhajane bādhā: "My dear Lord, all this material scientific advancement of education, they are simply expansion of the three qualities of māyā. That's all." Jaḍa-vidyā saba māyāra vaibhava. They are all the different combinations. What is called? Permutation and combination? What is called?

Devotee: Permutation means a change.



Prabhupāda: So different qualities. All these, whatever you see in the material world, they are simply permutation, combination, like that, of the material qualities, tri-guṇa. Daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14]. They are nothing more. So this jaḍa-vidyā, this material science, expansion of material qualities, so Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says the jaḍa-vidyā, this kind of education, they are simply expansion of material qualities. And they are simply impediments for, to advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The more you become technologist and attached to this material world, then more you go far away from Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So therefore we have to accept everything: nirbandhe kṛṣṇa-sambandhe. We can accept all this material advancement in relationship with Kṛṣṇa. We can accept a tape recorder. This is material advancement. But we can use it for Kṛṣṇa. We take the typewriter, but we use it for Kṛṣṇa. We take a car-we use it for Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise we don't want. What is the use of car? We can walk. But if for Kṛṣṇa's sake if it is wanted Suppose we are going to preach somewhere, and if you say, "Oh, this is material, māyā. Why shall I take it? I shall go, walk," this is nonsense. You take advantage. Sometimes they criticize that "You criticize material advancement. Why do you take car? Why do you take this?" No, we can take everything because we see everything in relationship, Kṛṣṇa. This combination of matter, that is all right. But it is Kṛṣṇa's matter. Bhūmir āpo analo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4].

So our vision is different. We are not under the control of māyā. At least we should be like that. Then we remain in the transcendental state. Otherwise all these people, those who are not working under Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are under the influence of these material modes. So therefore they are all rascals. They are mistaken. Anyone who is not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he's a rascal. This should be our conclusion. So any question on this verse? It is very important. Every verse, Bhāgavata, every verse is illumination. [break] Therefore those who are yogis, ramante yoginaḥ anante, [Cc. Madhya 9.29] they are not desirous of enjoying this creation of māyā. Yoginaḥ anante. They want to enjoy in the association of the ananta, not māyā. Māyā is temporary. However māyā may exhibit in so many ways, it is temporary. This nice city or this nice country, this nice world, decorated-one day it will be finished, all finished. Pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedam **. When there will be inundation, all these planets will be merged into water, finished.

Devotee: In the material world, we are bound by māyā, mahā-māyā. In the spiritual world, is there another relationship of yogamāyā?



Prabhupāda: Yogamāyā.



Devotee: Could you explain a little bit about that?



Prabhupāda: Yogamāyā means... Here, this is also Kṛṣṇa's exhibition of māyā, but it is temporary. In the another, spiritual world, that is also exhibition of Kṛṣṇa's māyā, but it is permanent. Here is a perverted reflection, we say. Just like shadow, shadow, the shadow of the tree in the water-everything is perverted, opposite. So that shadow is not the substance. The substance is there. On the bank of the river, that is really. Similarly the spiritual world is There also, everything is there. There are trees, there are fruits, there are flowers, there are men-everything is there, birds, beasts, everything. But they are all real. Here, bahu-rūpa. Bahu-rūpa means, which it is not reality. That, this bahu-rūpa is also reflection, but it is not real. That is the difference. Ivābhāti. Therefore it is called ivābhāti: "It appears like that." Actually it is not. Just like in some shop you see so many ladies and gentlemen are standing with nice dress. What is called that...?



Bali-mardana: Mannequin?



Prabhupāda: Mani?



Sudāmā: Mannequin. Like doll. In department store.



Prabhupāda: Department store. But they are ivābhāti; they are not fact. Ivābhāti. It appears like ladies and gentlemen and so many things, but they are not fact. Therefore ivābhāti. Iva means "It appears like that." It is not fact. But actually there are ladies and gentlemen. It is simply an imitation. So spiritual world, actually. And it is ivābhāti; it appears like that. But those who are fools, they are attached to this ivābhāti. If somebody goes, "Oh, here is nice beautiful woman. Let me embrace," that is foolishness. That is ivābhāti. That is difference. So therefore this very word is used, ivābhāti. Actually it is all matter. But they have been changed into different forms. The Māyāvadi philosophers, they say "It is ivābhāti. There is no form. Therefore make it formless." But our is that ivābhāti means there is form, but this is simply imitation. That is the difference between Māyāvada and They say "Because it is false therefore reality must be zero. It is formless. It must be zero." Śūnyavādi. Nirviśeṣa śūnyavādi. There are no varieties. They will say "No varieties," and somebody will say, "No. It is zero." We say, "No. There is variety." This is ivābhāti. It appears like the reality. It is not real thing. The real is different. A comparison is given: just like water, the desert. There is no water, but it appears like water. But that does not mean there is no water. As soon as you say, ivābhāti, that there is reality, but this is not. It appears like reality. That is the actual meaning of ivābhāti. Iva, like. Ābhāti, appears. The snake... (end)





720405SB.MEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.3

-

Melbourne, April 5, 1972



Prabhupāda: ...of His association, or its association with the different types of modes of material nature, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. So you mix it. Then it becomes eighty-one. Three multiplied by three, nine. And again, nine multiplied by nine, it becomes eighty-one. So there are 8,400,000 forms on account of this mixture. That's all. So the mixture is possible, and according to the mixture, they have got different consciousness. According to the body, they have got different consciousness. A man, highly intellectual brāhmaṇa, he is, "Oh, I am greater than everyone. I am so wise. I am so pure. I am brāhmaṇa." So he has got a different conception. And similarly, the hog, because he has got a different form, it has that, "Oh, stool is so nice. Let me eat it." It is very (easy) to understand. According to the association with the modes of material nature, we are getting different types of body. And according to different types of body, we are developing different types of consciousness. Is it very difficult to understand? But when we transcend this bodily concept of life, then we come to the one standard consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Try to understand. If there is any difficulty, ask. It is very important. Why there are different consciousness? Everyone could take up this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But they cannot take it because they have got bodily concept of life. And body means association with the modes of material nature in a different way. Try to understand. Is there any question on this point? Say it clearly. If you have understood, explain. It is very important point.



Ramamāṇo guṇeṣu, guṇeṣu asyā mamāham iti manyate. According to the body, the hog is claiming, "Oh, the stool is mine. You cannot take." He is thinking. Just like the other day in Hong Kong, we saw that one woman was collecting some nasty food from the garbage because he (she) is thinking, "This sort of food is my food." Mamāham. He(she) has got a certain type of body. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura said, nānā yoni brāhmaṇa kare, karma-kāṇḍa jñāna-kāṇḍa sakale viṣera bhāṇḍa. Those who are taking to the karmīs' life or jñānīs' life, even jñānīs' life. Jñānīs' life means higher type of forms of body. Just like... So long... Here the jñānīs have got a very nice body, brahminical body, pure, cleansed, and beautiful, knowledge. The higher development, they can go still up, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, Siddhaloka, Brahmaloka. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā [Bg. 14.18]. The more you are in sattva-guṇa, you get higher level of living in higher planetary system. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā [Bg. 14.18]. Those who are on the modes of goodness of material nature, they go higher and higher, higher and higher. But Kṛṣṇa says, ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Even if you go to the Brahmaloka, that is also not security, that you get rid of the four principles of material life, birth, death, old age, and disease. Ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Again coming down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa... Even if you go to the impersonal Brahman effulgence, from there also, you have to come back. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. So, madhya-dhāma gatvā punar janma na... But anyone who reaches The jīva, another reason of falling down.

There is sometimes question, "How one who lived in association with Kṛṣṇa, how he fell down?" Generally those who are living with Kṛṣṇa or Vaikuṇṭha, they never fall down. But those who are in the effulgence of Kṛṣṇa, in the impersonal Brahman, they fall down. Because it is the propensity of the living entity to enjoy. But one cannot enjoy; there is no ānanda. Those who are merging in the Brahman effulgence, they are getting the department of eternity. The Brahman is sac-cid-ānanda. So they are simply accepting sad-aṁśa. Sad-aṁśa means only eternity. Just like if you are asked to sit down in a place eternally, no, it will be impossible. You must desire a change, variety, because we are living entities, living beings. So therefore our Vaiṣṇava philosophy has varieties of enjoyment.

This Māyāvādī philosophy, they are thinking of Brahman, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "I have become Nārāyaṇa." So how long they will think like that? Therefore they fall down. Artificially he is Brahman. That's all right. Everyone is Brahman. But simply thinking, "I am Brahman, I am Brahman." Suppose you are rich man. So if you simply think, "I am rich man, I am rich man, I am rich man," will that give you pleasure? You must act like a rich man. If I am rich man, I must have a very nice motor car, I must have very nice society, friendship, love, buildings. Then that will give me pleasure. And if I have got millions of dollars bank balance and if I think, "Oh, I am so rich man, I am so rich man, I am so rich man." That will not give you pleasure. Is it not practical? Try to understand. Will any rich man, if he thinks simply that "I am rich man, I am rich man," will he be happy in that way? Rather, a poor man who has got variegated life, he is happy.

Even Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme Lord, who has nothing to do, He also sometimes thinks that "I must fight with somebody. I must play. I must become subordinate to somebody." Therefore He comes. He becomes subordinate to Nanda-Yaśodā. That is pleasure. He becomes chastised. He fights with the demon. Some of the demons, they are devotees. Just like if I want to take massage, I find out my masseur from my devotees, with all strength. You see? I cannot go outside. Similarly, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The fighting spirit is there in Kṛṣṇa also. So when He wants to fight, in the Vaikuṇṭha there is no possibility of fight. Nobody will be able to fight. Nobody will agree to fight. So there is no fighting. Fighting means must be inimical propensity. Unless you think "I am your enemy," and I think "you are my enemy," the fighting is not going on. If I think, "I am fighting with my friend," it will be false fighting. Fighting must be between two strong enemies. Therefore sometimes Jaya Vijaya come. The question is that why the living entity falls down? It is not falls down. Just like Jaya Vijaya came just to satisfy his master. His master desired fighting, so some of His servant went to the material world and became great enemy like Hiraṇyakaśipu. Rāvaṇa. For killing Rāvaṇa, Rāma is coming. Well, Rāvaṇa could not be killed without Rāma. If Rāma desired, millions of Rāvaṇas could be killed in one second. And why He is coming to, personally to fight with him? Just to satisfy a pleasure pastime, that "I shall fight." That is variety.

Brahman, Brahman does not mean no variety. Varieties. There is fighting. Just like Kṛṣṇa was taking pleasure when His devotee Bhisma was piercing Him with arrows, actually. He was taking pleasure. So Viśvanātha Cakravartī has given this example, that this can be realized by this example, that when a lover kisses the opposite lover, even sometimes, kissing, there is blood come out, still, it is pleasing. In that kissing process, even blood comes out, still, it is pleasure. The lover does not complain. It is very suitable example given by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. So when Kṛṣṇa enjoys with His devotees, the fighting with piercing Kṛṣṇa's body, that is being enjoyed by Kṛṣṇa. I think I have explained this in Bhāgavata. So impersonal, without any variety, nobody can live. No live Even Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, He can also say. He wants variety. So this variety of forms... Because they want variety of enjoyment, therefore they have got different forms of body according to the association.

So Māyāvādī philosophers, when they come to know that this is māyā's place, so therefore they want to make it varietyless, formless. This is their theory. So, but that is not the solution. This is māyā. This form or no form, this is māyā. When we develop our real spiritual form and enjoy in company and association of the Supreme Lord varieties, just like Vṛndāvana, variety... In Vṛndāvana the cows, the trees, the water, they are also spiritual. Some devotee wants to serve Kṛṣṇa becoming a cow. Some devotee wants to serve Kṛṣṇa becoming a bird, becoming a monkey. And somebody is serving as gopī or as cowherd boy, as father, as mother. But they are all spiritual. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ. They are all expansion. Just like when Brahmā took away all the friends and cows of Kṛṣṇa, immediately expanded Himself in the same way. So all the cows and all the cowherd boys, in every case, they were all expansion of Kṛṣṇa, pleasure potency. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Nija-rūpa. So the varieties are there also, but here the variety is māyā. Māyayā bahu-rūpayā. The same example, the mirage. It appears like water, but that is not real water. Similarly, here māyayā, because it is false. They appear like that varieties but they are false. Māyayā bahu-rūpaya. Ramante. This ramante, this pleasure, is material pleasure because guṇeṣu. Ramamāṇa guṇeṣu asyā. They are trying to take pleasure in the material modes of nature. Mamāham iti manyate. What is that?

Devotee: Mamāham iti manyate.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So these varieties, they have created a sense of personal property, mama, "mine." Therefore they are fighting. "Oh, this is our country, Japanese country. This is this country. You have come here. Show me your visa," immigration. So māyayā, by māyā. Why you ask for visa? It is your property? No. They are thinking, "It is my property. It is my property." Just like in Australia and other countries, colonization. They usurped others' property, and now they are thinking, "It is our property." You see? Before their usurping, the property was there. So before their usurping when the property was there, whose property it is? So we come here with different forms and claim something, "This is my property." Another man claims, "It is my property." Actually this is māyā, false. Everything Kṛṣṇa's property. Īśāvasyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. "Oh, this is..." But māyā, they have created this false idea, "It is my property. It is my property." Mamāham iti manyate. The same thing explained in Bhagavad-gītā. Ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā. By false ego they have become befooled. Kartāham iti manyate. Kartā. Kartā means the proprietor or the master. He is not actually master, but under the influence of different modes of material nature he is feeling, "I am master. I am enjoyer. I am bhokta." This is the trouble. What is the next verse?



Pradyumna:



yarhi vāva mahimni sve

parasmin kāla-māyayoḥ

rameta gata-sammohas

tyaktvodāste tadobhayam

[SB 2.9.3]



Prabhupāda: Word by word.



Pradyumna: Yarhi...[break]



Prabhupāda: "I am now amongst the members of Kṛṣṇa conscious devotees. I am one of the devotees, and because I have taken this association, and because I am working under their direction, Kṛṣṇa must be pleased, and He must give me protection. Therefore, I should not reserve anymore anything. Let me fully surrender." No reservation, fully surrendered. [break] Our business is we want to sell books, not to make money. Now, if you simply take it formally... Hayagrīva has taken the formality. We have to keep some cows. Never mind we are to take payment from others. That is not cow protection. Cow protection means just like Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is tending the cows. He is going, taking the cows personally from His royal palace going to the forest whole day, working there. Is it not, cowherds boy? And taken some little fruit, mother, whatever mother has given. They are playing that. So this is cow protection, not that "Somebody will give money and we shall keep some third class cows and feed there and become cow protector." We must tend the cows very nicely so that they give us sufficient milk. And with that milk we shall live. "No, because we are giving protection to cow, you send money for the cows and the cow protectors, and earn money there and give us money. We shall eat nicely and sleep." As soon as this practice is going on, then next will be: "Give me some LSD, give me something else." This will go on. We don't want that.



Similarly, the GBC member means they will see that in every temple these books are very thoroughly being read and discussed and understood and applied in practical life. That is wanted, not to see the vouchers only, "How many books you have sold, and how many books are in the stock?" That is secondary. You may keep vouchers... If one is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, there is no need of vouchers. That is... Everyone is doing his best. That's all. So we have to see that things are going on very nicely. So in that way the GBC members should divide some zones and see very nicely that things are going on, that they are chanting sixteen rounds, and temple management is doing according to the routine work, and the books are being thoroughly discussed, being read, understood practically. These things are required. Now, suppose you go to sell some book and if somebody says, "You have read this book? Can you explain this verse?" then what you will say? You will say, "No. It is for you. It is not for me. I have to take money from you. That's all." Is that very nice answer?

Devotee: No, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Then? "We have written this book for your reading, not for our reading. We are simply collect money." That's all.



Sudāmā: Śrīla Prabhupāda? If while in the process of the studying of the book, there is some disagreement, one...



Prabhupāda: What disagreement? Everything is explained there. Why there shall be disagreement?



Sudāmā: Well, if there is no understanding, but still, the question, there is a question presented, then...



Prabhupāda: Then without understanding... or understanding... What is the difficulty? Everything is explained there. So what is the difficulty of disagreement? Everything, word to word meaning is there. Translation is there. Purport is there. Where is the difficulty?



Sudāmā: The point is, then, to practically apply. Then you will understand.



Prabhupāda: Practical application means that this "I" and "mine," it is all misconception. Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. I am His servant. When I say "I," "I" means "I am servant of Kṛṣṇa." And if I say "my, mine, Kṛṣṇa is mine. I am Kṛṣṇa's, Kṛṣṇa is mine." That is perfect "I" and "mine." "I am Brahman, I am God, I am the Supreme, I am moving the stars"-just like these rascals, they think like that-that is rascaldom. There are so many rascals, they think like that, meditate, "I am the Supreme, I am moving the star. I am moving the sun. It is being controlled by me." That is their meditation. That is explained there. That is their meditation. Is it not? Does not somebody meditate like that? They do not take actual, whether actually he is able to move the sun and moon, but foolishly thinking like that. They are taught that "If you simply think like that, then one day you will become." How impractical proposition.



Our proposition, that we also think about Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in order to enter into Kṛṣṇa con..., but not to become Kṛṣṇa, but to be allowed into the eternal pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭha. Our thinking, we are thinking of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6], not to become Kṛṣṇa, even not to become the cowherd boy. Ours is always-we want to become the servant of the cowherd boy. Those who are thinking of becoming gopī, the maidservant of another gopī. That is our proposition. If I think that "I shall become mother Yaśodā," that is also Māyāvāda. That is also Māyāvāda, exactly like that, if one thinks that "I shall become Kṛṣṇa." Our only proposition is how to be engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa. That is explained.

So if there is difficulty, we should discuss among ourselves and clear it, but there must be thorough discussion and understanding. And the president of the center, he should be able to answer the questions of other members. If he is unable, then he should ask the local general secretary. Then, at last, it should come to me, not that all the questions are going to me directly and "We are simply busy, vouchers and reports." So these things should be very carefully noted. The president means he must be very expert. He should be... Secretaries, they should be all expert in reading. This is our main business, to study, to know things. Otherwise, what is this? Now, this boy is asking question means he should have asked question to the senior members. What is your next question?

Devotee: The question is, Prabhupāda, that if there is question or not understanding in the course of a class, if the proper answer cannot be given, if one sincerely approaches you within the heart, then you will give understanding?



Prabhupāda: I have given understanding already in my book. That I am explaining. Why these books are being written? Just to explain things very nicely. They are already there. You try to understand. If you cannot understand, then you... [break] ...make the thing clear. But you are unable to understand. So in that case you have to cleanse yourself. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Both things. You must be able to understand and the instructor should be able to make you understand, both of them... Just like Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Parīkṣit Mahārāja, Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa. One answer, and he's answered, but the answer is not understandable by us. But Arjuna is understanding. Śukadeva Gosvāmī is understanding. Just like this is a question, attempt?



Bali-mardana: Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Parīkṣit?



Prabhupāda: Yes. So sometimes we cannot understand due to our incapable(?). But things are already there. So by discussing, by repeated trying to understand and being cleansed of heart, everything will be done. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. The two things are there-seva and praṇipāt: surrender, at the same time, service. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. If one is inclined to give service, then automatically things become understood. This is science like that.



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā-deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



This spiritual science cannot be understood simply by academic knowledge or by challenge. The sevā-vṛtti, the service attitude, must be there. Otherwise it will never be understood. Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā-deve tathā gurau. These are the Vedic injunction. So let us have...[break] Each and every śloka should be very, very scrutinizingly understood. That should be the first business in the temples. Of all these books. We have got so many books. Simply if we make arrangement for selling, not for understanding, then it will be simply materialistic. Both things must go on. Go on. (end)





720422SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.4

-

Japan, April 22, 1972



Prabhupāda: ...gata-sammohas tyaktvodāste tadobhayam. So chant this verse, beginning from... Practice.



Karandhara: Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam.



Prabhupāda: Brahmaṇe darśayan. Darśayan. Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam avyalīka-vratādṛtaḥ. Go on reading.



Karandhara: Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam. (devotees chant śloka with Śrīla Prabhupāda correcting)



Prabhupāda: You try to follow the transcription because you do not know devanāgarī alphabet. When there is chanting you follow the transcription.



ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-arthaṁ

yad āha bhagavān ṛtam

brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam

avyalīka-vratādṛtaḥ

[SB 2.9.4]



So read every verse. Practice it. Give everyone. [break] Purification means that one will be able to see God face to face. That is purification. Just like in the sky, as soon as the cloud is moved, dissipated, you can see the sun immediately. This is the process. God is everywhere, within and without. So why He is not seen? Because our senses are not perfect. God is everywhere. They say, "Oh, why you are going to temple. God is everywhere," as if he has seen God. These rascals say like that. "What is the use of going to temple? God is everywhere." Have you seen? No one has. You see?(?) Is it not, sometimes they say?



Sudāmā: Yes, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: If God is everywhere, why not in the temple? These are the atheistic proposal. If God is everywhere, so why not in the temple? In the temple I can see God, at least. The form of God, it is being worshiped, offered prasādam. So there is a spiritual atmosphere. So why shall I not go to the temple? So actually God is everywhere. That's a fact. But so long I am not purified, I have to see God as they are prescribed in the śāstra. Here the Deity, He is God, but because I have no power to see God, therefore I see that "Oh, it is made of wood. It is made of metal." That is my imperfect senses (perception?). But God is there also. God is everywhere, so God is here also. Why you are talking of metal and wood? From reasoning, argument, if God is everywhere, why not He is in the metal or wood? In your eyes it is metal, but we see God. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as soon as saw Jagannātha, He fainted. Therefore viśuddhy-artham. Ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-artham.



So we have to learn how to purify our senses. Then we can see God everywhere. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. Brahma-saṁhitā. Premāñjana-cchurita. When we develop love of God, prema añjana, that ointment... Just like we apply some ointment to the eyes to make it clear-our vision becomes clearer-similarly, there is ointment which is called love of Godhead. If we develop that love of Godhead, so by that ointment, when our imperfect eyes will be cleansed, then we can see God. This is the process. Ātma-tattva. So ātma-tattva viśuddhy-artham. Ātma-tattva. Yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. So the beginning of purification is first of all to understand "what I am. Am I this body or something else?" Ātma-tattva. If we can understand "myself, what I am," then I can understand God also. Or if I can understand God, then I can understand me also. Just like if you see the sun, you can see yourself also. In the darkness you cannot see yourself, neither the sun.

So that is called ātma-tattva. Light. At night, darkness, dense darkness, you cannot see anything. I am walking in the dark, but I cannot see my hands and legs, where I am going. I am afraid: "Whether I shall fall into some ditch?" This is my position. Therefore it has to be purified. Ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-arthaṁ yad āha bhagavān ṛtam: "Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality, as He says..." So therefore we have to cleanse ourself, viśuddhy-artha. In order to cleanse, we have to hear from Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is coming. Out His causeless mercy He is coming to reveal Himself, Kṛṣṇa: "It is like this. I am like this. You are like this." Both things. First, beginning, Kṛṣṇa said, "You are not this body." Aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś ca... [Bg. 2.11]. "Arjuna, you are talking like a very learned man, but you do not know what you are-not this body. You are not this body. Why you are lamenting for this body, your body and your brother's body, your grandfather's body, your children's body? But you are not body."

Therefore, in the first chastisement, Kṛṣṇa was accepted as spiritual master. A spiritual master has the right to chastise. Father, spiritual master, they are advised to chastise. Putraṁ ca śiṣyaṁ ca tāḍayen na tu lālayet. So father and teacher is advised by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita that "You should always chastise your son and disciple. Chastise." Tāḍayet. Tāḍayet means "Simply chastise. Always find out mistake." Don't be angry, but it is the business of the teacher and the father simply to find out your mistakes, not to find out your good things. Tāḍayen na tu lālayet. Lālayet means patting: "Oh, my dear son, my dear boy, you are so nice. You have done..." Sometimes it is done, but it is the business of the teacher and the father to chastise. Never recognize the disciple's business or son's business as very good. Then they will spoil. That is the injunction of Cāṇakya Muni. Lālane bahavo doṣāḥ: "If you simply pat, then there will be so many faults." Lālane bahavo doṣāḥ. Doṣāḥ means faults. Tāḍane bahavo guṇāḥ: "And if you chastise, oh, they will be very much qualified." Tāḍane bahavo guṇāḥ, tasmāt: therefore, putraṁ ca śiṣyaṁ ca tāḍayen na tu lālayet, "simply chastise. Don't pat." This is the injunction, moral injunction. So, so far we are concerned, when our spiritual master used to chastise, we took it as blessing. That was very nice. And he would chastise like anything. "Damn rascal, foolish, stupid," anything, all good words. (laughter)

One day it so happened... That was not my fault. My, another old godbrother, was... Prabhupāda was speaking. So I was very much fond of hearing. That gentleman, he was a retired doctor. So he wanted to speak something. He should not have done so, but... Just like... So naturally I also... And Prabhupāda saw it, and he became so angry. So he knew that my attention was drawn by him. He chastised him like anything. He was old man. Actually almost like his age. So he was paying sixty rupees in those days per month. So he became so angry, that "Do you think that because you pay sixty rupees, you have purchased us? You can do anything and anything?" He said like that. Very strong word he used. "Do you think that I am speaking for others? You have learned everything? You are diverting your attention." So many ways, he was very, very angry. You see? So this is nice, to chastise. Therefore, as soon as Kṛṣṇa was accepted as guru... Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam: [Bg. 2.7] "I become Your disciple." Because in the beginning there was friendly talks... So friendly talks cannot make any good advance. Talks must be between the spiritual master or teacher and the disciple.

So immediately, first of all, He chastised. Aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase: [Bg. 2.11] "Arjuna, you are talking like a learned man, but you are a fool number one." Gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ. That means "If you had been actually paṇḍita, learned man, then you would not have lamented for this body." Gatāsūn. "The body is neither a subject matter for lamentation, either living condition or dead condition. It has no value." This is the instruction, Kṛṣṇa's word. But the modern civilization, they are giving all value to this body, all their philanthropic work, hospitalization, and this, so many things. Just like our Mr. George Harrison, he raised how many millions dollars for...

Karandhara: Nine million.



Prabhupāda: Nine million dollars, and, to the... This is going on. In the Bhagavad-gītā we don't find anywhere a single line that "You raise funds for," I mean to say, "giving relief to the poor" or "to the suffering." Is there any instruction in Bhagavad-gītā? You have read. Can you find out? But these people, they have become more learned than Kṛṣṇa. In our country, Vivekananda: daridra-nārāyaṇa-sevā. The whole Ramakrishna Mission is collecting funds only on this rascal plea. One Swami Nikhilananda, he told me "Now the Americans are questioning that you are raising fund for feeding the poor, but when we go to India we see simply poor men. What you are doing with this money?" Actually they are doing nothing. They are collecting money in the name of feeding the poor, and they are living just like royal style, you see, eating all, everything.



So ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-artha. So we should not be very much attached for the benefit of this body. We must purify. Ātmā, ātma-tattva... Ātmā is sometimes... In Sanskrit language, ātmā is meant the body, the mind and the soul. So ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-artha: "In order to find out what is pure ātmā..." Now ātmā is covered with the subtle body and the gross body. So we should analyze whether this gross body is ātmā or the subtle body is ātmā. So they do not know, the modern civilization. The karmīs, they are accepting this gross body as ātmā, the gross body as ātmā, or the subtle body. The jñānīs, they are accepting mind, intelligence, as ātmā. But ātmā is above. Therefore we have to purify the idea of ātma-tattvam. Ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-artham. Ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-artham. Yad āha. So we have to hear from authorities, from Bhagavān. Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam avyalīka-vratādṛtaḥ. Because Brahmā underwent great tapasya for hundreds of years, so, being pleased upon Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa, explained to him this ātma-tattva.

So Kṛṣṇa is within. In the beginning of Bhāgavata, tene brahma hṛdā... The... Darśayan. When Brahmā saw the form of the Lord-not exactly outside but from within. And He educated him from within. Tene brahma hṛdā. Hṛdā means through the heart He transmitted the knowledge, bhagavat-tattva. And after understanding the bhagavat-tattva instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he wrote this Brahma-saṁhitā. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. There are hundred chapters of Brahma-saṁhitā. They are lost. Only the fifth chapter was found in a temple in a handwritten leaf. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu collected it, and He gave it to His disciple, that "This Brahma-saṁhitā is the summary of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So you take..." So Brahmā learned this, what is Kṛṣṇa, what is Bhagavān, from Bhagavān. So you have to learn also from Bhagavān. So Bhagavān is teaching Himself to Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa. And you try to understand as Arjuna understood. Then you also directly learn what is taught by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was accepted by Arjuna, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān: [Bg. 10.12] "You are Parabrahman. You are the Supreme Brahman." Paraṁ dhāma: "You are the rest of everything." Paraṁ dhāma. Pavitram is the supreme pure. Paramaṁ bhavān śāśvataṁ puruṣam: "You are puruṣam, enjoyer." So these things were accepted by Arjuna. So if we simply accept as Arjuna accepted, then we also learn what is Bhagavān. [break]

...also spiritual. Localized Paramātmā, that is also spiritual. And Bhagavān is... They are all spiritual, therefore all one. But according to my angle... So ultimately Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead... But because I cannot see, sometimes I realize a impersonal Brahman or localized Paramātmā. But actually the Absolute Truth, absolute person, is Kṛṣṇa. Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. Kṛṣṇa says, "There is no more superior truth above Me." So you realize the Absolute Truth in different stages, in the beginning as impersonal Brahman, impersonal Brahman. Just like you realize the sun as impersonal sunlight, then localized sun globe. But if you are able to enter into the sun globe, then you see the sun-god, Vivasvān. It is up to your power. But actually, from the person, sun-god, the light is coming. This is practical. The sun-god... Within the sun globe there is sun-god, Vivasvān. He is a person, Sūrya-nārāyaṇa. And there are persons also in that globe. They are living in the Sūryaloka. Similarly, there are person in the Candraloka. I do not know which Candraloka these people are going; they find no person there. But they say one side is dark. Whether one side is dark for them, in that side there may be. Anyway... So, yes. Then go on. "Generally..."

Pradyumna: "Generally people have many wrong conceptions about both of them. The wrong conception of the jīvātmā is to identify the material body with the pure soul. And the wrong conception of Paramātmā is to think Him on an equal level with the living entity. But both misconceptions can be removed by one stroke of bhakti-yoga, just as in the sunlight both the sun and the world and everything within the sunlight are properly seen. In the darkness no one can see the sun, nor himself, nor the world. But in the sunlight one can see the sun, himself, and the world around him. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī therefore says that for purification of both wrong conceptions, the Lord presented His eternal form before Brahmājī, being fully satisfied by Brahmā's nondeceptive vow of discharging bhakti-yoga."



Prabhupāda: Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. That is clearly said in the Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa says, "If you want to know Me, then you have to accept this bhakti-yoga. No other means will...," because without full surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, nobody can know Him. Even a very important man in this world, you cannot know him by challenge. But if you surrender, it is possible to know him. Then? [break]



Bhakti-yoga therefore requires little tapasya, not playthings, tapasya, that "We are addicted to so many sinful activities. We must give it up." That is tapasya. "We must observe fasting on ekādaśī day, on Lord's birthday." These are tapasya. If we do not... "We must chant sixteen rounds. We must observe the rules and regulations." This is tapasya. Don't make God very cheap thing: "Oh, it is very cheap thing." No. It has been made very easy for the Kali-yuga people because they cannot undergo any kind of tapasya. There is simple tapasya-"Chant sixteen rounds. Don't take this. Don't do this, four items. Take prasādam. Don't take anything." So nothing is stopped. A little regulated, that this much, if we do not do, then how we can expect to see God and understand God? Tapo divyam [SB 5.5.1]. If simply we remain like hogs and cats and dogs, then how it is possible to realize God? Paraṁ pavitram. If I do not become pavitra myself, pure, how I can see the supreme pure? It is impossible. Tapasya must be there. But for this age the tapasya has been minimized. Brahmā is the most important person within this universe. He underwent tapasya for a hundred years. Then he could see God and realize God. You cannot go such tapasya, undergo such tapasya. That is not possible in this age.

He has simply asked, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, very kindly. He is God. He is giving His own prescription: harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam, kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva: [Cc. Ādi 17.21] "Simply you chant." Because in this age it is very difficult... Every process... The yoga system, that is also tapasya. The jñāna system, that is also tapasya. Karma system also, that is also great tapasya. Karma means not working hard in the factory like cats and dogs. No, that is not karma. Karma means to perform the ritualistic ceremonies, big, big yajñas, sacrifices. That is karma.

So where is your money? You cannot provide your food even for two meals. That is the position. For two meals only, people are going... [break] ...twenty miles. You see? Fifty miles, sixty miles, forty miles-that is common thing. Or they are sometimes coming from 120 miles in train. And I have seen in Canada. They are going by plane from Vancouver to Montreal or something like that, their daily business. Similarly, in your country also, there are many men coming daily Los Angeles, five hundred miles by plane. This is your civilization. For two meals only, you have to make so much tapasya-fifty miles, hundred miles, five hundred miles, go and come back. There is a story that one gentleman, he was coming to Calcutta early in the morning because he has to go hundred miles, so to catch the first train at six o'clock. Then he will reach at nine o'clock in city. Then he can attend office at ten o'clock. So... And again, going back, the office hour is finished at five o'clock. He was to go to home at ten o'clock. But still, he will go for sleeping six hours. The whole day and night is engaged for earning two meals. So they will undergo so much tapasya only for two meals which is obtained very easily by the cats and dogs. But they are not prepared to undergo any tapasya for understanding God. This is their position. For meals the birds, bees, they are not going to office. There are 8,400,000 forms of life. Only the civilized form of, the so-called civilized men, they are undergoing so much trouble for their meals. But others, they are not going fifty miles. They have got ready food. They sit down on any tree. Oh, there are enough fruits. Little eating, finish their business. Or take the elephants also. They are eating so much. They have got also food. Therefore śāstra says that "Food is already there." So many people say, "Oh, so many people are dying, starving." And where is the man? Show me who is dying for starvation. These are all pleas. They won't take any tapasya for understanding, but they will work hard like asses, like hogs and dogs, for two meals. But we should consider that we are taking so much penances for simply filling our this hungry belly, appetite. Why not little tapasya for Kṛṣṇa, chanting sixteen rounds? But will... That is also very difficult. Then? Tapasya, penance in pure bhakti-yoga.

Pradyumna: "The form of the Lord which was manifested before Brahmā..." [break]



Prabhupāda: ...intelligence that our form we change or we die, so Kṛṣṇa never dies. Kṛṣṇa never dies. The evidence of death is... Just like in our past life we had some body and we died. We have got another body. Kṛṣṇa does not die means He does not change His body. Sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā [Bg. 4.6]. If He would have died, then He could not recollect in His mind the incident which happened millions of years ago. He says, vivasvān, proktavān aham avyayam, vivasvān manave prāha. When Arjuna inquired that "You say that You instructed this Bhagavad-gītā, this science, to Vivasvān long, long, millions of years ago. How can I believe it?" Therefore He said, "I remember it. You don't remember. Therefore I do not die. You die." This is it. One who can remember, he does not die. Just like I... So long I can remember of my childhood activities, boyhood activities, I have not died. Is it not? Although the body is gone. This is the evidence that Kṛṣṇa does not die. Try to understand this point. Death means forgetting everything. That is death. But if you can remember, that is not death. It is clear?



Devotees: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So I change my body, but I remember that I was a child, I was a boy, I was playing like this. I was doing like this. My mother was chastising me like this. Therefore I am not dead. But the body is gone. So this is the distinction between death and life. If you can remember, then you have not died. And if you forget, that is death. But the ātmā is permanent, eternal. So Kṛṣṇa does not die. Otherwise, how He could remember? This is the reason. You try to understand all this reasoning. You have to preach. This is the reason. Because Kṛṣṇa says that "I remember everything," therefore Kṛṣṇa does not die. Is it established or not? Yes. You say... My personal example... Because I remember all my childhood, boyhood activities, therefore I am not dead. Nobody says that "You are dead man," although my body has changed, because I can remember. And as soon as I shall forget, that is death.



Then? One heard and one spoke. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣit. Parīkṣit Mahārāja sat down. He did not do anything. He simply heard about Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, activities. So śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe: "Simply by hearing, Parīkṣit attained perfection." Abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane. Vaiyāsaki. Vaiyāsaki means Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Kīrtane. He simply narrated. He also gained. Therefore śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. There are nine different processes of bhakti-yoga. Any one of them you adopt, you become perfect, not that you have to adopt nine. If you can, it is very nice. So nine, eight, seven, six, five-if you adopt only one, you become... You don't anything. Simply hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from a realized soul, you will become perfect. So śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam, arcanaṁ vandanam. If you simply worship the Deity in regulated form, you become perfect. This is arcanam. Śravaṇam. So all the methods are there. You adopt any one of them; you become perfect. Simply you offer prayer-you become perfect. Vandanam. You simply work. You simply wash this temple and sweep this temple regularly with heart and soul-you become perfect. You don't require even to read. So dāsyam. Dāsyam means simply work as menial servant of Kṛṣṇa. Dāsyam. Sakhyam. Arjuna. Just like Arjuna. He made simply friendship with Kṛṣṇa. In friendship so many insulting words are used also. So

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



So any one of them you adopt, you become perfect. So the best thing is nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. If you hear Bhāgavata... This Bhāgavata is written for hearing, for hearing, discussing. Otherwise, why we are taking so much time? So here it is said that "Both Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Parīkṣit Mahārāja attained perfection through the medium of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." So any questions?



Devotee (1): You said that a person progresses through the three levels of God realization from Brahman realization. Is that true also for a Vaiṣṇava? Does he first attain Brahman realization and then Paramātmā, or does he...



Prabhupāda: Vaiṣṇava, immediately given lift to the Supreme Person, and because he understands Supreme Person, automatically he understands what is Paramātmā and what is Brahman. Others, they go step by step, but Vaiṣṇava is given immediate lift. Just like somebody is earning money, ten dollars, fifteen dollars, twenty dollars, and he is thinking of accumulating money, 100,000 dollars. So if somebody gives him immediately 100,000 dollars, "Take this," then ten dollars, fifteen, twenty dollars, hundred dollars, thousand dollars are all in. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. If you simply have tried to understand Kṛṣṇa, then you understand everything. Then Kṛṣṇa says, brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā: "The impersonal Brahman is resting upon Me." So you immediately understand what is impersonal Brahman. Yasya prabhā: [Bs. 5.40] "It is the effulgence of Kṛṣṇa's body." Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. You understand, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa resides in everyone's heart as Paramātmā." So immediately understand what is Paramātmā. Immediately understand what is Brahman.



Devotee (1): Because it is a gradual process...



Prabhupāda: No, gradual process for the others, not for the devotee. Devotee is given immediately and that also in a simple way: in His form of name, nāma-rūpe. You simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. So devotee is privileged so much, especially in this age, that "You take God, the Supreme Absolute Truth, by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." If you do it properly, then everything is done. You are given the thing immediately, but it may take some time. That is gradual. That is another thing. And for others, those who are trying to know the Absolute Truth by their own effort, for them, first realization is Brahman. Then next realization is Paramātmā. And if they can surpass these two realizations, then, some day, they may become fortunate to understand what is the Supreme Person. [break]



Cintāmaṇi: ...can't we remember like when we were in the womb of our mother? We can remember things, like when we were children, but we have no memory. When we were...



Prabhupāda: Hm? What is that?



Karandhara: Why aren't we able to recall when we were in the womb?



Prabhupāda: Room?



Karandhara: The womb of the mother.



Prabhupāda: What is to be done in the mother's womb? What is to be done? What is the question? I cannot understand.



Karandhara: She wants to know why we can't remember that, why I can't remember when I was in the womb.



Prabhupāda: You cannot remember so many things.



Cintāmaṇi: But you said that when we change bodies we forget everything, that after death that... I don't understand.



Prabhupāda: Oh. Change bodies... Just like you have changed your body from the body of the womb, and at the present moment... But you don't remember all the incidences that have happened. So sometimes we remember; sometimes we do not remember, like that. But generally, if we... We remember during lifetime, but we forget also. Even if we forget, that does not mean I am dead. Forgetfulness is explained, māyā. We forget Kṛṣṇa. We forget that "I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa" by forgetfulness. That is explained. What is that? Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan. Ātma-māyā. It is a illusion. That forgetful... Actually there is no forgetfulness. I should not forget, but because I am illusioned, therefore I forget. Because... I forget means I am illusioned. Ātma-māyā. Influenced by the modes of material... The one who is most influenced by the modes of material nature, they forget. Just like you are worshiping Kṛṣṇa. But others, they are not worshiping. They are to be awakened to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It does not mean they are actually separate from Kṛṣṇa. But they have to be awakened. They say man is not dead, he is sleeping. But he has to be awakened. As soon as he is awakened, he remembers immediately. This is called svapna-citta-nyāya. I am sleeping, forgetting everything. I am in a different place. But as soon as I am awakened I remember, "Oh, I have to do this, I have to go there." So this forgetfulness is a temporary illusion, that's all. Actually we don't forget. It is temporary. Ātma-māyām ṛte. It is only it is action of God's external energy. Because I wanted to forget Kṛṣṇa, therefore Kṛṣṇa has helped me in forgetting Him by His own illusory energy. Have saṅkīrtana. (end)





720423SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.4-8

-

Tokyo, April 23, 1972



Prabhupāda: ...darśayan rūpam avyalīka-vratādṛtaḥ. He manifested His form to Brahmā. That means God is not formless. If He is formless then how He could show His form? Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam avyalīka. Avyalīka means without any cheating. Where is avyalīka? "Without any deceptive motive." So those who have realized impersonal form, not form, impersonal feature, they are cheated. They do not know actually what is God, what is the Absolute Truth. Avyalīka-vrata. And why Brahmā was favored to see the form of the Lord? Because he underwent severe tapasya, vow, worship. So God, or the Absolute Truth, is not formless. He has his form, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. But that can be seen only by persons who underwent severe austerities, penances, or engaged in devotion. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Otherwise, they will remain impersonal. The conclusion is, those who are impersonalists, their knowledge is imperfect. They have still to go forward.



Therefore Bhagavad-gītā says bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births of continued impersonal views, when he actually comes to the right platform of knowledge, he surrenders to Vāsudeva. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ: [Bg. 7.19] "That mahātmā, that saintly person, is very rare." All the so-called swamis or yogis, they are all impersonalists. Therefore our swamis, they are very rare. They are not ordinary, these so-called swamis and yogis because they know the personal feature of God. Go on.

Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verses 5-8)



sa ādi-devo jagatāṁ paro guruḥ

svadhiṣṇyam āsthāya sisṛkṣayaikṣata

tāṁ nādhyagacchad dṛśam atra sammatāṁ

prapañca-nirmāṇa-vidhir yayā bhavet

sa cintayan dvy-akṣaram ekadāmbhasy

upāśṛṇod dvir-gaditaṁ vaco vibhuḥ

sparśeṣu yat ṣoḍaśam ekaviṁśaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ nṛpa yad dhanaṁ viduḥ

niśamya tad-vaktṛ-didṛkṣayā diśo

vilokya tatrānyad apaśyamānaḥ

svadhiṣṇyam āsthāya vimṛśya tad-dhitaṁ

tapasy upādiṣṭa ivādadhe manaḥ

divyaṁ sahasrābdam amogha-darśano

jitānilātmā vijitobhayendriyaḥ

atapyata smākhila-loka-tāpanaṁ

tapas tapīyāṁs tapatāṁ samāhitaḥ



Prabhupāda: Word by word first.



Pradyumna: (leads transliteration of verse 8 word by word.) divyam-pertaining to the demigods in the higher planets; sahasra-one thousand; abdam-years; amogha-spotless, without a tinge of impurity; darśanaḥ-one who has such a vision of life; jita-controlled; anila-life; ātmā-mind; vijita-controlled over; ubhaya-both; indriyaḥ-one who has such senses; atapyata-executed penance; sma-in the past; akhila-all; loka-planet; tāpanam-enlightening; tapaḥ-penance; tapīyān-extremely hard penance; tapatām-of all the executors of penances; samāhitaḥ-thus situated. [break]



Prabhupāda: ...memory was so sharp, that once heard, it is practiced immediately. In the Kali-yuga this memory is declining, and they are proud, "We are advanced." There is no question of advancement. It is simply degraded. But this is māyā. Falsely they are thinking, "We are advanced." In this age, memory will be reduced, duration of life will be reduced, people's merciful tendency will be reduced, strength of the body will be reduced. In this way everything will be reduced. Now we do not find very strong men, very strong memory, living for a long time, bodily strength. No. These are reducing. Now people are not merciful. One man is being killed before you in the street; nobody takes care. This is the sign of Kali-yuga. Everything will be reduced. Memory also being reduced. There are eight kinds of things reducing. One of them, these four, five, I have already mentioned. Important things. The duration of life is reducing, no sympathy, no sympathy. One is suffering from some disease; nobody is taking care. This is the sign of Kali-yuga. "Oh, let him die. Let me live." These are the signs of Kali-yuga: no memory, no sympathy, no long duration of life, no bodily strength, no education. This is the symptoms of Kali-yuga. Therefore the only means is harer nāma harer nāma harer nāma [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. They cannot in the ordinary way it is impossible to make advancement.



The so-called yogis, karmīs, they are all cheaters. They show some bodily gymnastic and talks all nonsense, becomes God within a week or six months. These things are going on. Very precarious condition. Therefore it is, kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva: "Kalau, in this age, Kali-yuga, there is no other alternative." And I see practically our society, our students. They are simply, practically chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. So compare any so-called yogi and jñānī and sannyāsī. They cannot stand before them in their... Even though they are not perfectly advanced, still, they cannot stand. People are appreciating. So stick to your principles.

This morning I was reading Kṛṣṇa's activities. Regularly He was rising three hours before sunrise, regularly. His wives were disgusted. As soon as there will be cock crowing, "Kakako!" Kṛṣṇa immediately... (laughter) That is warning. That is warning, nature's warning. There is no need of alarm bell. And the alarm bell going on, but he is sleeping sound. (laughter) No. And if he by chance rises, immediately stops so that it may disturb, it may not disturb. But there is nature's alarming bell, that cock crowing at three o'clock. According to the... And Kṛṣṇa will immediately rise. Although He was sleeping with His beautiful queens... The queens were disgusted. They were cursing this cock crowing, "Now Kṛṣṇa will go away. Kṛṣṇa will go away." But Kṛṣṇa, He used to rise early. You read Kṛṣṇa's activities in our Kṛṣṇa book. So if you are Kṛṣṇa conscious, then...

We cannot imitate Kṛṣṇa, but we can follow Kṛṣṇa. We can follow His footsteps, how He was living. He was a gṛhastha. He was not a sannyāsī. So our sannyāsī is not very great credit. To remain gṛhastha, because we are going back to Godhead, back to home, the whole, our master, is gṛhastha. Not only gṛhastha, He has got so many wives. So to become sannyāsī is not very great credit, according to our Vaiṣṇava philosophy. To become perfect house-holder, that is credit. Perfect householder, like Kṛṣṇa. Read Kṛṣṇa book regularly. Why these books are written? Only for selling? Taking statistics, "How many books you have sold?" You learn, read. Always read, twenty-four hours. As soon as you get time, read. I do that. I do that. Reading, writing, or chanting. But when there is no other way, you sleep little. Not to enjoy sleep, but because it is not possible to continue, all right, sleep one hour, two hours, three hours, four hours, five hours. Not more than that. Not that I am sleeping, enjoying life, up to eight o'clock, twelve o'clock.

In Western countries they sleep twelve o'clock. As soon as there was kīrtana, half-naked he used to come in New York. He used to complain, Mr. Chudy, "Oh, it is..." "Mr. Chudy, sir, I cannot do anything. You request them." That was being done in our 26 Avenue. Always police complaint, police used to come. But we did not stop. So things should be learned. We have got so many books, everything is there. Now here is tapasya. Akhila-loka-tāpanam. Akhila-loka. The whole universe became perturbed by the tapasya of Brahmā. Now go on. You finished all reading? Yes. (more devotees lead chanting of verse 8, Śrīla Prabhupāda giving corrections in pronunciation)

Prabhupāda: This is called anuprāsa. It is literary beauty. Everything "ta." Tapas tapīyāṁs tapatāṁ samāhitaḥ. Anuprāsa. So many t's in one line. Tapas tapīyān. So in Bhāgavata, it is not that whimsically written. There is literary beauty, metaphor, simile, and what is called, symmetry, reason(?). Everything is complete. Not that whimsically a line, three lines, one line, and two lines, and it becomes a poetry. In Sanskrit poetry writing is not so easy. You have to follow so many rules and regulations. How many words in the beginning, first line, how many words in the second line. Sāhitya-darpaṇa. There is a book, Sāhitya-darpaṇa. Therefore it is called Sanskrit. Sanskrit, everything is reformed. It is not like that "Beauty but, peuty put." If you say "u," "aḥ," then you must say "beauty but" and "peuty put." But not that sometimes "pute," sometimes "but." No. That will not be allowed in Sanskrit. The pronunciation must be regular. You cannot change. Saṁskṛta. Saṁskṛta means reformed, Sanskrit language. Devanāgarī. This language is spoken in the higher planetary system, even in Vaikuṇṭha. This language is spoken. Devanāgarī. Deva-nagara. Just like Tokyo is Japan-nagara, similarly... Nagara means city. And the citizens are called nāgarī. One who lives in the city, they are called nāgarī. So devanāgarī. These alphabets, letters, are called devanāgarī. But in the cities of the demigods, this language is spoken. Devanāgarī.



They do not know whether there are cities. They simply go to other planet and say there is no men, no living entities. Why God created such planet where there is no living entity? How it is possible? In everywhere we see living entity, and why one planet is there where there is no life? This is most obnoxious. I cannot believe that. How it is possible? We see while walking on the street, even within the earth... In jungle, neighbor, nobody goes. Full many, full many of flower... And there are trees. And see. Nobody sees where there are flowers. Why Candraloka is so condemned that there is no living entities, no trees, no plants, and only some dust? And these people go and bring some dust, take all credit. It cannot be.

According to our Vedic instruction, living entity is called sarva-ga. Sarva-ga. The living entity can go anywhere, anywhere. Why not in Candraloka? You are going. And why previous to you nobody was there? So it is very doubtful. What do you think? From reasoning point of view. And we get information from the śāstra that it is one of the heavenly planets. People live there for ten thousands of years. They drink soma-rasa. These are statement in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It is not yet published. We have explained this. It is cold. And that is also admitted by scientists here. It is 200 degrees below zero. Therefore they require some heating beverage. That is called soma-rasa. The Bhagavad-gītā also it is stated. And how we can believe that there is no living entity. One side is dark, and one side is full of dust. These are our doubts. What is your version? You think it is all right?

Sudāmā: No.



Bhūrijana: It's silly to have a prison house if there are no prisoners.



Prabhupāda: Huh?



Bhūrijana: Why build a prison house if there are no prisoners in it.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Sarva-ga. We practically see everywhere living entities. Why this planet is made solitary-there is no living entity? How we can conclude like that? Even in the desert here there are living entities. This is... What is called this, cactus?



Sudāmā: Cactus. Yes.



Prabhupāda: They grow in desert. Sometimes watermelon, watermelon. Watermelon is grown in desert very nice. So how you can conclude that there is no life. Cactus is also life.



Sudāmā: Śrīla Prabhupāda? If they are really going there in the moon planet, then the bodies of the living entities are different than our bodies because the...



Prabhupāda: No, you cannot go and live there.



Sudāmā: Right. So perhaps if they are really going there, then if they cannot..., and the living entities are living there as it is stated in the scripture, then perhaps they are doing very much damage or intruding, going against the laws of nature.



Prabhupāda: First of all let us admit that they are going. That is my first objection, whether they are actually going or giving bluff.



Pradyumna: And you suggested before that if on the moon planet there was such intelligent beings, that if someone was aiming to go to the moon, they could just by mystic powers...



Prabhupāda: Yes. Divert them.



Pradyumna: Divert them.



Prabhupāda: To some hellish place. (laughter) Nowadays they are going airplane, sometimes diverted. Yes. So if they are demigods, they have got better brain and... There are so many questionable things, contradictions of the... We cannot take, accept it, that the statement in the Vedic literature, they are not right, but they are right. No, we cannot. Next. (devotees continue reciting verse SB 2.9.8 )



divyaṁ sahasrābdam amogha-darśano

jitānilātmā vijitobhayendriyaḥ

tapyata smākhila-loka-tāpanaṁ

tapas tapīyāṁs tapatāṁ samāhitaḥ



Prabhupāda: Just like when the first sputnik traveled round the world. In one hour, twenty-five minutes, this whole world was circum(am)bulated. So actually it takes so many hours if you circumambulate the whole world, 25,000 miles. Even by plane it will take day and night. What is the speed of aeroplane?



devotee: Five hundred miles an hour.



Prabhupāda: So one thousand miles, two hours. So 25,000 miles it will take fifty hours. But by other arrangement, it was circum(am)bulated one hour, twenty-five minutes. So, similarly, by other arrangement it can be done in one minute, in one second. It is a question of arranging. It is, therefore, all relative. Everything is relative. You cannot walk... The ant cannot walk. Therefore it should be like this, it should be like that, according to my convenience. No, relative. You have got greater power, greater speed than... My speed, your speed, may (be) different. Therefore what is one hundred years for me, it may be one second for you. It is relative, all relative truth. In your calculation it is one hundred years. In my calculation it is one second. Therefore Brahmā's duration of life is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. Brahmaṇe, Here also divyam. Sahasrābdam. Now divyaṁ sahasrābdam. Brahmā's one day, one twelve hours, daytime, we cannot calculate. Our, according to our calculation it is... Sahasra-yuga. Sahasra-yuga. Yuga. Yugas means these Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, Kali. That means forty three hundred thousands of years. And thousand times, forty three hundred thousands of years, that makes Brahmā's one day of twelve hours.



So rascals will say these are all imagination. Not imagination. Because relative truth. Your speed, your power... Just like an ant. An ant lives, say, for few hours. That is also his hundred years. A germ lives for few seconds. That is also his hundred years. So this hundred years, they are relative. One hundred years calculation your, one hundred years of the demigods or one hundred years calculation of the ant, they are not the same. According to the body, according to the power, the calculation is there. Time is unlimited. Time is unlimited, but according to my body, a certain duration of period, I say it is hundred years, when we make our history. So therefore it is said, divyaṁ sahasra. One may not miscalculate, that sahasra, one hundred. No, śata is hundred. Śata is hundred. It is sahasra, means thousand. Divyaṁ sahasrābdam. Go on.

Pradyumna: (devotees repeating) sahasra-one thousand; abdam-years; amogha-spotless, without a tinge of impurity; darśanaḥ-one who has such a vision of life; jita-controlled; anila-life; ātmā-mind; vijita...



Prabhupāda: That anila, life. The soul is being carried by that anila, air. The yoga system is controlling the air, apāna, prāṇa, udāna. There are different kinds of air, passing. And the ātmā is within that air. The yoga system is to take the ātmā, sata-cakra(?), from down to up. That is yoga practice. So anila means life air, and the ātmā, the soul, is within the air. So by perfect yogic practice, with this air the yogi can transfer himself to any planet. That is yoga, not that showing some gymnastic without any rules and regulation, without following any principles. These are all bogus. Actual yoga practice is to control the air within this body. Then, by mechanical means, he can control, and at the perfection, the yogi can leave this body according to his will. That means unless he thinks that "I am now perfect; I can transfer to any planet," he does not leave the body. Therefore yogis... Still there are yogis who are seven hundred years old, three hundred years old, four hundred years. You see just like young man. Still in India you'll find such yogis. They can give complete history which happened two hundred years here. Simultaneously, history they can give. "This happened. This Englishman was here. He did..." like that.



So actually I am not this body. So if by some method I can see it, that is samādhi. We have got a limited number of breathing power. This is going on, breathing. So everyone has got... Just like you have got bank balance-one has got one thousand or hundred years, er, one hundred dollars or one thousand dollars-similarly, every living entity has got a number of breathings. That is...[break] But if you spend, if you spend, then one day it becomes one dollar. So the yoga practice is not to waste this breathing. The breathing is wasted when you eat voraciously, when you have sex life, when you are... These breathings are lost, wasted. So one has to control these things. Then breathing will be reserved. And plus, by samādhi, no breathing. That is the process of increasing life. Increasing life means you have got a certain amount of breathing facility. If you can save it without spending... Therefore you have to control your senses, the mind, your activities, your eating, your sleeping. Because these are breathing, when sleeping, (makes snoring sound) breathing, lost breathing. Sex, lost breathing. Eating voraciously, lost breathing. Therefore they have to control all these things. Then you can increase your duration of life. That is called prāṇāyāma. This is called prāṇāyāma. Prāṇa means life, this life, prāṇa. What is that?

Devotee: Your Divine Grace, is this also true that every species of life... For instance, plants and trees, don't appear to be breathing as we do, but they breathe through their...



Prabhupāda: Don't appear to you. What do you know about plant life? Something does not appear to you, that does not mean there is nothing such thing. You don't be so courageous that you know everything. You have to know from the śāstra. They have got breathing. They have got feeling also. That is already proved by modern scientists, Sir Jagadish Chandra Bose, that when you cut a plant, it feels the pain and it is recorded in the machine, the feeling. So everything is there. As soon as you find some living entity... A small full stop-like... Sometimes you find in the book. It is lesser than the full-stop. It is moving, (makes sound) "but, but, but, but." It has got heart; it has got legs; it has got everything within it. Otherwise, how it is working? Everything is there. This is rascaldom, that "This has got soul; this has got no soul." This is rascal's theory. Living entity so small, one ten-thousandth part of the top tip of the hair, we are. Very... You cannot imagine. So any life he takes, any form, it has got all the, I mean to say, functional thing. Everything is there. That is God's creation. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. The biggest of the biggest. He has got the same, what is called, physiological construction. And the ant, he has got the same physiological construction. You cannot see. What is your strength? That we are studying with our tiny brain, "Oh, it has got no breathing. It has no soul," that is our tiny brain.



But we have to know actually from authentic śāstra what is the actual thing. Śāstra-cakṣusā. You don't see with your, these blunt eyes, rascal eyes We see through the śāstras. That should be. That is real knowledge. What is our capacity of these eyes, these senses? They are all imperfect. So whatever knowledge you gather, the so-called scientists, they are all imperfect. Real perfect knowledge is here, Veda. Vedaiś ca sarvaiḥ. Therefore you should see through the Vedic version what is actually the fact. So the living entities, sarva-ga. Sarva-ga means a living entity can enter anywhere, and the material function is there. Just like we say "The point has no length, no breadth." Why? But I can see point. Why length and...? "I have no instrument to measure it." That you say. You cannot say there is no length and breadth. You have no instrument to measure what is the length and breadth of the point. You say...

Similarly you cannot understand what is the form of God. You say, "Oh, God is false." But from the śāstra we can understand. Here it is said that rūpaṁ sa ādi-devo jagatāṁ paro guruḥ. Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam. So if God has no form, how He showed His form to Brahmā? He has form. Brahmā has attained the perfection to see the form of God, and the rascals who have no such perfection, they say "No form." That is the position. They, with their imperfect senses, all rascal theories, they are thinking that they have become perfect. But they are not perfect. First thing is that the senses with which you are studying, they are imperfect. What is the value of our eyes? Unless there is sunlight, you cannot see. So how can you say that "Our seeing is absolute"? It is relative. So whatever knowledge we are getting, they're all relative knowledge. Relative means according to my power I am studying, "This is this. This is this." But they are all wrong. You do not know what is actually the position. Therefore the conclusion is that we have to take knowledge from the perfect. Śāstra-cakṣusā. Your eyes should be... Actually we are doing that. Now, directly we are seeing the sun. We see just like the disk. But when you go through scientific books, geographic and other authorit..., astronomy, they, "No, the sun is fourteen hundred thousand times bigger than this planet." So actually we are understanding about the sun not by our direct eyes but through the authoritative knowledge, through the śāstra, through the books.

Śruti-pramāṇam. That is evidence, śruti-pramāṇam. Śruti means Veda. In the Vedas it is stated... Just like Brahmā. He is receiving Vedic knowledge from, directly from God, Kṛṣṇa. Brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam. This is the process of understanding. Brahmā, how Brahmā is receiving knowledge? Directly he sees there is nobody there, but he is receiving knowledge. Directly he could not see. Upāśṛṇot, upāśṛṇot. Upāśṛṇot: "He simply heard." Upāśṛṇot. Ear, not the eyes. So therefore knowledge has to be gathered by aural reception, not by the eyes. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that, "Do not try to see a saintly person. You try to hear a saintly person." If you see a long beard and very strong man, he is a great sādhu. Oh. That's it." No. You have to hear. What does he speak? Then you understand. Upāśṛṇot. Divyaṁ sahasrābdam. Then? Go on.

Pradyumna: Vijita-controlled over; ubhaya-both; indriyaḥ-one who has such senses; atapyata-executed penance; sma-in the past; akhila-all; loka-planet; tāpanam-enlightening; tapaḥ-penance; tapīyān-extremely hard penance; tapatām-of all the executors of penances; samāhitaḥ-thus situated.



Prabhupāda: Then?



Pradyumna: "Translation: Lord Brahmā underwent penances for one thousand years by the calculations of the demigods. He heard this transcendental vibration from the sky and he accepted it as divine. Thus he controlled his mind and senses and the penances which he executed were a great lesson for the living entities. Thus he is known as the greatest of all ascetics."



Prabhupāda: So one has to become ascetic and therefore penance. Then these things will be learned. Not with imperfect senses, imperfect conclusion we can understand. No. Then?



Pradyumna: "Purport: Lord Brahmā then heard the occult sound tapa, but he did not see the person who vibrated the sound. And still he accepted the instruction as beneficial for him, and therefore he engaged himself in meditation for one thousand celestial years. One celestial year is equal to 6 x 30 x 12 x 1000 of our years. His acceptance of the sound was due to his pure vision of the absolute nature of the Lord. And due to his correct vision he made no distinction between the Lord and the Lord's instruction. There is no difference between the Lord and the sound vibration coming from Him, even though He is not personally present. The best way of understanding is to accept such a divine instruction, and Brahmā, the prime spiritual master of everyone, is the living example of this process of receiving transcendental knowledge. The potency of transcendental sound is never minimized because the vibrator is apparently absent. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or the Bhagavad-gītā or any revealed scripture in the world is never to be accepted as an ordinary mundane sound without transcendental potency.



One has to receive the transcendental sound from the right source and accept it as a reality and prosecute the direction without any hesitation, and the secret of success is to receive the sound from the right source of a bona fide spiritual master. Mundane manufactured sound has no potency, and as such, seemingly transcendental sound received from an unauthorized person also has no potency. One should be qualified enough to discern such transcendental potency, and either by discriminating or by fortunate chance, if one is able to receive the transcendental sound from a bona fide spiritual master, his path of liberation is guaranteed. The disciple, however, must be ready to execute the order of the bona fide spiritual master, as Lord Brahmā executed the instruction of his spiritual master, the Lord Himself. Following the order of the bona fide spiritual master is the only duty of the disciple, and this completely faithful execution of the order of the bona fide spiritual master is the secret of success.

Lord Brahmā controlled his two grades of senses by means of sense perception and sense organs, because he had to engage such senses in the execution of the order of the Lord. Therefore controlling the senses means to engage them in the transcendental service of the Lord. The Lord's order descends in disciplic succession..."

Prabhupāda: If you simply engage your senses to execute the order of the Lord, then it is controlled. Otherwise, you cannot control. It is impossible because we have got our senses-they are very strong. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. The mind is the master of the senses. The central sense, the chief sense, the prime minister sense is the mind. Therefore Mahārāja Ambarīṣa first of all engaged his mind in Kṛṣṇa. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. If you engage your mind always to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then the sense deviation, sense going other, otherwise-immediately controlled. Immediately controlled. The senses are very strong. They are compared with serpents. Durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī. Kāla-sarpa. Just like cobra. Someway or other, it touches-immediately death. So our senses are so strong that it is simply dragging us towards hell. Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisram [SB 7.5.30]. Mind is dragging somewhere, eye is dragging somewhere, ear is dragging somewhere, and touch sensation is dragging somewhere. In this way we are perplexed.



Therefore the process is sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. You have to engage your mind unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and your tongue, always chanting and taking little prasādam. Then all senses will be controlled. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. And see. Eyes should be engaged to see the Deity, very gorgeously, nicely dressed. Then our eyes will not ask, "Oh, let me see this beautiful woman." No. You will see the most beautiful woman, Rādhārāṇī, and you will become... Similarly, ear should be engaged always hearing about Kṛṣṇa. Eyes, ear... Nose should be engaged for smelling the flower which is offered to Kṛṣṇa. Legs should be engaged for preaching work going or going to the temple. Hands should be engaged for cleansing the temple. In this, way if you are engaged always your senses, you are perfect. You are the greatest yogi. Yogi means yoga indriya-saṁyamaḥ: "Yoga practice means to control the senses." But this bhakti process is so nice-automatically senses are controlled.

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



He is the highest yogi. Those whose senses are always engaged in serving or satisfying Kṛṣṇa, he is the greatest yogi. Finished? "Therefore controlling the senses means to engage them in the transcendental service of the Lord."



Pradyumna: "The Lord's order descends in disciplic succession through the bona fide spiritual master, and thus execution of the order of the bona fide spiritual master is factual control of the senses. Such execution of penance in full faith and sincerity made Brahmājī so powerful that he became the creator of the universe. And because he was able to attain such power, he is called the best amongst all the tapasvīs."



Prabhupāda: Nārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim: "If you cannot approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then what is the value of your tapasya?" Ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim: "And if someway or other, if you approach Kṛṣṇa, there is no more necessity of tapasya." You have already got all the results of tapasya.



ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

nārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

[Nārada-pañcarātra]



That's all. (end)





720424SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.7

-

Tokyo, April 24, 1972



Pradyumna: "...searching on all sides. But when he was unable to find anyone besides himself, he thought it wise to sit down on his lotus seat firmly and give his attention to the execution of penance, as he was instructed." [SB 2.9.7]



Prabhupāda: So he could not find any person. Still he took it seriously and began tapasya. Therefore in the beginning of Bhāgavata it is said, tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye: "From heart." Yes. He heard from outside. From the heart the order was, "Yes, now you begin your tapasya." So he began. So Kṛṣṇa is helping both sides, from externally, internally. Externally he heard. Somewhere the sound came, and internally He confirmed, "Yes." So Kṛṣṇa is helping us externally by the spiritual master, internally by instruction. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi. In this way, He is trying to help us. Unfortunately we do not care to take His help. Then why should we not suffer? Antar-bahiḥ. Antar-bahiḥ. There are two things, inside and outside. So Kṛṣṇa is... Outside He is helping, spiritual master. Spiritual master is external manifestation of the Supreme Lord. Just like if somebody is going somewhere in this Tokyo city. I have to say something. So I apply him, "Will you kindly carry this message to him?" Similarly, Kṛṣṇa deputes some of His confidential devotees to help the people to become Kṛṣṇa conscious: "Please go and tell him this." The spiritual master is, therefore, external manifestation of the Supreme Lord. And internally He is sitting there as Paramātmā. So both ways, He is helping. And because the business is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, therefore there is no difference between the external teacher and the internal teacher. Because teaching is the same.



Therefore Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura..., sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ: "All the śāstras, the spiritual master is accepted as directly Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead," because he is carrying directly the message of Hari. Then again it is explained... Then Māyāvādī will say, "Then I am God. Because I am carrying the message of Kṛṣṇa, therefore I am Kṛṣṇa." No. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. Not that he has become Prabhu, or God, but he is very dear servitor. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. Because He is carrying an important message, therefore he is very confidential. And because he is very confidential servitor, he is not different from Him. Suppose if I ask somebody to do something very confidential, so that means he is identical with me, because otherwise, how can I trust? Therefore it is clear, not like Māyāvādīs, that "Because I have been deputed by Kṛṣṇa to carry some message," not that I have become. But I am equal because the business is the same. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], and the spiritual master says the same thing, sarva-dharmān parityajya: "Just surrender to Kṛṣṇa." Therefore, message being the same, they are identical. The persons are identical. But not identical in the Māyāvādī sense, that he has become now God. No. He is not God, but he is the most confidential servant of God. This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Because spiritual master has to be accepted, sākṣād-dhari, directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, therefore the so-called spiritual master should not be puffed up, that "Now I have become God." This is Māyāvāda. This is rascaldom. He is most confidential servant of God, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the disciple accepts him as good as God. Therefore the conclusion is simultaneously one and different. Acintya-bhedābheda. Bheda, different, means the spiritual master is a confidential servant, or the servant God. To the disciple he is servant God.

Just like in Christian philosophy, they say, "The father and the son, the same." Is it not? Yes. So similarly, here the father and son, or the spiritual master and God, they are same, but at the same time not same. It is simultaneous. This is called acintya-bhedābheda-tattva, simultaneously one and different. I think the Christian philosophy is like that. Christ, son, and God, Holy Ghost-they are simultaneously one and different? Is that? So that is the position. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ, kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya **. So we can interpret... When the Christian people say that... Just like they say "only son." So we can interpret... Of course, we are not going to interpret. We can take it that anyone who becomes confidential... Just like father position. He has got many sons. One son who is very obedient, he says, "He is my only son, and others not sons." Does he not, father say, sometimes? "Actually he is my son." Sometimes father says like that. But that does not mean that he has got only one son. He has got many sons, but all of them are useless, worthless. He is only bona fide.

Similar statement is there by Tulasī dāsa. He says-Tulasī dāsa was some Hindi poet-that "The put, the son, and mut, the urine, they come through the same source." That's a fact. Put and mut. Put means son, and mut means urine. So when we beget son, the same genital; when we pass urine, the same genital. Son, he has... You...(?) Liquid. Tulasī dāsa says-it is very nice-that "Put and mut, they are coming from the same source. So a put, if he is devotee of the Lord, then he is put. If he is not, then he is mut. Then he is mut." If the son... After begetting son, if the son does not become devotee, then he is as good as mut. I pass urine. Mut son, he says, because he's less than mut. Because mut, I pass urine. The obnoxious thing, that is gone away. But it is present. It is present. The bad smell is constantly giving me trouble. Mut karma's there.(?) So these are very instructive. So why this is? Anyone... Everyone is son of God, but one who is acting as real son of God, he is praised, "He is my only son." This idea, not that God is limited to produce only one son. Why? God has unlimited sons. He is unlimited. If an ordinary man can beget hundreds of sons, just like Dhṛtarāṣṭra... There are many instances..., Ṛṣabhadeva. So why God should be restricted to beget only one son? I asked this question in church to some Christian priest, that "God is limited or unlimited?" He said, "Unlimited." "Then why you are restricting, limited one son?" He could not answer. You know that? Why you are limiting? He is unlimited. The ordinary person can beget hundreds of thousands. Why God, unlimited, He should be restricted to one son? The interpretation should be... Anyway, that Tulasī dāsa says that if he is devotee, then he is son. Otherwise it is urine. The God has begotten many sons... Just like... The only worthy son was Jesus Christ-you can interpret it like that-because he was giving service to the Lord, to the father. He brought the message of father.

So our interpretation is like that, not that God has got only one son, but he is the only worthy son. All are mut. Anyone who is not God conscious, Kṛṣṇa conscious, mut put(?). Then? Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "To achieve success in life, one should follow the example of Lord Brahmā, the first living creature in the beginning of creation. After being initiated by the Supreme Lord to execute tapasya, he was fixed in his determination to do it."



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Pradyumna: "Although he could not find anyone besides himself, he could rightly understand that the sound was transmitted by the Lord Himself. Brahmā was the only living being at that time, because there was no other creation. And none could be found there except himself. In the beginning of the First Canto, First Chapter, first verse of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, it is already mentioned that Brahmā was initiated by the Lord from within. The Lord is within every living entity as the Supersoul, and he initiated Brahmā because Brahmā was willing to receive the initiation. The Lord can similarly initiate everyone who is inclined to have it. As already stated, Brahmā is the original spiritual master for the universe. And since he was initiated by the Lord Himself, the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is coming down by disciplic succession. And in order to receive the real message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, one should approach the current link or spiritual master in the chain of disciplic succession. After being initiated by the proper spiritual master in that chain of succession, one should engage himself in discharge of tapasya in the execution of devotional service. One should not, however, think himself on the level of Brahmā, to be initiated directly from the Lord by the Lord from inside, because in the present age no one can be accepted to be as pure as Brahmā. The post of Brahmā, to officiate in the creation of the universe, is offered to the most pure living being. And unless one is so qualified..."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This is important. Who becomes Brahmā? A very exalted living being, pure, he is entrusted that "You become Brahmā." Brahmā is also living being, but because he is very pure... This Brahmā post is sometimes not available because there is no such pure living being. So Kṛṣṇa becomes Himself Brahmā sometimes. Go on.



Pradyumna: "The post of Brahmā, to officiate in the creation of the universe, is offered to the most pure living being. And unless one is so qualified, one cannot expect to be treated like Brahmā directly. But one can have the same facility through unalloyed devotees of the Lord and scriptural instructions as revealed in the Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam especially, and also the bona fide spiritual master available to the sincere soul. The Lord Himself appears as the spiritual master, and the person who is sincere in heart serves the Lord. Therefore the bona fide spiritual master who happens to meet the sincere devotee should be accepted as the most confidential and beloved representative of the Lord. If a person is posted under the guidance of such a bona fide spiritual master it may be accepted without any doubt that the desiring person has achieved the grace of the Lord."



Devotee: All glories to you, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. (devotees offer obeisances) There is kīrtana? No. No? (end)





720425SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.9

-

Tokyo, April 25, 1972,

Informal Class in Room



(Pradyumna leads devotees in chanting ślokas 1-9) [break]

śrī-śuka uvāca

ātma-māyām ṛte rājan

parasyānubhavātmanaḥ

na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ

svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā

bahu-rūpa ivābhāti

māyayā bahu-rūpayā

ramamāṇo guṇeṣv asyā

mamāham iti manyate

yarhi vāva mahimni sve

parasmin kāla-māyayoḥ

rameta gata-sammohas

tyaktvodāste tadobhayam

ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-arthaṁ

yad āha bhagavān ṛtam

brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam

avyalīka-vratādṛtaḥ

sa ādi-devo jagatāṁ paro guruḥ

svadhiṣṇyam āsthāya sisṛkṣayaikṣata

tāṁ nādhyagacchad dṛśam atra sammatāṁ

prapañca-nirmāṇa-vidhir yayā bhavet

sa cintayan dvy-akṣaram ekadāmbhasy

upāśṛṇod dvir-gaditaṁ vaco vibhuḥ

sparśeṣu yat ṣoḍaśam ekaviṁśaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ nṛpa yad dhanaṁ viduḥ

niśamya tad-vaktṛ-didṛkṣayā diśo

vilokya tatrānyad apaśyamānaḥ

svadhiṣṇyam āsthāya vimṛśya tad-dhitaṁ

tapasy upādiṣṭa ivādadhe manaḥ

divyaṁ sahasrābdam amogha-darśano

jitānilātmā vijitobhayendriyaḥ

atapyata smākhila-loka-tāpanaṁ

tapas tapīyāṁs tapatāṁ samāhitaḥ

tasmai sva-lokaṁ bhagavān sabhājitaḥ

sandarśayām āsa paraṁ na yat-param

vyapeta-saṅkleśa-vimoha-sādhvasaṁ

sva-dṛṣṭavadbhir puruṣair abhiṣṭutam



Prabhupāda: ...transcendental vibration. So everything is there. If you do not practice, what can I do? The transliteration is there, the accent is there, and now our Pradyumna is there also. Utilize time; become attracted. As Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive, you become attracted at least to some. Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive. You cannot become all-attracted. At least you become attracted to some. They are becoming attracted by good apartment, by shaving the beard or..., like that. You told me they are trying to remain young?



Sudāmā: Yes, yes. You have given us so many. Now we have so much to start. So many mantras, Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Īśopaniṣad.



Prabhupāda: Huge. So why you are not utilizing this facility?



Sudāmā: We're missing the point.



Prabhupāda: This evening you will have to chant these verses and you will explain. Who will explain? You will explain? That's all right. Then I shall speak. First of all let them hear from my disciples, then I shall speak. Is it all right?



Sudāmā: Yes, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: So now practice whole day how to pronounce these ślokas.



Pradyumna: Better all chant.



Prabhupāda: Yes. And explain. Practice like this. Then wherever you go, you will be all respected. [break] Very nice. What is this? It is not even W.C. in comparison to the higher planetary building.



Pradyumna: Does not even?



Prabhupāda: W.C.



Sudāmā: W.C., toilet.



Devotees: Water closet.



Prabhupāda: What is called? W.C.? What is it?



Devotee: Water closet.



Prabhupāda: That means your lavatory. Therefore the demigods do not come here even to urine. (laughter) Formerly they used to come. Now they do not come because it is not fit for their urinating. Here, we are very much proud of our advancement, but the demigods do not come even to pass urine. Why they should come? Now, because another house is raised here, even a common man is not coming to urine here. A little less facility, so they are not occupying. So why the demigods will come to this nonsense place? You can understand. These apartments are lying vacant on account of a little less facility. So why the demigods? Their comforts and their standard of living is many millions times better than yours. You cannot imagine it even. The more you go to the higher planetary system, their standard of living is still higher, higher-duration of life, standard of living, beauty, other facilities. Why they are called higher planetary system? Here in this planet even you don't get the sunshine sufficiently. The bare necessities. Now you can experience that when you go above the cloud by airplane you see there is no more cloudy. The sunshine is free. You can imagine how in the higher planetary system the sunshine is so free. And here as soon as there is little sunshine, oh, today, "Good morning." Today is very good morning. In London, Lennon's gardener, he was meeting, I was walking. He was Mr. Johnson or something.



Śyāmasundara: Frank.



Prabhupāda: Frank? So, "Today is really good morning." "Yes." Otherwise it is dark. And actually countries which have no sufficient sunshine, they are condemned. I told you frankly, your London is hell, in that television. Actually it is hell. We could understand from outside London, simply dark, moist, everything damp. The trees, they have got, what is called?



Devotee: Moss.



Prabhupāda: Moss. Yes. That moss for want of sufficient sunshine.



Devotee: People get little relief from their misery and they say, "Oh, I am happy now."



Prabhupāda: Yes. From the miseries, Mr. John is happy by becoming naked and having fireplace. He is bringing the wood personally, putting there. And Yoko is very happy. Japanese wife. She was talking philosophy with me.



Śyāmasundara: Now he has made one song, "I don't believe in Hare Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: Who?



Śyāmasundara: John.



Sudāmā: "He is me."



Prabhupāda: That's all right. So our Hare Kṛṣṇa will be advertised. (laughter) People will be inquisitive, "What is this Hare Kṛṣṇa?" at least. One who does not know. That is good.



Śyāmasundara: Because nobody believes in John Lennon anymore either.



Prabhupāda: How long it will go bluffing?



Śyāmasundara: He is losing his...



Prabhupāda: Popularity.



Śyāmasundara: His popularity. People are becoming disappointed because formerly he was very brilliant songwriter, but now it's become very degraded.



Pradyumna: He formerly was married before, and he had family I think. But then he divorced to marry...



Prabhupāda: Not divorce. The contract is her former husband should live also. She has got double husband. He is living there along with him. I know that.



Śyāmasundara: Cox.



Prabhupāda: Cox. He is living there.



Devotee: Simply insanity. Insanity.



Prabhupāda: Insanity. Yes. He is the manager. What manager? He has got motorcycle and goes round. He must be given some post. And he has also married another? That...



Śyāmasundara: Dan? I don't think he is legally married.



Prabhupāda: Friend. She has got, he has got a child?



Śyāmasundara: One or two small children.



Prabhupāda: So he has to maintain all of them. On this contract that Yoko is there.



Śyāmasundara: Yes. Dan was her old friend. Dan was her friend. That's why he became manager.



Prabhupāda: So all this business on the basis of sex. That's all. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. For very insignificant happiness they are encumbered in so many ways. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tucchaṁ kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha-duḥkham.



Śyāmasundara: And every time she tried to have a child, because they lead such a decadent life, she has miscarriage every time.



Prabhupāda: That means she has got syphilitic poison. Girls who cannot bear child means there is syphilitic poison. Either the man has got syphilitic poison or the woman has got syphilitic poison. And for these men, syphilis is not very uncommon.



Sudāmā: In this country, it is now also very, like epidemic.



Prabhupāda: Syphilis. All over Europe. When Dr. Ghosh, who is my friend, he came to see me in Allahabad? One doctor? So he is friend. He told me that when he was student, Colonel (indistinct), one big professor, medicine, he was lecturing. He was Englishman. He said that "In our country, seventy to eighty percent of the student community, they are suffering from syphilitic attack." So in our country, in India, if one is attacked with syphilis, then he is taken as very abominable. His character is not good, it is understood. So he said, "Horrible," Dr. Ghosh, because he was Indian student. So Colonel (indistinct) replied, "Why you are saying horrible? In your country ninety percent people are attacked malaria. So there, syphilis. So as a medical practitioner why you take this disease as bad or that disease as good? Your business is to see that there should be no disease. Don't consider in that way, that 'This disease is good, this disease is bad.' " That's nice explanation. But fifty years ago or hundred years ago syphilitic poison was very much prevalent. Still it is in Europe and America. And now it is spreading all over. And in Āyur Veda it is said, phiraṅga, phiraṅga. Phiraṅgī. The Europeans are described in Vedic literatures as phiraṅgī, their name is phiraṅgī. So this syphilitic disease is mentioned in the Āyur Veda, the disease brought by the phiraṅgīs. And the doctor says that originally it was spread through dog. The unmarried girls, they keep dog for sex. You do not know? He knows. You will find very beautiful girl is keeping very big dog. They are trained to have sex life. And that is cause of syphilis. The dog is full of syphilitic germs. It is called phiraṅga in the Āyur Veda. And one who has got syphilitic germs, his life is doomed. Unless it is properly treated and cured, so many disease will follow. So many. This craziness is also due to syphilitic poison, parents.



Sudāmā: There is a case of a very famous gangster, Al Capone, and others. They died in the prison house of syphilis of the mind, brain.



Prabhupāda: Just see.



Sudāmā: They went crazy.



Prabhupāda: So how much by nature the sex life is condemned in so many ways. Therefore we say "No illicit sex." It will save you from so many encumbrances. Sex life is not denied, but this unrestricted sex life is very very abominable in human society. But they are encouraging unrestricted sex life. They are distributing tablets, encouraging others to have sex life. Never mind. Unmarried girls they are keeping dogs. One lady in America, she told me that the dogs are kept for this purpose. When I was going to walk in that park in Brooklyn, the young girls are bringing dogs, big, big dogs. You were not at that time with me?



Śyāmasundara: Yes. I don't remember.



Prabhupāda: Bhavānanda. Bhavānanda was taking me to that big park.



Śyāmasundara: Yes. I went. Prospect. Was it called Prospect?



Prabhupāda: Prospect Park. Yes. Go on. Just try to understand the situation of the world. And you are living in this world. How much careful you have to become. [break] These are the saṅkleśa. And Kṛṣṇa showed him the Vaikuṇṭha planet, vyapeta-saṅkleśa. All these problems are not there. Go on. [break]



Pradyumna: "...Personality of Godhead, being thus very much satisfied with the penance of Lord Brahmā, was pleased to manifest His personal abode, Vaikuṇṭha, the supreme planet above all others. This transcendental abode of the Lord is adored by all self-realized persons freed from all kinds of miseries and fearfulness of illusory existence."



Prabhupāda: These five kinds of... Is it explained there? Five kinds of?



Śyāmasundara: Five kinds of material miseries?



Pradyumna: "The material body is overcast with five kinds of miserable conditions, namely ignorance, material conception, attachment, hatred, and absorption. As long as one is overwhelmed with these five kinds of material miseries, there is no question of entering into the Vaikuṇṭhalokas."



Prabhupāda: Another five kinds of misery is pavarga. Pa, pha, ba, bha, ma.



Pradyumna: Oh, yes. Pa, pha, ba, bha, ma.



Prabhupāda: Pavarga. And to counteract is called apavarga. Apavarga-vartmani. Pavarga, pa means hard labor. If you want to exist here you have to work very, very hard. Just like this man. With hard labor collected some money, constructed this house. Now there is no tenant. Another hard labor to find out tenant. Is it not hard labor?



Devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: In such a modern city, this apartments are lying vacant. That means he is... He has invited us to stay here to get some blessing so that tenants may come. (laughter) Āśīrvāda. He was āśīrvāda. If by the āśīrvāda he can get some tenants... All these men, they simply want āśīrvāda. They don't want Kṛṣṇa. They want āśīrvāda so that their nefarious activities may continue peacefully.



Sudāmā: Mr. Santanam was the same. He had loaned to me some money for doing some work on the temple. And then when he got promotion in his job, he came to me and said, "Sudāmā, it is by, I think, the mercy of Kṛṣṇa that I have now promotion. Please do not bother paying me the money back."



Prabhupāda: That's nice, but the difficulty is sometimes Kṛṣṇa's āśīrvāda may be just the opposite. Kṛṣṇa will take away. So at that time they become atheist. In Germany there are so many atheists born out of the second war.



Sudāmā: In Japan also.



Prabhupāda: Japan also.



Sudāmā: Japan also. After the war...In Japan during the war the Japanese government supported a certain religious sect, Shinto religion. And they would spend thousands of dollars for ceremony for soldiers and to have good omen for the war. When they lost the war, the entire government wrote in the Constitution, now it is in the Constitution, that the government of Japan will not support any religious organization. So the people then, after losing the war, they lost faith in anything religious and they became distraught.



Prabhupāda: That is the effect of the last... The general, people in general, they expect dharma for artha. dharma for artha. The Bhāgavata therefore explains that dharmasya... Dharmasya ca... What is that?



Pradyumna: Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya?



Prabhupāda: Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate. Nārthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ. Yes. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate. One should not execute religious principles for getting better financial or material facility. That is not the purpose. But they have taken it purpose. "We have supported this religious community-we must become victorious of our whimsical declaration of war." That Kṛṣṇa supported the Battle of Kurukṣetra, it was not whimsical declaration of war. Before declaring war, Pāṇḍavas, even Kṛṣṇa tried to stop it in so many ways. When Duryodhana clearly said that "Not even that portion of land which can hold the tip of a needle can be given to you without war..." They were, Kṛṣṇa personally requested that "They are kṣatriyas. They cannot take up the work of a brāhmaṇa or a śūdra or a vaiśya. So better you give them five villages only. Let the five brothers rule over them." He replied, "What do You say of five villages? Not that portion of land which can hold the tip of a needle I can give them without war." Therefore the war was declared: "All right. Decide by war." That was not a whimsical war manufactured and maneuvered by the politician. That is dharma-yuddha. When you encroach upon my right, there must be. Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam [Īśo mantra 1]. You cannot encroach upon others' right.



So the animal killer, they are encroaching upon others' right. These cows and goats, they are also living entities, they have got right to live. When there is absolute necessity, that is a different thing. But you cannot encroach upon their right of living simply to satisfy the taste of your tongue. That is the greatest sin. Similarly illicit sex. One has got wife and he is having illicit sex with other woman, that is, that is crime. "You want to satisfy your sex? All right. You have got legitimate wife." "No. I want to satisfy my senses." Therefore illicit sex is sinful. You have got many other foodstuff. Why should you satisfy your senses by killing some other right of living? Therefore it is... Why it is sinful anyone can understand. Just like if I have no money, that does not mean to secure money I shall take your money. Then I am thief. You cannot say, "Oh, I have no money. This man has got so much money. Therefore I have taken some money." Will the court excuse you? Even if you have no food, you cannot encroach upon other's right unless you are sanctioned. Therefore according to Vedic system, the meat-eater is given chance by sacrificing an animal before some demigod. Not free slaughterhouse. No. That you cannot do. Undergoing that process, someday he will come to his senses that "Meat-eating and killing of animal is not good." Because there are so many mantras. If you understand mantras, the mantra, when a goat is sacrificed before Goddess Kālī, before the goat being cut by his throat, the priest says that "Because you are sacrificing your life before Goddess Kālī, next life you are going to have human form of body for your, this sacrifice." Otherwise you have to undergo the process. That is gradual evolutionary process. But because you are forced somehow or other in the presence of mother material energy, she will give you the facility to promote immediately to the human form of life. And as human being, you will have every right to kill this man who is killing you. That is meaning of māṁsa. Mām means me, sa means he. "He will also eat me." So I will have to take the form of a goat next life. And he will take the form of a human being and he will get the chance of killing me. He can excuse, but he will get the chance. This is the bandhana. Karma-bandhana.

So after hearing all these mantras, if one takes the risk of eating meat, let him do that. But who is that sane man who will take this risk? This is the meaning of sacrifice. Not that it is a slaughterhouse substitute. No. They will understand that what kind of risk they are going to take by killing the animal under the name of sacrifice. Another thing is that to sacrifice the goat before the demigod Kālī means it is restricted. Because the prescription is that one can sacrifice a goat before Goddess Kālī on the dark moon night, amāvasyā. That is once in a month. So even the śāstra gives him the facility, the facility is restricted. As much as marriage. What is the difference between married sex and without wife? Restricted. You restrict to one woman. You don't spoil many women and get syphilis disease. You see? This is restricted. Restricted to one man, restricted to one woman, restricted once in a month.

So actually whenever there is sanction in the śāstra, that is not encouraging. That is restriction. So one cannot give this evidence, "Oh, your Vedas say this is sanctioned." But that sanction is restriction. Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā. The śāstra is not encouraging. Because there is no need of encouraging. It is already known to him. Why the śāstra encourage? This is not encouragement. This is restriction. The same example can be given. Just like when government opens liquor shop it is not encouragement. It is restriction. You cannot have liquor manufactured by yourself anywhere, everywhere; otherwise it will increase more and more. So you have to pay heavy tax and purchase. And there are so many other rules and regulations. So this is restriction. When there is liquor shop licensed by the government, it does not mean it is encouragement. At least that is the philosophy. It is restriction. So all these facilities given sometimes in the śāstras or by the government for drinking or for intoxication or for sex or for gambling, that is restricted. Gambling, kṣatriyas, they can gamble. They must have the sporting spirit. Otherwise when they are defeated they will succumb to death. So they have to... The gambling, I lose one hundred thousand dollars, "Never mind. It is sporting." Otherwise I will succumb to death. I have been... What? That is being done in gambling clubs. But if you do it in a sporting habit, then "Never mind. I gain or lose, it is nothing." That's all. Kṣatriyas are allowed because when they fight they will have to gain or to lose. But if they lose, if they become succumbed, then it will be very difficult for them. They are allowed to hunt. If they cannot kill, then how can they rule over the criminals? The kṣatriya king, "Oh, he is a criminal"? Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Such a Vaiṣṇava king. As soon as he saw somebody is trying to kill a cow, immediately took his sword: "What nonsense you are doing? Immediately I shall kill you." A kṣatriya must be spirited. Immediately cut off. Even in England, that was the practice. They used to practice dummy men cut head. The king must be like there.

Sudāmā: Here also. Here also there was a class of men called samurai, and they carried long sword and short sword. And they had certain rules for fighting. They would never fight a man unless he was equally matched. And if he lost, then he must take... If I lose the battle then I must take the short sword and kill myself for shame, for dishonor.



Prabhupāda: Not only that, when Kṛṣṇa was fighting with Rukmiṇī's brother, he lost his chariot. So, and Rukmiṇī took the sword. So Kṛṣṇa also throw His bow and arrows. He also took the sword. Not that "I shall possess better weapons to kill you." No. Equal. Equal terms. "If you have no sword, I will give you a sword." Yes. "Take this sword. I take another." That is kṣatriya spirit. Sporting. So for kṣatriya, this animal killing, this, which is abominable, but they require.



Devotee: Intoxication too?



Prabhupāda: Intoxication also. Just like Balarāma, He was drinking madhu. Yes. You have not seen it? He was also enjoying in the company of women. Because He is kṣatriya. The kṣatriyas are allowed polygamy, drinking, intoxication, because they are king. They must have facility. At the same time they are ruling over the country. They take consulting great sages, saintly persons. And if he is not in order, these saintly persons would dethrone him. Pṛthu Mahārāja's father was killed, Veṇa. He was not according to the system. He was killed.



Pradyumna: I don't understand how sometimes we..., how the intoxication of some type of wine would go along with the ruling of a country.



Prabhupāda: Well, for rulers is a pleasure. They must have some pleasure. Just like ordinary men, they drink with woman, dancing, it is a recreation. So this is material recreation, to be little intoxicated and several nice young girls around. That gives him some encouragement. You see? They have to take so much risk, so much responsibility. For recreation they require it. They should be given little facility.



Devotee: Can they still make spiritual advancement?



Prabhupāda: Well, spiritual advancement is going on. They are taking advice from great saintly persons, they are observing, they are performing big sacrifices, spending money, treasury. That is their spiritual advancement. You are satisfying Kṛṣṇa in spite of... All these devatās, the demigods, they also enjoy. In higher planetary system, like Indra, he is prostitute hunter number one, Indra. (laughter) But he is a great devotee at the same time.



Pradyumna: But he is still in material world.



Prabhupāda: Yes. This is material. So those who are going to directly to transfer to the spiritual world, for them all these things are prohibited. But those who want to remain here, at the same time they have got some particular duty, these are also. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu says those who are preparing bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya niṣkiñcanasya, they must give up all these things. They should be niṣkiñcana. Niṣkiñcanasya yad dhanaṁ viduḥ(?). You have read that? Niṣkiñcana. Devotee, they don't want all these, anything, any glaring possession. Even Brahmā. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that brahma-janme nāhi mora āśa: "I don't care to take birth as Brahmā." Kīṭa-janma hau jathā tuwā dāsa: "Better let me become an insect where Your devotee is there." So our purpose is different. We don't want even the exalted place like Brahmā in this material world. We don't want. That is our determination. We want Kṛṣṇa. Go back to home, back to Godhead.



Pradyumna: Could that be..., could these enjoyments of the kṣatriyas...



Prabhupāda: Therefore paraṁ na yat-param. What is that verse? Paraṁ na...



Pradyumna: Yat-param.



Prabhupāda: Yat-param.



Pradyumna: Sandarśayām āsa paraṁ na yat-param.



Prabhupāda: Param. We are seeing here in this material world, this apartment is better than the down apartment. So it is param. Param means better superior quality. So here in this material world we are finding out something superior than the others, because it is relative world. But the kingdom of Godhead, Vaikuṇṭha, na yat-param, there is no more param. Finished. All param finished.



Pradyumna: Ah, nothing is superior than this.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Param. Param. You can say "It is a very nice apartment. Why shall I (go) after Vaikuṇṭha?" But he has no idea. He thinks that "If I go to Europe I get a better standard of living, better woman and better salary." But he has no idea what is param. Therefore, paraṁ na yat-param. There is no more superior. All superior finished. This is Bhāgavata. Paraṁ na yat-param. Final. Final beauty, Kṛṣṇa. Final opulence, final strength, final wisdom. Everything final in Kṛṣṇa, ultimate. No more. Na yat-param. Therefore He is called Parameśvara. Īśvara means commander. There are many commander, controller, but Kṛṣṇa is called Parameśvara. "No more." And Kṛṣṇa says mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. Para means superior. "There is no more superior than Me." Paraṁ na yat-param. This is meaning of. So have saṅkīrtana. (end)





720426SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.10

-

Tokyo, April 26, 1972



Pradyumna: "...abode of the Lord, the material modes of ignorance and passion do not prevail. Nor is there any other influence in the matter of goodness. There is no predominant..."



Prabhupāda: Nor there is...? Nor there is...?



Pradyumna: "Nor is there any of their influence in the matter of goodness."



Prabhupāda: Ah, yes.



Pradyumna: "There is no predominance of the influence of time, so what to speak of the illusory, external energy that cannot enter in that region. Without discrimination, both the demigods and the demons worship the Lord as devotees."



Prabhupāda: So this is the description, beginning, just to get an idea of the spiritual world. Unless we go there... Just like we have come to Japan. We are getting direct experience. But before coming here, from books and literature and maps-it is an example-we can get some information, what is Japan. Similarly, the spiritual world, what is that spiritual world, in other places, in Upaniṣad also describes. In the Bhagavad-gītā also, this description, na tad bhāsayate sūryo na candro na pāvakaḥ [Bg. 15.6]. There is no need of sunlight, moonlight, what to speak of the stars, neither na pāvakaḥ, neither electricity. Na tad bhāsayate sūryo na candro na pāvakaḥ. Here in this material world we cannot see things without sunlight, moonlight or electricity. We are proud of our eyes, but as soon as there is no light... Now there is sunlight; we can see very nicely. The spiritual world is not like that. There is no need of sunlight, moonlight or electricity. The first impression is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. Similarly here also, pravartate yatra rajas tamas tayoḥ sattvaṁ ca miśraṁ na ca kāla-vikramaḥ, na..., na pravartate. What is the meaning?



Pradyumna: Na pravartate? "Prevail."



Prabhupāda: Not prevail. Does not prevail. What is that? Here there are three material modes of nature, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa: goodness, passion, and ignorance. These things are not there. Here the sattva-guṇa, the goodness is also polluted, miśram. Here... Just like sometimes a brāhmaṇa, born of a brāhmaṇa family, very first class, all, everything, but he is working as a śūdra, not pure. There is mixture. Therefore it is said, sattvaṁ ca miśram. Sattvaṁ ca miśram. Miśram means sometimes there is... Because all qualities of the material nature is helping me to misidentify my position. In the lower stage... Just like animals, the dog. In the lower stage of tamo-guṇa, unnecessarily, "Gow gow! Why you have come here. Why you are coming?" You see? So this is the lowest stage of tamo-guṇa. There is no offense, still he will disturb people. So tamo-guṇa is lowest stage. Little more, passion, rajo-guṇa: "Beware of the dogs." He does not make "Gow! Gow!" but he points out "Here is dog. Please don't come." Similarly, sattva-guṇa also: "I am Mr. Such and such. You cannot see without engagement." So these things are going on. The influence of three modes of material nature.



So these things are not there. There they do not require to keep a dog, neither there is dog. You see? Just to make an idea what is Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Because vaikuṇṭha means without anxiety. Vaikuṇṭha. Kuṇṭha means anxiety, and vaikuṇṭha means without anxiety. So if you have no anxiety, what is the use of keeping dog for making "Gow! Gow!"? You have no anxiety. Just like in Japan the practice is... Generally they say that there is no thief.

Sudāmā: Yes. Yes.



Prabhupāda: So actually if there is no thief, where is the cause of anxiety? If there is no burglar, thieves, rogues. It is the duty actually. It is the duty of the king to see that there should be no thieves. People should be anxiety-free. That is nice government. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, when he was ruling, there was not even scorching heat. People were so anxiety-free. You see? Due to pious activities of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, there was no severe cold or scorching heat, no dangerous disease, infection. They were all free from all this. It can be possible if there is good government. So here is the idea. Pravartate yatra rajas tamas tayoḥ sattvaṁ ca miśraṁ na ca kāla-vikramaḥ. Kāla-vikramaḥ. Here we are governed by the stringent laws of time. I am getting old. Kāla-vikramaḥ. The body is getting seventy-six years. This means time has eaten up my duration of life seventy-six years, influence of time. You cannot avoid it. Kāla-vikramaḥ. Na yatra māyā. Māyā, illusion. Either fixed-up idea. Everyone knows Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality, and they are all happy by serving the Lord. Everyone is engaged. Surāsurārcitāḥ anuvratāḥ. They are not..., they have no revolutionary spirit: "Oh, why shall I serve You? I am also God." This is revolutionary. These things are not there. The so-called rascal declaring oneself that "I am God," no. Anuvrata. Everyone is following: "Oh, here is Lord." In the Vaikuṇṭha planets there is very great respectful consciousness, "Here is Lord." But in Vṛndāvana, there is no such respectful consciousness, Kṛṣṇa, and the cowherds boys, gopīs, but their love is very, very intense. Out of love, they cannot disobey Kṛṣṇa. Here in the Vaikuṇṭha, out of respect, they cannot disobey. In the Vṛndāvana, Goloka Vṛndāvana, they cannot think of denying anything to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is so much lovable. They can give anything. There is no so respectful because they do not know whether Kṛṣṇa is God or not. They know, "Kṛṣṇa is like us, one of us." But their respect and love is so intense that without Kṛṣṇa they become lifeless. There is no life.



So here we are defying Kṛṣṇa, defying God. We are declaring falsely, "I am God. You are God. Why you are searching God? These gods are loitering in the street. You just try to serve them. Why you are searching in the temple?" These things are kāla-vikramaḥ, influence of time; māyā, illusion; and so many things. These things are absent. So what is the purport? Just see. And surāsurārcitāḥ. There, there is no more distinction between sura and asura. Here, asuras, they are not devotees. They deny. So asura, how the asura goes there? Asura does not go there as asura, but he goes there as devotee. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. He is the son of an asura, Hiraṇyakaśipu. Therefore he is classified asura, son of asura. But this asura quality is not more existing there, although he is promoted. In other words, when one is transferred to the Vaikuṇṭha world there is no such distinction between sura and asura.

Why there should be? Everyone is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. So in other words, here also, anyone who is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, it doesn't matter whether he is born in mleccha family, yavana family or Muslim family or Hindu family or brāhmaṇa family. These distinctions are completely abolished because the real business... Everyone is mukta, liberated. He is engaged in real business, Kṛṣṇa's service. What is the purport?

Pradyumna: "The kingdom of God or the atmosphere of Vaikuṇṭha nature, which is called the tripād-vibhūti, is three times bigger than the material universes and is described here as also in the Bhagavad-gītā, in a nutshell. This universe, containing billions of stars and planets, is one of the billions of such universes clustered together within the compass of mahat-tattva. And all these millions and billions of universes combined together constitute only one-fourth of the magnitude of the whole creation of the Lord. There is the spiritual sky also. Beyond this sky the spiritual planets are there under the names of Vaikuṇṭha, and all of them constitute three-fourths of the entire creation of the Lord. God's creations are always innumerable. Even leaves of a tree cannot be counted by a man, nor the hairs on his head. However, foolish men are puffed up with the idea of becoming God himself, although unable to create a hair of their own bodies."



Prabhupāda: So I have protested this false God consciousness in all my purports. That is my business, to punish all these rascals. You see? I become very much angry, anyone says before me, "I am God, he is God, everyone..." I cannot control myself. (laughter) Yes. I am so obstinate enemy of these rascals. I want to kick them on their face, but it is incivility. It becomes... But I want to kick them. It will be my pleasure. Never mind I go to hell. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Man may discover so many wonderful vehicles of journey, but even if he reaches the moon by his much advertised spacecraft, he cannot remain there. The sane man, therefore, without being puffed up as if he were the god of the universe, abides by the instructions of the Vedic literature, the easiest way to acquire knowledge in transcendence. So let us know through the authority of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam of the nature and the constitution of the transcendental world beyond the material sky. In that sky the material qualities..."



Prabhupāda: They are going to different planets... They cannot go. Suppose if they are going: so taking so much trouble, expending so much money, they are trying to study. But we study within this room, even up to Vaikuṇṭha planet. Huh? These rascals are taking so much trouble and still unsuccessful. And we are getting all clear idea. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is the perfection of Vedic literature. In remote jungle they are sitting. They are enjoying spiritual atmosphere and getting all information from the Vedic literature. How much, I mean to say, fortunate we are, those who have taken shelter of this Vedic literature. We get all information. Is there any doubt? So why should we take so much trouble? Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, take information, be prepared, and at the time of death, think of Kṛṣṇa. Immediately transferred within a second. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Within a second, transferred. Because spirit soul is finer than the mind. So mind can be transferred immediately within a second millions of miles away. So how much speed is there for spirit soul, you can imagine. Mind, you can immediately... You are sitting here. Immediately you can transfer mind, Bombay. You are seeing. The kīrtana is going on. It is practical. Manaso vāyuḥ. Vāyu, the velocity of the air, and finer than the... Because air is gross matter and mind is subtle matter, so the speed of mind is far greater than the velocity of air. Air, the velocity of air is two thousand miles or per... Two hundred miles, like that?



Śyāmasundara: Of light? Velocity of light?



Prabhupāda: Light or air. What is the?



Śyāmasundara: Velocity of light is 5,280 miles per second.



Prabhupāda: Just see. Light. Light is subtler than air. Light is fire. Light is electricity. Electricity is produced by air. So first gross matter-this earth. And subtler than earth is water, and subtler than water is the air? No. Subtler than water is fire. So electricity, you told me the velocity of electricity?



Śyāmasundara: Uh, yes. 428,000 miles per second.



Prabhupāda: Per second. So this is the third subtlement. The fourth subtlement matter is air. The air must be still greater velocity. And air, from air... Just like we get radio message. In one second, one sound rotates seven times. Is it not?



Śyāmasundara: Speed of light. It goes, I think...



Prabhupāda: Not speed of... Sound. You say "Kṛṣṇa." This word, immediately within a second, seven times. And therefore we quickly capture. We have got a machine. So therefore it is still speedy, sound. Sound is sky. So subtler than the sound is the mind. Then you can imagine how much speedy is mind, how many millions of miles you can go. And subtler than the mind is soul. So just imagine how quickly the soul can be transferred to the other world, other planet. You can transfer by yogic principle. So it is said, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. The most subtler. And in the spiritual world that is completely spiritual. There is no tinge or contamination of anything of this material embarrassment. Ahaituky apratihatā. Then, what is...?



Pradyumna: "In that sky the material qualities, especially the modes of ignorance and passion, are completely absent. The mode of ignorance influences a living entity to the habit of lust and hankering. And this means that in the Vaikuṇṭhalokas the living entities are free from these two things. As confirmed..."



Prabhupāda: Lust and anger. These two things completely... Then?



Pradyumna: "As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, in the brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage of life one becomes free from hankering and lamentation. Therefore the conclusion is that the inhabitants of the Vaikuṇṭha planets are all brahma-bhūta living entities, as distinguished from the mundane creatures who are all compact in hankering and lamentation. When one is not in the modes of ignorance and passion, one is supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness in the material world. Goodness in the material world also at times becomes contaminated with touches of the mode of passion and ignorance. In the Vaikuṇṭhaloka it is unalloyed goodness only. The whole situation there is one of freedom from the illusory manifestation of the external energy. Although the illusory energy is also a part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, still, illusory energy is differentiated from the Lord. The illusory energy is not, however, false, as claimed by the monist philosophers. The rope accepted as a snake may be an illusion to a particular person, but the rope is a fact, and the snake is also a fact. The illusion of water on the hot desert may be an illusion for the ignorant animal searching out water in the desert. But the desert and water are actual facts. Therefore the material creation of the Lord may be an illusion to the nondevotee class of men, but to a devotee, even the material creation of the Lord is a fact, as the manifestation of His external energy. But this energy of the Lord is not all. The Lord has His internal energy also, which has another creation known to be the Vaikuṇṭhalokas, where there is no ignorance, no passion, no illusion, and no past and present. With a poor fund of knowledge one may be unable to understand the existence of such things as the Vaikuṇṭha atmosphere, but that does not nullify its existence. A spacecraft cannot reach these planets does not mean that there are no such planets, for they are described in the revealed scriptures. As quoted by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, we can know from the Nārada-pañcarātra that the transcendental world or Vaikuṇṭha atmosphere is enriched with transcendental qualities. These transcendental qualities, as revealed through the devotional service of the Lord, are distinct from the mundane qualities of ignorance, passion, and goodness. Such qualities are nonattainable by the nondevotee class of men. In the Padma Purāṇa, Uttara-khaṇḍa, it is stated that beyond the one-fourth part of God's creation there is the three-fourths part manifestation. The marginal line between..."



Prabhupāda: Just see how we are getting information about the space. Just see. Beyond this material sky this space is... Information of the space is there. They cannot have any information of this material space, what to speak of the spiritual space. How much our knowledge is perfect. Either we are crazy, all thinking, or we are in a very secure position than all these rascals. What do you think? Clear conception of everything. Go on.



Pradyumna: "The marginal line between the material manifestation and the spiritual manifestation is the Virajā River. And beyond the Virajā, which is a transcendental current flowing from the perspiration of the body of the Lord, there is the three-fourths part manifestation of God's creation. This part is eternal, everlasting, without any deterioration, and unlimited, and contains the highest perfectional stage of living conditions. In the Sāṅkhya-kaumudī it is stated that unalloyed goodness or transcendence is just opposite to the material modes. All living entities are eternally associated without any break, and the Lord is the chief and prime entity there. In the Āgama Purāṇas also the transcendental abode is described as follows. The associated members there are free to go everywhere within the creation of the Lord, and there is no limit to such creation, particularly in the region of the three-fourths magnitude. Since the nature of that region is unlimited, there is no history of such association, nor is there end of it. The conclusion may be drawn that because of the complete absence of the mundane qualities of ignorance and passion, there is no question of creation nor of annihilation. In the material world everything is created and everything is annihilated, and the duration of life between the creation and annihilation is temporary. In the transcendental realm, there is no creation and no destruction, and thus the duration of life is eternal unlimitedly. In other words, everything in the transcendental world is everlasting, full of knowledge and bliss without any deterioration. Since there is no deterioration, there is no past, present and future in the estimation of time. It is clearly stated in this verse that the influence of time is conspicuous by its absence. The whole material existence is manifested by actions and reactions of elements which make up the influence of time prominent in the matter of past, present and future. There are no such actions and reactions of cause and effects there. So the cycle of birth, growth, existence, transformations, deterioration and annihilation or the six material changes are nonexistent there. It is the unalloyed manifestation of the energy of the Lord without any illusion as experienced here in the material world. The whole Vaikuṇṭha existence proclaims that everyone there is a follower of the Lord. The Lord is the chief leader there without any competition of leadership, and the people in general are all followers of the Lord. It is confirmed in the Vedas therefore that the Lord is the chief leader and all other living entities are subordinate to Him."



Prabhupāda: Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13).



Pradyumna: "It is confirmed in the Vedas therefore that the Lord is the chief leader and all other living entities are subordinate to Him as only the Lord..."



Prabhupāda: So we have accepted the original leader, Kṛṣṇa. Why should we follow the nonsense leader who has no perfect knowledge? We have accepted the supreme leader. That is our advantage. Then?



Pradyumna: "...as only the Lord satisfies all the needs of all other living entities."



Prabhupāda: And He is so able leader that He supplies everything. He is not a false leader. Then?



Pradyumna: That is the end of the purport.



Prabhupāda: That's all. So stick to this leader. Don't deviate. That's all.



Devotee: All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. (end)





720427SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.11

-

Tokyo, April 27, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śyāmāvadātāḥ śata-patra-locanāḥ

piśaṅga-vastrāḥ surucaḥ supeśasaḥ

sarve catur-bāhava unmiṣan-maṇi-

praveka-niṣkābharaṇāḥ suvarcasaḥ

[SB 2.9.11]



"The inhabitants of the Vaikuṇṭha planets are described as having a glowing sky-bluish complexion. Their eyes resemble the lotus flower, their dress is of yellowish color, and their bodily features are very attractive. They are just the age of growing youths. They all have four hands, they are all nicely decorated with pearl necklaces with ornamental medallions, and they all appear to be effulgent."



Prabhupāda: So, still you are not prepared to go to Vaikuṇṭha? If you get this body, if you go to Vaikuṇṭha, four hands, catur-bāhavaḥ, four hands? You cannot see any human being here with four hands. Although Kṛṣṇa is two-handed, but Nārāyaṇa, He is four-handed. Therefore when the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes on this platform... You have seen two hands, not four hands. Four hands is not for human being. It is only Brahmā has got four hands, and above him, in the spiritual world, all the inhabitants, they have got exactly the form like Viṣṇu. You cannot distinguish who is Viṣṇu and who is ordinary living being. But Viṣṇu has got some special feature on His chest. So by seeing that, He is recognized by the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī. Otherwise, just like here, if some big man comes, president, he looks like ordinary man, but he has got his badge. By that badge one can understand that he is president or some big man. From general body feature, bodily feature, one cannot understand distinction between Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu, and the devotees. But there are special features of Lord Viṣṇu by which He can be... Then?



Pradyumna: Purport: "The inhabitants in Vaikuṇṭhaloka are all personalities with spiritual bodily features not to be found in the material world. We can find the descriptions in the revealed scriptures like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Impersonal descriptions of transcendence in the scriptures indicate that the bodily features in Vaikuṇṭha are never to be seen in any part of the universe. As there are different bodily features in different places of a particular planet, or as there are different bodily features between bodies in different planets, similarly the bodily features of the inhabitants in the Vaikuṇṭhalokas are completely different from those in the material universe. For example, the four hands are distinct from two hands in this world."



Prabhupāda: So in other planets also there are different types of body. Some of the bodies are prominent in earth, earthly body. Just like we have got here earthly body. Similarly, fiery body, watery body, gaseous body, there are different types of body. What the scientists know about? Maybe in Candraloka they are going, but they cannot see the body. They say that there is no life. Suppose there is gaseous body, so they do not see it. But every planet has got different types of body. And Vaikuṇṭha planets also their bodily features are described herein. Then?



Pradyumna: Next verse? Pravāla... [break]



Prabhupāda: ...valuable jewels. Pravāla is coral. Is that? Yes.



Pradyumna: Pravāla-vaidūrya...( break)



Prabhupāda: ...skin some animal nowadays. Nowadays it has become fashion.



Pradyumna: Furs.



Prabhupāda: Cowskin dress.



Śyāmasundara: Leather.



Prabhupāda: Leather dress. Leather was specially used for shoes. Now they have become dress-advancement of civilization. Has become coat. You see? Iti manyate. The Bengali verse is: piśācī pāile yena mati-cchanna haya. Just like ghost-haunted person, he talks so many nonsense things, similarly,



piśācī pāile yena mati-cchanna haya

māyā-grasta jīvera haya se bhāva udaya



Māyā-grasta, those who are too much materially covered, they are thinking, "This is nice. This is nice. This is nice." In Kali-yuga it is said, lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. Keśa-dhāraṇam. When I did not come to your country, I was thinking, "What is that keśa-dhāraṇam?" But as soon as I came to your country I saw the hippies-big, big hair. Keśa-dhāraṇam. Keśa means hair. It is predicted. Just see. This is śāstra: "In the Kali-yuga people will think very, think themselves of very beautiful feature by keeping long hairs." That is stated. This is called śāstra. Five thousand years ago Bhāgavata was written, and there the symptoms of Kali-yuga are mentioned, and this is one of the symptoms, lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam.



In the Twelfth Canto you will find this description, svīkāra eva ca udvāhe-all these predictions are there. "Marriage will be done simply by agreement." Now it is... Just see. It is being done. Svīkāra eva. Svīkāra means agreement: "I accept you." No actual marriage ceremony is performed. Practically marriage is going out of date. So these symptoms are there. Dāmpatye ratim eva hi. Husband and wife's relations will be stronger if there is sex power. That's all. Otherwise divorce. Just see the symptoms. Dāmpatye ratim... Sūtratam... Sūtrate... Vipra. Vipratve sūtra-dhāraṇam: "A brāhmaṇa means having a piece of thread, that's all." Vipratve sūtra-dhāraṇam. And only two-paisa worth sūtra will... Just like in India: "Oh, I am brāhmaṇa because I have got this thread." That's all. Vipratve sūtra-dhāraṇam. Avṛttyā nyāya-rahitam(?): "If you have no money, then you cannot get justice." If you are poor man, then you will never get justice. You see? First of all, if you want to get some money... Somebody, he is not paying. You have to go to court. So first of all the pleader will charge, "Give me so much money." Then stamp charges, then percentage of stamp charges. Suppose you are claiming $5,000. Then you have to five percent... So so many thousand dollars you have to pay for stamp charges to claim, to push good money after bad money. The money which is not being realized, that is bad money. Now you have to push further good money to realize that bad money. So if you have no good money to push, then you cannot get even that bad money. And that also will be pending for years together. Unless you bribe the clerks and the bench clerk and others, "Please get my case swiftly in..." So he will ask money, bribe.

So anyway, then Bhāgavata says anadhena nyāya ratim(?): "If you have no money, then don't expect justice. Don't expect justice." Even high-court judges, they take bribe to give you favorable judgement. In India we have seen so many bribe. Police, you give bribe; high-court judge, you can give bribe. This is the position of Kali-yuga, horrible position. The king or the so-called president is simply showbottle. If you approach... You cannot approach. Formerly, if anyone was ill-treated, injustified, then he could go in front of the king. Just like Lord Rāmacandra, He was approached by a citizen: "My Lord, in the presence of father, son has died. What is Your kingdom?" Just see. The king is responsible. Natural death is father dies first, the son dies later on. But somebody's son died in the presence of the father. He immediately brought the case before the king: "Why it is?" This is called king. The king is responsible. In our Kṛṣṇa book you will find that one brāhmaṇa's sons were stolen, and he, every time he chastised the king. You have read that portion? Yes. So in Kali-yuga they are not actually functioning as king or president, but still, they are drawing high salaries and respect, doing harm to the people, and still, they are exploiting.

This is Kali-yuga, very abominable condition, precarious condition. You cannot get justice, you cannot get nice food, you cannot get nice treatment, your age is diminished, your power is diminished, everything is topsy-turvied. The best thing is to prepare yourself very quickly to go back to home, back to Godhead, and there you become one of them, like these Vaikuṇṭha persons. These are the description already there. So many ornaments. We do not see what is... If you ask somebody... They may have some plastic utensils, but if you ask somebody that "Have you seen pearl, sapphire, or coral, or diamond?" everyone will say, "I have never seen in my life." And still they are proud: "Oh, we are now advanced." What advanced? Simply plastic and paper. I see in Japan, all paper, simply papers. All big, big buildings packed up with papers. I was observing from the train all the big, big... What is the contents? Contents means paper. That's it. The house is made of paper. And Japan is considered to be very advanced, and industrialist. Simply outward dress. Actually nobody has got any wealth. The money is also paper. No pearl, no gold, no silver, nothing. But they are satisfied with papers. That's all. Paper house, paper money, paper book, paper everything. Plastic, paper.

Now intelligent person should be anxious that if Kṛṣṇa says, mad-dhāma gatvā punar janma na vidyate. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma: [Bg. 15.6] "If you go to this planet..." Why you are trying nonsensically to go to the moon planet? Suppose you have gone there? What is there? You see piles of dust. That is your explanation. Why don't you try here, rascals, and go, and become so nicely dressed with decoration, ornaments. And all young men. What is that? Sarve catur-bāhava unmiṣan-maṇi. Where is that?

Pradyumna: Supeśasaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Surucaḥ supeśasaḥ. Supeśasaḥ. What is the meaning of supeśasaḥ?



Pradyumna: Growing youthful.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Supeśasaḥ means this. Just like we are old man. Now it has become slackened. But when I was young it was very tight. This is called supeśasaḥ, muscles very tight. Supeśasaḥ means young, all young. Suvarcasaḥ, and luster. When a man is young, there is some luster, attractive luster. This is nature's gift. A woman becomes... A girl becomes full of youth, lustrous. A man, a boy becomes... Attraction. Without attraction, there cannot be sex. And without sex, there will be stopped of generation. So by nature these things are there. So śāstra makes some adjustments. The natural attractions are there, but they know what is the meaning of this attraction. Therefore, according to Vedic rules, the boy is selected by the father, the girl is selected by the father. They are given in marriage so that that natural attraction can be utilized for generating good population, not prostitution. You see? Therefore early marriage, selection by the parents, these are recommended. That is called marriage. Now the boys and girls are loitering in the street, and they are mixing freely and having all business. And then one day say, "All right, I agree. You are my wife. You are my husband." Svīkāra eva ca udvāhe. These are the signs of Kali-yuga. It is simply deteriorating. The human civilization is deteriorating. In the name of advancement of civilization, they are becoming animals simply. And the more the age of Kali-yuga will increase, these things will also increase more and more, more and more. Later on, you won't get foodstuff. You will be obliged to kill some animal and eat. Now you have got alternative. But we are becoming very much fond of animals, so Kṛṣṇa will, or nature will make some arrangement that you cannot eat except animals. That day will come. You cannot eat, even if you do not like. Nobody will say, "I don't like." Everyone will like. So there will be no supply of wheat, no supply of rice, no supply of sugar, no supply of fruit. These things will be stopped. No supply of milk. These are stated. You won't get. Then naturally... Just like in Arabian desert, they were animal eaters. What is growing there? So if in Jerusalem, if they have eaten flesh, so that is not their fault. Jesus Christ might have allowed: "All right." But why in other places where there are so many nice foodstuff? What is the reason? If you don't get something... (someone calling in Japanese) Who is this?



Śyāmasundara: He's gone to see.



Prabhupāda: So...(someone calling in Japanese) It is Japanese language? Why? He wants to see. Hm. So eternal life, yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]. Eternal life, such nice, always youthful, such nicely dressed, and four hands. Now you are eating with two hands. You will get four hands. (laughter) So you can voraciously eat also if you like, with four hands. How much you can eat, two hands? So these are the facilities. Why don't you try for this? And Kṛṣṇa assures, mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām.



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām

[Bg. 9.25]



So when there is facility, you can go to this kingdom of God. Why don't you...? Just like a student studies very faithfully, taking so much pains. Why? He expects that "Somehow or other, if I can pass this examination, I will get a very nice job, good salary, and live very happily." Everyone hopes like that. A businessman works so hard day and night with the hope that "At the end of my life, if I get a good balance, bank balance, then I shall live peacefully without any botheration." So everyone hopes like that for future. But what is this civilization? They have no future hope. The rascal professors, they say..., he is saying that "After death everything is finished." After death everything finished-why? Why there are so many varieties of life? After death there is life. But you do not know what is that life. That is your ignorance. Here is a chance, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that you get next life very good life. If you complete, you go to Vaikuṇṭha and get life like this. If you don't complete, if you are so unfortunate that you cannot complete one life, that is unfortunate. Why you... So then you get chance to get your birth as a human being in very rich family, in very pious family. That chance is again given so that you can revive your, again, Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is a chance. You had previously some advantage of executing this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Somehow or other, you could not... Not you or you-all of us, we could not. So Kṛṣṇa has given another chance. So don't miss this chance. Make it complete. Make it complete and go to Vaikuṇṭha or Kṛṣṇaloka. Such a nice proposal. Where it is? Who can give this? Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī adored Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te: [Cc. Madhya 19.53] "Oh, You are the greatest of the munificent." Namo mahā... Vadānya means the greatest munificent, who gives charity in the greatest... So Caitanya Mahāprabhu is giving that. What is that? Kṛṣṇa-prema. Simply by loving Kṛṣṇa, you are promoted. This is the greatest gift. The human society is so rascal, they cannot understand what is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. The greatest gift to the human society given by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So those who are intelligent, those who have taken to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they should be very serious to execute the, I mean to say, program. Very nice. We should always pray to Kṛṣṇa that "Kṛṣṇa, You have given this chance. Please have Your grace upon me-I may not miss it. By māyā's influence I may not miss it. You have given me so great chance." This should be our business. If you have got to pray anything... Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu prayed,

na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

[Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]



"Simply I may remain a faithful devotee of Your..." That's all, without any reason, without any cause, causeless. This should be our vow. If we, taking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if we want to make some material asset, then we are cutting our throat, suicidal. The only prayer should be how to remain a pure devotee. If we remain a pure devotee, there is chance. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Because Kṛṣṇa, He is so kind, at the same time so strict also. Strict. If you have got a pinch of material desire, you cannot go to Vaikuṇṭha. You cannot go. Therefore niṣkiñcanānām. You have to become completely niṣkiñcana, nothing wanted of this material world. That is called tapasya. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. If you want to utilize Kṛṣṇa... You can utilize. If you want kingdom, Kṛṣṇa will give you kingdom. That is not very difficult for you (Him). Kṛṣṇa can give you liberation, to merge in His effulgence. That also Kṛṣṇa will give. But it is very difficult to get Kṛṣṇa's service, very difficult. Kṛṣṇa will give you everything, whatever you want. By Kṛṣṇa conscious, being Kṛṣṇa conscious, by rendering devotional service, if you want to have some material profit, Kṛṣṇa will give you. Kṛṣṇa will give you. That is not very difficult thing for Kṛṣṇa. If you want to merge in His existence-the Māyāvādīs-all right, you can get it. But that it not real profit. Real profit is here described, in Vaikuṇṭha, how they are face to face seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having the same body, and same ornaments, same opulence, everything same. Sārūpya, sālokya, sāyujya. Sāyujya is damn rascals. Sāyujya-mukti, never, merging, never, no Vaiṣṇava will take. But sārūpya, so far our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava is concerned, they do not want even this sārūpya, same bodily feature. They don't want anything. They simply want how to serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all. That is Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava vicāra.



So here is the description of sārūpya-mukti, the same bodily features like Nārāyaṇa. This is called sārūpya-mukti, same bodily feature. Pravāla-vaidūrya-mṛṇāla-varcasaḥ parisphurat-kuṇḍala-mauli-mālinaḥ. Kuṇḍala, earrings. Here no male person have any earrings. But formerly you will find pictures of big, big kings, they have got earrings. You have seen? Yes. That is opulence. Jaipur Mahārāja's photograph, earrings, big, nice. Ornaments, huge ornaments. Kṛṣṇa is going to tend the cows-He has got so much ornaments. That is asset. Formerly also in our childhood, a woman having no sufficient ornaments, he (she) will be ashamed to go to the society: "Oh, others will think me so much poor. I will not go. I'll never go." Therefore I was surprised when I came to your country. I saw young girls and ladies, they have no bangles, no ornaments. At least, I was surprised. And smoking cigarettes. (laughter) What is this opulence? See? I heard they are very rich. They have got the tendency, but they do not get it. Those who are very rich, they are getting ornaments. These are the psychological. Every woman, every girl, has the aspiration for nice ornament, nice dress. But they don't get it. Therefore dissatisfied. In the Manu-saṁhitā it is recommended that if you want to keep your wife satisfied, you must give sufficient ornament. These are the psychological things. So the Kali-yuga, therefore, dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. People will be so much wretched that they'll be unable to maintain his wife and children. Therefore in this age, if a man can maintain his family, that will be dākṣyam: "Oh, very fortunate."

So don't take this so-called material civilization has got any value. Reject it. You see? And be prepared for going back to home, back to Godhead. That should be aim. Don't be allured by these rascal leaders. And the another rascal, the Māyāvādī, they cannot believe all these things-"Make it zero." Śūnyavāda. They also do not like the modern ways of life, disgusted, but they have no adjustment, and therefore "Make it impersonal, zero, finished." Here is not zero. Here is substance. We are not after zero. We are after substance. The substance is described here. Just try to understand. We are not fakir. Fakir, this word is used in... One who has no hope, simply loitering in the street, he is a fakir, hopeless. So all are, they are fakirs. And we are not fakir. We are hoping to go there, to live with Nārāyaṇa or Kṛṣṇa, having this greatest opulence, eternal body, blissful life, full of knowledge and opulence. That's all.

Devotees: All glories to Śrīla Prabhupāda. (obeisances) (end)





720428SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.11-15

-

Tokyo, April 28, 1972



Pradyumna: Translation: "Lord Brahmā saw in the Vaikuṇṭha planet, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Lord of the entire devotee community, the Lord of the goddess of fortune, the Lord of all sacrifices, and the Lord of the universe, and who is served by the foremost servitors like Nanda, Sunanda, Prabala, and Arhaṇa, His immediate associates." [SB 2.9.15]



Prabhupāda: So here, as Brahmā saw God, His abode, His associates, so anyone can see also. Brahmā is also living being. Just like if Mr. Nixon can become president, you can also become president. But not that you can become God. You can become president, but you cannot become God. That is not possible. A foolish conclusion is that "If I can become president, then I can become also God." But these associates of God, they are equally... We have already heard how their bodily features are. They are also of the same color. They are also same color.



bhrājiṣṇubhir yaḥ parito virājate

lasad-vimānāvalibhir mahātmanām

vidyotamānaḥ pramadottamādyubhiḥ

savidyud abhrāvalibhir yathā nabhaḥ



Where is, the color is described? Ah, yes.



śyāmāvadātāḥ śata-patra-locanāḥ

piśaṅga-vastrāḥ surucaḥ supeśasaḥ

sarve catur-bāhava unmiṣan-maṇi-

praveka-niṣkābharaṇāḥ suvarcasaḥ



There is one śloka where the description is there about the color?



Pradyumna: The devotees?



Bhānu: Śyāma...



Devotee (1): Text eleven. [SB 2.9.11]



Sudāmā: "The inhabitants of the Vaikuṇṭha planets are described as having a glowing, sky-bluish complexion."



Prabhupāda: Yes, śyāmāvadātāḥ, śyāma, śyāma. Śyāmasundara. Kṛṣṇa is known, therefore, Śyāmasundara. This is the sky color. You can understand. Because the sky has no own color, because the color of Kṛṣṇa is spread as brahmajyoti, that is being reflected in the sky. This is the color of God. Śyāmasundara, therefore called. Yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam aham... So we can see at least the color of the Lord. Here it is said "sky-bluish." How can you deny? Who can say that "I have not..." If you have seen... Just like the sunshine. Sunshine is whitish. So in the sunshine, you can see the whitish color. So you can at least imagine what is the color of the sun planet, what is the color of the predominating deity there. A little intelligence required. So if the sky... When clear sky, you see bluish sky. That is reflection of Kṛṣṇa's bodily effulgence. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. Yasya prabhā, by expansion of the bodily effulgence, the brahmajyoti... In that brahmajyoti there are many universes, in that brahmajyoti, jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi. The sky's bluish effulgence is there. Above this material sky there is another sky whose reflection you simply can see little. Just like outside there is a brilliant light, so you can get little reflection within your room, similarly, this universe is dark and covered. It is covered, round, surrounded. But outside that universe... Or this universe is floating in that effulgence. It is reflected. The sky is reflected bluish. This is the... Let the so-called scientist challenge it. Here is a description from the Bhāgavata: yasya prabhā [Bs. 5.40].



So we have to know from the right source what is God. We cannot imagine. You cannot know even what is there within the sky. The scientists calculate that to go to the ultimate region... What is called? Circumference.

Śyāmasundara: Stratosphere?



Prabhupāda: Yes. It will take forty thousands of years with the speed of 18,000 miles per hour. No, or... Some estimation. Anyway, forty thousands of years. So who is going to live for forty thousand years to see and go and see and come back? They cannot go even to the moon planet, theorizing. How they can go? But this is fact. If you have got power, you go and see. But they cannot go a few miles, and they are proud that "We have known everything. We know everything." This is their foolishness. Our knowledge is so imperfect; still, we are proud of our knowledge: "Oh, I have known everything. I know everything. I am God. I am God." So, and foolish like that... Just like a foolish child, he is declaring himself, "I am God," and there are so many followers: "Oh, he is God, he is God." That's it. They do not know what is God. At least we know what is God in this sense, that our God, when... Actually He is God. Therefore, at the age of seven years, He lifted a big mountain on the finger. So we accept this God. When He was young man He married sixteen thousand wives. These are the unique instances. And why shall I accept a cheap God who cannot provide even one wife? We are not... Because he cannot provide it, he does not marry. So this kind of God we don't accept.



There must be symptoms of God, sarva-śaktimān, with all potency, aiśvaryasya, all riches, aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya, with all strength. If He has all strength, is it very difficult for Him to raise a hill on the finger if He has got all strength? That is the definition of God, all-powerful. So why should I deny that "Ah, this is all story"? It is not story. It is fact. If He is all-powerful, what is the difficulty for Him to lift a mountain? If He is all-strong, then where is the difficulty to maintain sixteen thousand wives? Why sixteen thousand? If He maintains sixteen millions of wives, still, it is insufficient. Because if we say "All potency, all-powerful, all-good," then to maintain sixteen thousand wives with sixteen thousand palaces and all the palaces made of first-class marble and gold and jewels, and the furnitures are made of ivory... These are description. That is God. Why we shall accept a nonsense God simply having a big beard or some...? You see? No. We don't accept. We accept real God. What is the purport?

Pradyumna: "When we speak of the king, it is naturally understood that the king is accompanied by his confidential associates like his secretary, private secretary, aide-de-camp, ministers, advisors, etc."



Prabhupāda: Otherwise what is the meaning of king? "God is imperson. God is zero"-what is this nonsense God? If our great conception, king or president, we understand is a great personality, if in this tiny material world in one corner of this planet there is a big president like Nixon and he has got secretary, his staff, his this and that, so many things, and why God should be without any associates, nirākāra, nirviśeṣa, zero? What kind of God? He must be associated with so many associates. Then?



Pradyumna: "So also, when we see the Lord, we see Him with His different energies, associates, and confidential servitors, etc. So the Supreme Lord who is the leader of all living entities, the Lord of all devotee sects, the Lord of all opulences, the Lord of sacrifices, and the enjoyer of everything in this entire creation, is not only the Supreme Person, but also He is always surrounded by His immediate associates, all engaged in their loving, transcendental service to Him."



Prabhupāda: Śriya-pati. Śriya, the goddess of fortune. He is not only sātvatāṁ patim. He is not only the Lord of the devotees. So therefore if we accept the Lord of everything, then where is the question of our poverty? If your father is very big man, very rich man, then where is the question of poverty? So devotee renounces. But a devotee has got all the opulences of the Supreme Lord, background. So he doesn't want to be opulent himself, but the background is all-opulent. If need be... Just like a small child, a very rich man's son. So he may remain a simple child, but all the property of his father is there on his back. If there is need, the father will spend all the property for the child. So the child does not require to acquire property. That is bhakti. If you simply become devotee... Because Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, is described here, sātvatāṁ patim... Sātvata, a devotee. Then you get everything. If you know Kṛṣṇa, then you know everything. If you get Kṛṣṇa, then you get everything. Why should you try to get this thing, that thing, that thing? Simply try to get Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's protection. Then you get everything. You simply try to know Kṛṣṇa; then you know everything. Śriya-pati. Śriyaḥ patiṁ yajña-patiṁ jagat-patim.



So we can end here. Little have kīrtana.

Devotee: All glories to you, Śrīla Prabhupāda. (end)





720412SB.MEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.13

-

Melbourne, April 12, 1972



Pradyumna: "The Vaikuṇṭha planets are also surrounded by various airplanes, all glowing and brilliantly situated, belonging to the great mahātmās, or devotees of the Lord. The ladies also are as beautiful as lightning because of their celestial complexions. And all these combined together appear just like the sky decorated with both clouds and lightning." [SB 2.9.13]



Prabhupāda: So, there is no scarcity of aeroplanes in Vaikuṇṭhaloka also. It is not nirviśeṣa, zero. The rascals, they do not know what is actually Vaikuṇṭha is or the kingdom of God. And they dismiss everything by declaring, "Zero, without any varieties." Nirviśeṣa śūnyavādi. They have no information; therefore, "zero." But actually that is not. Exactly like this sky, the Vaikuṇṭha sky is there. Like the planets here, there are also planets. As in the sky, outer space, here in this material world big, big...[break] So there also there are many big, big aeroplanes running on.



Now, how this information received. When Bhāgavata was compiled five thousand years ago, there was no existence of aeroplane. But how in the Bhāgavata the information of the aeroplane is there? If men were less intelligent five thousand years ago, and now they have advanced, then how persons five thousand years ago... Not five thousand years. Many, many millions of years ago the information was there. But from historical point of view, at least five thousand years ago. So how they give this information of airplane? So how you can say that some forty thousand years ago... What is the Darwin's theory? There was no brain?

Śyāmasundara: Apelike creatures.



Prabhupāda: So how this nonsense theory can be accepted? According to our Vedic information, from the very beginning the one person, one living creature, was Brahmā, the most intelligent person. Not that he developed from monkey. This nonsense theory killed the human civilization. The intelligence is coming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And the most intelligent person is receiving that, Brahmā. And then he is distributing this knowledge. So knowledge has not developed with the development of the brain of the living entities. That is a wrong theory. Knowledge is already there. And the most intelligent person received it, and it is being distributed still. Therefore Vedic knowledge is considered to be the perfect. And if we take knowledge from the Vedas, then our knowledge is perfect. Now here is the knowledge. What is the purport?



Pradyumna: "Purport: It appears that in the Vaikuṇṭha planets there are airplanes also, brilliantly glowing, and they are occupied by the great devotees of the Lord, with ladies of celestial beauty as brilliant as lightning. As there are airplanes, so there must be different types of carriages also, like the airplanes, and they may not be driven machines as we have experience in this world. Because everything is of the same nature of eternity, bliss and knowledge, the airplanes and carriages are of the same quality as Brahman. As there is nothing except Brahman, so it should not be misconceived that there is only void and no variegatedness. To think like that is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Otherwise no one would have such a misconception of voidness in the Brahman. As there are airplanes, ladies and gentlemen, so there must be cities and houses and everything else just suitable to the particular planets. One should not carry the ideas of imperfection from this world to the transcendental world without taking into consideration the nature of the atmosphere as completely free from the influence of time, etc., as described previously."



Prabhupāda: So, in all other planets, not only within this material world, but also in the spiritual world there are also varieties of planets. The difference is: here the varieties are made of matter, and there the varieties are made of spirit. That's all. There are two things: material energy and spiritual energy. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. The material energy is also one, mahat-tattva. But bahudhā iva ivābhāti. The one thing is matter. But bahudhā ivābhāti. What is that?



Devotee (1): Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti māyayā bahu-rūpayā.



Prabhupāda: Where is that verse?



Pradyumna: It's the second verse.



Prabhupāda: Bahu-rūpa ivābhāti māyayā bahu-rūpayā. Actually this is māyā, but bahu-rūpayā, by the interaction of the three modes of material nature there are varieties. Similarly in the spiritual world, although the spirit is one, there are also varieties, saṁvit... There are... These three qualities, there it is known... What is that called? Now, just now I forget. Saṁvit sandinī. Sandinī saṁvit. That is described in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, there also, varieties. So the Māyāvādī philosophers, they have no information of the spiritual world. Therefore they are thinking that spirit means something void of all these varieties. They cannot conceive that in the variety there can be enjoyment. Here they have got very bad experience of varieties. Therefore they want to make... Buddha theory is like that, varieties, varieties-the earth, water, air, fire. So if this body is made of all these varieties, so you make it nirvāṇa; you kill it or dismantle it to the varieties. Just like when anything in this material world, when it is annihilated, it goes. This, our body... Just like when we leave this body, the matter remains there, lump of matter. Gradually it becomes decomposed, and some water comes out. The water goes to the water, the earthly part goes to the earth, the fiery part goes to the fiery. In this way, this combination of matter becomes dismantled. That is called nirvāṇa, finished. That is Buddha theory, that "By chance, a combination of material elements has formed these bodies, and by chance, a living force has come out, manifested, and on account of the living consciousness, we are feeling pains and pleasure. So in order to stop the so-called pains and pleasure, you dismantle this machine. Then there is no more... You become zero. Then there is no more pains and pleasure." This is Buddha's theory. The same principle, that you have got some pain on your head, so the theory is that break your head. Sometime I suggested to our Sarasvatī, that "You break your head and there will be no pain." So this theory is like that. Instead of mending... This is the lack of knowledge. Mūḍha. Mūḍha. The pains and pleasure... One man in the prison life, he is simply suffering so many pains and pleasure. There is no pleasure, simply pain. So he is trying to commit suicide.



So sometimes people do that, suicide. They think that "If I kill, if I commit suicide, then all these pains and pleasures will be finished," because he has no information that a body is an instrument to feel pains and pleasure. Actually, I, as the spirit soul, I am unattached to it. Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan. Ātma-māyā. It is a creation of, temporary creation. So if I get out of this temporary creation and be situated in my own position, then there is no more pains and pleasure. It is simply pleasure. Therefore Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to change the consciousness. Now I am conscious of this material combination, this body, mind Therefore I am feeling pains and pleasure. And as soon as I am situated in my original consciousness, that "I am Kṛṣṇa's; Kṛṣṇa's eternal servant I am, so let me engage in Kṛṣṇa's service," and then there is no more material pains and pleasure. It is not that A neophyte, when he is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, he is feeling the same pains and pleasure, but that is due to our past habit, consciousness. Just like aeroplane. You come down on the land. Sometimes there is dizziness. You think that "I am still flying." But there is no more flying. That is stopped. Similarly, one who is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, his material pains and pleasures has been stopped. But due to our past experience, sometimes we think, "I am still in pains and pleasure." This is due to our past experience. The same example again: just like the fan is running. You put off the switch; still, the fan is running. But actually it is not running. The running capacity has been stopped. But due to the, what is called?

Śyāmasundara: Momentum.



Prabhupāda: Momentum. It appears as if running. So a devotee, although sometimes it appears that he is in pains and pleasures, committing something nonsense, that is momentum. In the next verse in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said,



ksipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā

śāṣvac chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

[Bg. 9.31]



Although we find in the neophyte devotee some bad behavior due to his past experience, so we should not take him as nondevotee. Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. He is sādhu-if he sticks to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And the bad habits which are visible now, it will disappear. It will disappear. So we have to give chance because we see some bad habits of a devotee, we should not reject. We should give another chance. We should give another chance because he has taken the right thing, but to past behavior he appears to be again going to the māyā's clutches. So we should not reject, but we should give chance. One may take little more time to come to the standard, but we should give him chance. If he sticks to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, very soon all these defects will be disappearing. Kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā. He will be completely a dharmātmā, a mahātmā. Why? Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: [Bg. 9.31] "Anyone who has taken seriously My lotus feet, seriously surrendered to Me, he will never be anxious. He will never be anxious, although sometimes it appears that he is coming down." So this should be our principle. We stick to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then everything will be all right in due course of time. So the varieties of life there is. That variety is actual variety.



Here it is only perverted reflection. Here the beauty... Just like the beauty is described there, bhrājiṣṇu. Bhrājiṣṇu, all glowing. Lasad-vimāna. Lasat, brilliant. There is also aeroplane, but not this tin aeroplane. You see? There the airplanes are made of jewels and gold, brilliant. And their beauty. There also men, women there are, not that simply men devotees, no. But the men and women, they are creation. The both sexes are there, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So nothing is different from here, but they are permanent, real. Here everything are temporary and false. This is the difference. Everything, there is also tree, there is also flower, there are also palaces, there are aeroplanes, there are chariots, men, women, but they are real, and here it is unreal.

The same example, the mirage. It appears exactly like water, but it is not water. It is false. But there is real water. We should not think that because it is false water, therefore there is no water. Water is illu... That is Māyāvādī theory. Because here... Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: Śaṅkarācārya, that "Only Brahman, impersonal Brahman, is fact, and everything, all varieties, they are mithyā." No. They have no full information of Brahman. When we get full information of Brahman, the Supreme Brahman, Kṛṣṇa He is ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. He is always engaged in celestial Not celestial. Spiritual bliss. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. His līlā, His rasa-līlā, He is playing with the cowherds boy, but there is no defects or the, what is called, inebrieties. There is no such thing. Everything is fact, and everything is real. Therefore ānandamāyā. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. There is rasa. Here is also rasa. Here rasa is not ānanda-cinmaya. This is material. There everything is real. So bhrājiṣṇubhir yaḥ parito virājate lasad-vimānāvalibhir mahātmanām. Those vimānas, aeroplanes, belong to the mahātmanām, great liberated devotees. So devotees are not going to be zero. They will have also aeroplane there, but not this third class aeroplane. As soon as the machine goes wrong, it immediately crashes. There is no crashing; neither there is any necessity of machine because they are spiritual. Just like motor car, a machine, it requires oil, it requires petrol to run on. But as we are spirit, we don't require anything. We can run without any arrangement of mechanical. We can experience that. A man is running, not that you have to put some petrol. Of course, we are putting petrol, this foodstuff. That is meant for the body. But if the whole thing is spiritual, there is no more necessity of these things, material ingredient. There is no necessity. That they cannot. There the aeroplane is also spirit. It is living. It has taken the shape of aeroplane, but it is living. It is not false. Therefore there is no necessity of this petrol, simply beautiful aeroplane, and wherever you like, you can go. They are moving in the sky. And the beautiful women. They are women just like lightning. their beauty is so brilliant, glowing, that the women, they are, themselves, are lightning. As we find lightning in the cloud, very beautiful, similarly, when these aeroplanes fly in the outer space or Vaikuṇṭha sky, it looks like lightning in the cloud. Pramada uttamādyubhiḥ. Uttamādyubhiḥ.

Here the beauty is also false because it is material. A woman is very beautiful, but as soon as the spirit soul is gone, if somebody says that "You can take this woman at your house," nobody will like. Nobody will like, because the real thing is gone. It is false beauty. The same woman, beautiful, everyone is after this: "Oh, very nice woman." But as soon as the spirit soul is gone... Just like dolls. There are very, very beautiful women's dolls in the tailor's showroom, and nobody cares for it. Well, everyone knows this is false. Therefore Śaṅkarācārya said that "Why you are being attracted by this woman? It is simply lump of matter. It is a simply lump of matter." Everyone, it is in our experience that a lump of matter is standing, sometimes photograph of a nice woman, or the doll of a nice woman. Everyone knows that this is false. Nobody is attracted. So therefore there, there is nothing material. Everything is spiritual. The body is also spiritual. He is and everything... There is no distinction between body and soul. Everything is one. That we cannot experience now, but we have to get information from the authorized book. Therefore they are far far better. There is no question of comparison. Pramada uttamādyubhiḥ. Pramada. Woman's name is pramada, pramada because as soon as one woman comes before a man, he becomes agitated. Therefore woman's name is pramada. Pramada. Pramada means agitates. Kāminī. Agitates. So there the pramada uttamādyubiḥ. Uttama. Udgata-tama. Tama, this darkness, is not there. Savidyut. Savidyud abhrāvalibhir yathā nabhaḥ. When they fly in the sky it appears just like lightning in the clouds. These are the description of Vaikuṇṭha planet. So, what is your question? Any question?

Devotee (1): I have a question, Your Divine Grace. You say in Vaikuṇṭha everything is the same as here in the material world. So there are families. The children... Do the children grow...?



Prabhupāda: There is no children. There is no children because there is no birth. There is no death. So there is no question of children. You don't find any description of children.



Devotee (2): In the material world variety is created by the attraction of three modes of nature.



Prabhupāda: Mm?



Devotee (2): The three modes of material nature cause the variety in the material world. In the spiritual world, what are the factors which cause variety?



Prabhupāda: That saṁvit, sandinī, varieties of Kṛṣṇa's spiritual energy.



Trivikrama: In Kṛṣṇaloka there are children, Kṛṣṇa, the cowherd boys.



Prabhupāda: That is also eternal. That is another planet. Eternally Kṛṣṇa is playing with the cowherds boy. Not that these children are being born. They are like... Just like in this world also we see Kumāras, that eternally child, Kumāras, the four Kumāras. They are born along with the Brahmā, but they're just like a small, four years old boy, Kumāra, catuḥsana-kumāra. So we get some information only, but you will see them practically when you go. (laughter) You take information only. But it is not variety-less, not the nonsense theory, zero. That is the first thing. It is not zero. So any other question? Nirviśeṣa-saviśeṣa. There Kṛṣṇa is dancing always with the gopīs. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. There everything is expansion of Kṛṣṇa's own form. Here is also This is also expansion of Kṛṣṇa's energy, material energy. And that is Just try to understand like this. Here everything is by the expansion of Kṛṣṇa's material energy. And there, everything is there by His spiritual energy. That's all. Something made of sugar and something made of dirt. The sugar is always sweet, and dirt is always detestful. That's all. Two dolls, one is made of clay, another is made of sugar. Which one you will like? Children? Two dolls. One is made of sugar and another is made of this clay. Which one would you like?



Devotees: Sugar.



Prabhupāda: Because that doll, wherever you lick up, is sweet, and this doll made of clay, you cannot lick. So that is the only explanation. This... Kṛṣṇa says that bhūmir āpo... Apareyam. Aparā. "These are My inferior energies." Itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parā: "Beyond this, there is another prakṛti, another nature. That is parā, superior." The superior? How I can understand this inferior and superior? Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho [Bg. 7.5], that "Superior energies are jīva, living entity." Just like here the matter is there, and the living entity is there, but the living entity is controlling the matter, controlling the matter, not the matter is independent. The matter independently cannot become this here tape recorder. When the superior energy, living entity, collects them, applies his intelligence and converts into a tape recorder, it works. It is nothing but a lump of matter, only tin and some metal and some paper and something like that. So this superior energy, when it acts on it, then it can work. Therefore, similarly, here this whole material world is made of the inferior energy. Both the energies are of Kṛṣṇa. They are emanating from Kṛṣṇa. But one is inferior energy; the other is superior energy. That's all. This is the difference between material world and the spiritual world.



So in the spiritual world there is no need of making mechanical arrangement because everything is spirit. There is no need of mechanical arrangement. That we cannot accommodate with our poor brain at the present moment. But simply try to understand that as we find here superior energy and inferior energy, without the superior energy the inferior energy has no value. This tape recorder, so long the superior energy is handling, it is giving the desired result. But if you don't handle, if some superior energy, some human being, does not tackle it, it has no value; it is matter only. It is matter. Out of its own accord it cannot act. But if it was made of spirit, then out of his own accord it can play. There is no need of handling. Just like if I ask you, "Bring me a glass of water," so immediately the glass of water is here. But if I ask this, "Give me a glass of water," it cannot. That is difference between matter and spirit. So in the spiritual world there is no need of artificial, mechanical arrangement. Everything is living force. That is the difference. And the Māyāvādī philosophers... Therefore they are called Māyāvādī. They are so fool that even in Kṛṣṇa they find difference, that Kṛṣṇa has got a soul. Just like Dr. Radhakrishnan states, "It is not to Kṛṣṇa the person, but within." He is such a fool that he does not know that there is no within and without Kṛṣṇa. And he is trying to comment on Bhagavad-gītā. He does not know what is Kṛṣṇa. He's distinction, making distinction.

Just like we have got distinction-I am a spirit soul; I am covered by this matter-Kṛṣṇa is not like that. If He is covered by matter, then how He can remember some forty millions of years ago He spoke Bhagavad-gītā to the sun-god? How He can remember? He does not die. He has no material body. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā: "Those who are rascals, they deride upon Me as an ordinary human being." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam paraṁ bhāvam avajānanto: [Bg. 9.11] "They do not know what is the essence of My position. Therefore they conclude like that." They have got experience that there is superior soul and inferior matter. "So Kṛṣṇa has also got the superior soul and inferior matter, material body." No. Kṛṣṇa has no material body. Otherwise, how He can remember what He spoke forty millions of Arjuna cannot. Vedāhaṁ sama... He knows past, present, and future. Svabhijñāh svarat. These things are there. So as soon as you also get rid of this material body, you also become like that, like Kṛṣṇa, sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. Sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. So in order to get That is our original body. So in order to get that original body, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is there. So anything more? [break] ...enjoy as much as possible. "Let me come fifty miles and take this wild bird toasted. Very tasteful." Because their life will be finished, "So whatever taste and enjoyment I can enjoy, let me finish it, because after this body is finished, everything will be finished." But our is not The body may finish, but our spiritual enjoyment is there if we get our spiritual consciousness. This is our proposition. We will get varieties of enjoyment. Chale-bale lāḍḍhu kha śrī-madhumaṅgala. There is only store in lāḍḍu and kachori in Vṛndāvana. Rabri. Makhana. Kṛṣṇa is makhanacora. Makhana thief is the All right. (end)



720413SB.MEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.14

-

Melbourne, April 13, 1972



Prabhupāda: Just like vi is short e and the gā is long a, so it should be long. Vigīyamānā priya-karma gāyatī, like that.



Devotees: Vigīyamānā priya-karma gāyatī.



Prabhupāda: Vi is short, vi. And when it comes to gi, vigīyamānā priya-karma gāyatī.



Devotees: Vigīyamānā priya-karma gāyatī.



Prabhupāda: In the English also there is long e. Yes. Go on. Next.



Pradyumna: "The goddess of fortune in her transcendental form is engaged in the loving service of the Lord's lotus feet, and being moved by the black bees, followers of spring, she is not only engaged in variegated pleasure-service to the Lord, along with her constant companions, but also she is engaged in singing the glories of the Lord's activities." [SB 2.9.14]



Prabhupāda: So this is not impersonal, the actual description of the spiritual world, all personal varieties. There are the bees, there are goddess of fortune, and followed by her associate, and there is service and so many things, all opulences, śrī. Śrīr yasya. Aiśvaryasya ṣriyaḥ yaśasaḥ. The definition of the Lord is given that He's full of beauties. In the Brahma-saṁhitā also, Lakṣmī. And not only one, all of them are lakṣmīs. The associates of Lakṣmī, the maidservants of Lakṣmī, they are also lakṣmīs. They are not ordinary women, just like Rādhārāṇī is the chief gopī and all Her young girl friends, they are also gopīs. They are of the same category. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. They are all expansion of Kṛṣṇa, pleasure potency. So this is the information of the Vaikuṇṭhaloka or Goloka Vṛndāvana. So one should take advantage of this life. What we are gaining here by attachment? What we shall get here? The all rascaldom. There is nothing substantial. Therefore one should little risk, that "If there is some chance of entering such a immortal, eternal kingdom of God, why should I not take chance?" You should take chance at all risk in this life to enter into the nitya-līlā, nitya-līlā, eternal pastimes of the Lord.



That is advised by Nārada Muni to his disciple Vyāsadeva: "What you are writing, all these nonsense books? You..." What is called? Jugupsitam. Jugupsitam. He instructed Vyāsadeva that "Whatever literatures you have produced..." Means up to that time he produced Vedānta-sūtra. He wrote up to Vedānta-sūtra, which is considered to be the topmost philosophical thesis in the world, Vedānta-sūtra, all over the world, the Vedānta philosophy. So he finished that Vedānta-sūtra. Still, he was not happy. And his spiritual master Nārada chastised him, "What nonsense books you have written?" First of all he was not happy, so Nārada came, and he asked him that "Why you are not happy? You know everything, but why you are not happy?" So he submitted, "Yes, my master, I know everything, and I think I have done everything, writing all these books. But still, I am not happy. So why I am not happy, that you can tell because you are my master."

So, "Yes, I can tell you." And then he said that "You have labored so much for writing all these nonsense books, but you have not said anything of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore you are unhappy. Therefore I advise you that now you write one book which is simply the transaction of the Supreme Personality, nothing else, nothing of this material world, sacrificing, this religious, and this unreligious, 'this is good, this is bad,' nothing of the sort. Simply write about the pastimes of the Supreme Lord. Then you will be happy." Then he wrote Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And when he wrote, began writing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he writes in the beginning, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] "All these cheating type of religious system, I kick it out, this ism, that ism. I kick out all them. It is this book, especially meant for paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satām, those who are simply paramahaṁsas. It is meant for them. It is not for the ordinary men. I have kicked out all the so-called religious system, dharma artha kāma." People are very much Nowadays they are not even for dharma or artha. They are simply kāma, sense gratification. Sense gratification because every one of us, we come here for sense gratification. The spirit soul is originally spiritual spark." Why he has come here?"-this question is sometimes raised. That is answered. We are reading. Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan. It is a māyā. We cannot enjoy. It is māyā. We have created. "Can I not enjoy like Kṛṣṇa? Can I not become God?" This is māyā. This is māyā. Therefore we are reading this verse, ātma-māyām ṛte rājan parasya... What is that?

Devotees: Parasyānubhavātmanaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Parasyānubhavātmanaḥ. The spiritual, spirit soul has no other business than to serve the Supreme Lord, but creating an illusion, he has come here, svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā, just like creating a mentality and sleeping: "Oh, I have become king." That is not king. That is simply svapna, false. So this material world is simply a nightmare, that's all, hallucination. Ātma-māyām. It is nothing but a hallucination, but we have become so fool, we want to stick to it. We want to stick to it. In spite of so many instructions, so many literatures, still we want. The māyā is so strong. Ātma-māyām ṛte rājan parasyānubhavātmanaḥ. Therefore one should take little risk in order to enter into the eternal life, blissful life. One should take a little risk. That is advised by Nārada. And the same instruction, while he was giving, that First of all he said, "All this nonsense, that jugupsitam: They are abominable. Because you are writing books, dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90], so later on You are authority, Vyāsadeva. People will stick to this. And if even Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66], 'You give up all this nonsense, you simply surrender,' they will not hear because you are writing so many nonsense books." He chastised him like that. Jugupsitam, this very word. Jugupsitam. "You are authority, so you have done such, so many nonsense books." He wrote Mahābhārata, he wrote Aṣṭadaśa-Purāṇa, he wrote, I mean to say, Upaniṣad, and after all, Vedānta-sūtra, all these books which are so highly recognized all over the world. Still, that was condemned, "But you have written all these nonsense books." Jugupsitam. "Because you are authority, they will stick to it." "Oh, here is."



Because in Upaniṣad the negating, that negation, negation of the material form... Therefore it is described in an impersonal form. These nonsense are sticking to that impersonal form. Impersonal-there is no form. Really, Veda says, apāni-pāda javano grahitā: "The Supreme Absolute Truth has no legs, has no hands, but He accepts whatever you offer." Now, how He accepts? He has no hand; then how He accepts? But they have no brain. They have no brain. When it is said that "He has no hand," it is said that "He has no hand like you." When he says that "He has no leg," it means that "He has no leg like you." If he has no hand, then how Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati tad aham aśnāmi bhakty-upahṛtam: [Bg. 9.26] "If I accept them"? If He is far away within the Goloka Vṛndāvana, goloka eva nivasaty akhilātmā [Bs. 5.37], but He has got such a hand-although He is living in Goloka Vṛndāvana, far, far away, He will immediately Whatever you offer, He will take. That kind of hand, not your three feet hand. If somebody offers me downstairs, "Prabhupāda, take this flower," but I am here. How can I take? But He can take. He can take. That is called apāni-pāda javano grahitā paśyaty acakṣuḥ. He can see. His eyes are not like this, that beyond this wall I cannot see anything. He can see everyone, what you are doing nonsense. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. As witness, He is seeing. He is within your heart. How you will hide it? Anumantā upadraṣṭā.

The Upaniṣad also it is stated that He... The two birds are sitting on the same tree, the jīvātmā and paramātmā. The one bird is eating forbidden fruit, and the other bird is seeing. So He is seeing. But how He is seeing? The Veda, the Vedic literatures, apaśyati. Therefore sees. Apaśyati means see. But you said, acakṣuḥ. He has no eyes. How He sees? That is His eyes. He has no eyes like you, a three feet distance, that's all, finished, your eyesight. He can see. From many thousands and millions of miles away He can see. So it is the distinction. When it is stated, impersonalism, He is not a person like us. Kṛṣṇa says, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] "Because I come here to be visible to the rascals, instead of taking advantage of this visibility, they are describing, nirākāra. Mūḍhā, rascals. I come here personally and still they say nirākāra, impersonal. Mūḍhā, rascals, fools, asses."

So anyone who does not know, rascals, fools, asses, they say God is nirākāra. No. God is sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. He has got His abode. He has got His maidservants, His wives.

Lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam [Bs. 5.29]. He has got His pastimes. Surabhīr abhipālayantam. Here you have got a hobby to keep dogs, "gow, gow, gow!" And Kṛṣṇa has no hobby? He has got hobby, to keep cows. Surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. You have imitated that hobby, and instead of keeping cows, they are keeping, "how!, how!," dogs. That is your capability, a nonsense which is untouchable. Dog is untouchable according to Vedic literature, and they are being kept. And cows? Killed. And cruelty to animals means not to be cruel to the cats Not cats. Yes, cats and dogs. And for the cows, "Oh, there is no question of cruelty. He has no soul. Kill him." This is your civilization, Dog civilization. You see? You keep dogs, "gow! gow! gow!", and if somebody comes to your home, to your country, you also make "gow! gow! gow! Why you have come?" Immigration department. "Please go out. Please go out." This is civilization.

The Vedic civilization is... Therefore India was open to everyone: "Come on. Come here." Therefore they entered as friend, and they conquered. Because India was open. "Yes, you are guest. Come on. You learn here." Lord Jesus Christ also went there to learn. So they kept open everything. Para-upakāra. Still, Caitanya Mahāprabhu said... Whatever is done is done. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is speaking when it was already conquered by the Mohammedans, the Pathans, but still He said, "Those who have taken birth in India, they must do this para-upakāra, do good to others." He never said, "Don't allow anyone." The Mohammedans have come. He did not care whether Mohammedans comes or Christians come. He knew that "Indian culture is so strong, these rascals cannot do anything. They will come here and plunder for some years and then go away. That's all. So let them do that. But your culture, Indian culture, is so great that you should distribute." Bhārata-bhūmite manuṣya-janma haila yāra: [Cc. Ādi 9.41] "Anyone who has taken birth in India, he should first of all make his life successful and distribute this knowledge all over the world." That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. We are engaged in that mission. We don't care for these dogs and cats. So therefore it is such a great thing that we should take little risk. That is That is not risk, but if one thinks that it is risk It is not risk. Nārada Muni advises,

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

[SB 1.5.17]



This is... "You Write books on this principle, that they are sticking to their so-called religious principle, so if anyone giving up his own religious system or occupational duty..." Religion means this sva-dharma. Sva-dharma means that the whole human society is divided into four classes-brāhmaṇas, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra-in different names maybe: intelligent class, administrative class, mercantile class, and laborer class. It may be in different names, but these four classes, division, is there all over the world in different names. So sva-dharma means, intelligent class means they are interested in philosophy, in religion, in uplifting the human society to the proper position. That is intelligent class. And administrator class means they are interested in giving protection to the people. Now it is under nationalism. And give them protection from the enemies, from thieves, from rogues. That is the duty of the kṣatriya. Kṣat. Kṣatta means injury, and tra means one who protects or liberates. "One who protects a human being from being hurt by others"-that is called kṣatriya. And brāhmaṇa means one who knows Brahman, the Absolute Truth. And vaiśya means those who know visampati, the economic problem. And śūdra means laborer. So each word has got meaning. So everyone has got his particular type of occupation, either as intelligent class of men, or as the administrator class of men, or as vaiśyas, traders, or merchants, or as a laborer. Everyone has got.



So Nārada Muni advised, tyaktvā sva-dharmam: "You give up all these occupational duties according to the modes of nature. Tyaktvā. You take immediately shelter of Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa, as Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. Sarva-dharmān means all kinds of this dharma: brāhmaṇa's dharma, or the kṣatriya's dharma, or the... Give up all this. Then? Mām ekaṁ śaraṇam. So Nārada also says that same thing. That is the characteristic of devotee. What the Lord says, the devotee will say. He will not make any addition, alteration, and amalgamate and comment. No. He will say the same thing. Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me, giving up all your occupational duty." Nārada also says that "Suppose one gives up his occupational duty and surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead," tyaktvā sva-dharmam caraṇāmbujaṁ harer [SB 1.5.17], "takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality." All right. It is very good. "But I am afraid if I fall down." Nārada says "It is all right." Bhajann apakvo. While you are discharging your devotional service even being immature you fall down, it doesn't matter even if you fall down. Bhajann apakvo 'tha. Apakva means nonmature. Patet tato yadi. He falls down from the path of devotional service. Yatra kva vā abhadram abhūd amuṣya kim: "What is the loss there?" And those who are sticking to their occupational duty... Ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ, "If one, one sticks to his occupational duty, but he does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, does not take to devo..., what does he gain?"

Here one who takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and falls down, for him, he says, "What is inauspicity there?" That means there is auspicity still, although he has fallen. And one who is sticking to his original occupational duty but does not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, what does he gain? This is the advice. What does he gain? "Oh, I am sticking to my own principles." What is your nonsense principle? After your death, after this body all principle will be finished. That's all. And you could not take the opportunity of taking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So what is your gain? And this man who has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, rejecting all so-called occupational duties and religious principles, he gains. There is no inauspicity because he had fallen. Why? Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ sañjāyate [Bg. 6.41]. At least it is guaranteed that you get next life a human form of life and in a very well-to-do condition, either in rich family or in the family of a very high class brāhmaṇa or Vaiṣṇava. So therefore he is not losing anything. And the other man who is sticking to his own occupational duty and does not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is losing everything because after this body nobody knows where he is going. Either going to be a cat or dog or tree or where, he does not know.

So it is so nice thing. Here is the opportunity. We get the opportunity, Lakṣmī. How Kṛṣṇa is served. Lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam [Bs. 5.29]. If by trying in one life, I am getting the chance of entering into Kṛṣṇa's kingdom to have eternal, blissful life, if I reject it, how much unfortunate I am. Even if you fall down. But there is a chance of becoming immediately being transferred. But even there is no chance, even there is not fully completed, even it is failure, still it is said "It is auspicious," because the next life guaranteed a human form of life. And for the ordinary karmī, what is next life? There is no information. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran loke tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. He can become a tree, he can become cat, he can become a demigod. Not more than a demigod. That's all. And what is the demigod? They get some opportunity in the higher planetary system and again fall down. Kṣīṇe puṇye punar martya-lokaṁ viśanti. After the bank balance, the puṇya, pious activity, resultant action of pious activities is finished, again come down. Ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokan punar āvartino 'rjuna: "Even if you go to the Brahmaloka where Brahmā lives, whose calculation of one day we cannot calculate; even if you go there, then they will come back." Mad-dhāma gatvā punar janma na vidyate. "But if you come to Me, then there is no more coming down here." This is the opportunity of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

[SB 1.5.17]



tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary-adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



You should read all this. You don't read. In the first volume of Bhāgavata these things are explained. But I don't think you read all these things. Do you read? So if you don't read, then you will feel restless: "Oh, let me go from Japan to India, from India to Japan." You are restless because you don't read. I am laboring so hard for you, but you don't take advantage. Don't take advantage of eating and sleeping. Take advantage of these books. Then your life will be successful. My duty-I have given you so valuable things, day and night trying to convince you, each word to word. And if you don't take advantage of this, then what can I do for you? All right. (end)





720430SB.TOK

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.16

-

Tokyo, April 30, 1972



Pradyumna: Translation: "The Personality of Godhead, seen leaning favorably towards His loving servitors, His very sight intoxicating and attractive, appeared to be very much satisfied. He had a smiling face decorated with an enchanting reddish hue. He was dressed in yellow robes and wore earrings and a helmet on His head. He had four hands, and His chest was marked with the lines of the goddess of fortune." [SB 2.9.16]



Prabhupāda: So full description of God. So four hands... We read in the previous verses that the devotees also were of four hands. So there is no change in the bodily feature. Purport?



Pradyumna: Purport. "In the Padma Purāṇa, Uttara-khaṇḍa, there is a full description of the yoga-pīṭha, or the particular place where the Lord is in audience to His eternal devotees. In that yoga-pīṭha, the personifications of religiousness, knowledge, opulence and renunciation are all seated at the lotus feet of the Lord. The four Vedas, namely Ṛk, Sāma..."



Prabhupāda: (aside:) Rotten. Gone bad.



Devotee: It's gone bad.



Pradyumna: "The four Vedas, namely Ṛk, Sāma, Yajur and Atharva, are present there personally to advise the Lord. The sixteen energies headed by Caṇḍa are all present there. Caṇḍa and Kumuda are the two first doorkeepers, and at the middle door there are the doorkeepers named Bhadra and Subhadra, and at the last door there are Jaya and Vijaya. There are other doorkeepers also, named Kumuda, Kumudākṣa, Puṇḍarīka, Vāmana, Śaṅkukarṇa, Sarvanetra, Sumukha, etc. The palace is well decorated and protected by the above-mentioned doorkeepers."



Prabhupāda: So everything in detail you'll find, the kingdom of God, the nature of that atmosphere, the devotees, the inhabitants. Everything is there clearly. So the festival today is murdered.(?) The festival? (sound of heavy rain in background?)



Sudāmā: I don't think it will take place because it is supposed to be held in a large park.



Śyāmasundara: It is very wet. Shall we go to Hawaii today?



Prabhupāda: Yes, why not? (laughter)



Devotee: Maybe we'll find a big umbrella.



Prabhupāda: So... (pause) You read this verse, number nine?



Sudāmā: Number nine.



Prabhupāda: It is not working?



Śyāmasundara: The speaker works, but the reel is not moving. I think that belt is making noises or is cut loose or is broken. It often happens with these belts. In Hawaii we can get another one.



Prabhupāda: (chants with devotees repeating)



tasmai sva-lokaṁ bhagavān sabhājitaḥ

sandarśayām āsa paraṁ na yat-param

vyapeta-saṅkleśa-vimoha-sādhvasaṁ

sva-dṛṣṭavadbhir puruṣair abhiṣṭutam



So discuss this. Tasmai sva-lokaṁ bhagavān sabhājitaḥ sandarśayām āsa. Sandarśayām āsa, manifested. This is called revelation. When... Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. God, Kṛṣṇa, His name, nāmādi... First God realization begins from the name. Therefore we are chanting the name. And by chanting the name, when our heart will be cleansed... Because we are now in unclean heart. So ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam, paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. By chanting the holy name, when our heart should be cleansed, then everything will be revealed. You cannot understand what is God, what is His name, what is His form, what is His quality. Quality... In the Upaniṣads the qualities are described as nirguṇa. Nirguṇa means not this material quality. But He has got spiritual quality. Nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca, in the Bhagavad-gītā: "He is devoid of all material qualities," but guṇa-bhoktṛ, "but He has qualities." Just like here it is described that He is so satisfied with the devotees, bhakta-vatsala. He's very much inclined to favor the devotees. This is guṇa. Here the masters are trying to take more service from the servant. That's all. Their aim is that "I will pay him less; I will take service from him more." This is material. But in the spiritual world, simply becoming servant... Of course, he hasn't got to do anything. Because God is complete, what He will have to do there? He doesn't require anyone's service. If He is complete, He is not depending on my service. He is complete. Still there are so many millions of servants there. They are eager to serve.



So simply by that attitude... These things are described, that there is not a single dust in the Vaikuṇṭha world. Everything is clean, but still, they are trying to sweep, make it clean, the stairway. This is service attitude. Actually, as Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do-He is complete-similarly, His servants there, they also have nothing to do. Everything is nice. There is no question of sweeping or cleansing or cooking. These things are not required. But still, they are ready to serve. And Kṛṣṇa, or Nārāyaṇa, is very favorably looking upon them. Abhimukham. Dṛg... What is that? Dṛk?

Pradyumna: Dṛg-āsavam.



Prabhupāda: Dṛg-āsavam. Dṛg-āsavam. Āsavam means intoxication. Intoxication. Just like one, when one is intoxicated, his eyes are... This thing, in... Bengali it is called dumabhi.(?) Not a staring, but very mildly smiling. Dṛg-āsavam. Bhṛtya-prasādābhimukhaṁ dṛg-āsavam. Abhimukham: "Glancing over the devotees very mildly, softly." Prasanna-hāsa: smiling so nicely that immediately you can understand that the master is pleased. Prasanna-hāsa.



So there is no question of displeasure. That is Vaikuṇṭha. There is no discrepancy of the service. Just opposite. Here there is just different thing. The master is not satisfied, and the servant is also not satisfied. Servant, you go on paying him more and more, he'll..., "Oh, it is insufficient. Give me more. I will strike. I will not come. I will not work." This is the position of this material world. Everyone is giving service. And apart from master and servant, even in family the man is giving service throughout his whole life, up to the old age. And ask anybody, any member of the family, "You are satisfied?" "No." Just see. Frustration. Gandhi, he gave service to the country to the best capacity, and people appreciated. He was called Mahātmā, so on, so on. But he was killed. He was killed. So here you go on rendering service to your society, country, family or anyone, you cannot satisfy them. It is not possible-they'll never-because the place is like that, insufficiency.

So this service... Here in this material world, service means neither master or servant. Service means to the senses. That's all. We are servant of our senses. We give service to the master-not to the master. I give service to the money-he pays me-not to the master. I have no love for the master. Here anyone goes to the office or goes to service, he does not... He has no business to give service to a certain man, but because he will pay, that means he gives to the, service to the money. And why he gives service to the money? Because it is required for my sense gratification. Therefore ultimately I give service to my senses. The so-called service to the society, friendship, love, country, nation-all bogus. I do service to my senses, sense gratification. That's all. Therefore here service means service to my sensuous kāma, lust. Kāmādīnām, kāma. First of all I am lusty; therefore anyone who is not, who does not require money, he does not go to give service. So because I am lusty-I require some money to fulfill my lusty desires-I go to serve. So therefore kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā. And I give service to a man. If he proposes that "I will give you $5,000. You go and kill that man," oh, I will do immediately. I will go because I want money. As it happened. Even the president is killed. Why the president is killed? You can hire anyone and kill anyone, especially in Western countries. So I want money, so even something which I should not have done, if it is ordered, "You do this. I will give you this money," I will do because I want money. Without money I cannot satisfy my senses.

So this is our position. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā. And even... Just like this man who killed President Kennedy, he was also killed. So although he accepted to kill President, which he should not have done, but still, the man who paid him or engaged him, he was not satisfied. He also killed him. This is the position. Even if you do something abominable, still, the man for whom you are doing, he will not be satisfied. He can kill you. This is going on. This is the sense of service here in this world. Try to understand. Practically it is all bogus. But I give service because I am lusty; I am hungry; I want to satisfy my senses. Therefore I pose myself: "Oh, I will give you service. I will become prime minister, and I will give you so much service." He will canvass. But as soon as he goes to the post of prime minister, he will do nothing. You cannot see, if you want to see him. While taking votes he will come to your door, "Please give me vote." And when he is in the prime minister post, if you want to see him, "Oh, the prime minister is preoccupied. You cannot see him." So on the whole, simply sense gratification in the name of service.

Here in the Vaikuṇṭha the service is not like that. There is nothing to do, and still, the servants are ready, always ready. They are simply waiting for the order. So master is self-sufficient. He hasn't got to order anybody. This is the there.(?) And here, just the opposite. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. So we are serving most abominably. Sometimes we do things which I should not have done. But still, because I want money, because I want to gratify my senses, I give service. Even very sinful service I give. But still, neither I am satisfied, neither the master is satisfied. This is the position. Everyone is trying to give, the politicians or any. Just I have given the example: Gandhi throughout the whole life gave service, but there were some persons who were not satisfied. It is not possible. Therefore the sensible man should consider that "What is the use of this service?" Just like this Vivekananda society, their daridra-nārāyaṇa-sevā. The daridras are lying on the street, but they collect money in the name of serving the poor, and they live very comfortably-big, big belly. You see. All the sannyāsīs are eating and sleeping and doing everything, all nonsense. But they are collecting money. They have no other source. We don't say that we are collecting money for daridra-nārāyaṇa-sevā, no. We collect money directly for serving Kṛṣṇa. We give directly, that "We have got our Kṛṣṇa. We have to serve. We have to do this. Kindly give us some contribution, and you take this book." We never say that we are going to serve the daridra-nārāyaṇa. Our Nārāyaṇa is not daridra. Daridra means poor. Here our Nārāyaṇa is described. Our Nārāyaṇa is not... Here it is... He is... Tatrākhila-sātvatāṁ patiṁ śriyaḥ patiṁ yajña-patiṁ jagat-patim. He is not daridra. How He can be poor? He is jagat-pati. He is the master, He's the Lord. He is the proprietor of all universes, jagat-pati. Śriyaḥ pati. He is the husband of the goddess of fortune. So how He can be poor? Just see how they concoct word, daridra-nārāyaṇa. Simply bogus. Here it is stated that God is śriyaḥ patim. Śriyaḥ means all opulences-all riches, all fame, all strength. He is the master of... Śriyaḥ patim. Yajña-patim. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvar... [Bg. 5.29]. Yajña-patim. Yajña means who accepts only sacrifices. Yajña-patim. And jagat-patim. This is the description of the Lord. How He can be poor? But they describe as daridra-nārāyaṇa. Wherefrom this word was concocted?

So this is going on. Very, what is called, awkward position in this material world. In the name of service, so many nonsense things are going on. In the name of worshiping God, so many nonsense things are going on. Therefore, the conclusion should be kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśās teṣāṁ jātā mayi na karuṇā. In the material world you can go on serving throughout the whole life; you will never be satisfied. Na trapā. Neither they will say, "Oh, you have given sufficient service. Now we don't require. Stop." No. "Go on. Go on. Go on. Go on." Na trapā nopaśāntiḥ. Therefore a sane man should conclude, "Why shall I be engaged in this nonsense service? Why not to give service to Kṛṣṇa?" This should be the conclusion. "Why I shall be engaged in this nonsense service when, without giving any service," bhṛtya-prasādābhimukhaṁ dṛg-āsavam, "the Lord is always prepared to bless His servant." He doesn't take any service. There is no need of service. Still, pleased-prasanna-hāsa. Prasanna, pleased. He doesn't require any service. But He... Why not accept this master? Why you are...? [break] Bhṛtya-prasāda. [break] Prasanna-hāsa. He is always pleased. Prasanna-hāsāruṇa, aruṇa-locanānanam. This is God. He doesn't require any service. Still, if you, somehow or other, if you approach there with this service attitude only... Because you cannot approach God in challenging mood. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "Surrender first of all." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is bhakti. If you surrender, then, Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. We suffer on account of our sinful activities. So here everything is sinful. Anything you do in this material world, that is sin. Even your so-called service to the society, country, they are also sinful. Caitanya-caritāmṛta says that dvaite bhadrābhadra sakali samāna. This material world is so polluted, everything is polluted here. So here we have divided that "This is nice, and this is bad." This is simply mental concoction. There is nothing good here; everything is bad. That should be the conclusion. But we have divided: "This is very good, and this is very bad." Everything is very bad. There is no question of good because there is no connection of God.

So here is the picture of God, bhṛtya-prasādābhimukhaṁ dṛg-āsavam. Bhṛtya-prasāda. He is always ready to bless the servants, just like a father. Here you have got some little examples, father and mother. Without any service from the child, he is always ready to bless, always ready. He does not take any offense. Simply father-mother is ready. That is the natural... But nowadays father and mother is also killing, killing in the womb. Just see. Killing in the womb. A child has taken shelter in the womb of a mother, and mother is going to the doctor-how to kill it. Just see. This is the position of the world. And here the supreme father, prasanna-hāsāruṇa-locanānanam, always ready... So why not take this master? Why not accept this father? Why you are after all this nonsense? That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Take the right thing. Don't be misled by the nonsense and rascals.

So any question?

Bhānu: It says His chest was marked with the lines of the goddess of fortune. That's...



Prabhupāda: Yes. There are some marks on the chest, śrīvatsa. That is the distinction between God and the living entities. (end)





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 3.1: Lectures





730521SB.DAL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.1.10

-

Dallas, May 21, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



yadopahūto bhavanaṁ praviṣṭo

mantrāya pṛṣṭaḥ kila pūrvajena

athāha tan mantra-dṛśāṁ varīyān

yan mantriṇo vaidurikaṁ vadanti

[SB 3.1.10]



Translation: "When Vidura was invited by his elder brother Dhṛtarāṣṭra for consultation, he entered the house and gave instructions which were exactly to the point. His advice is well known, and instructions by Vidura are approved by expert ministers of state."



Prabhupāda: So Vidura was a great devotee and great politician also. Not that a devotee should not take parts in politics. They knew everything, but they did not take part. Just like Vidura and his elder brother Dhṛtarāṣṭra. He was politician, Dhṛtarāṣṭra. His whole life was diplomacy and politics. But still, in difficult position he used to consult Vidura. So why a politician should consult a devotee? No. If I want to do something, I must take advice, the best advice, from the best man. That is the principle.



So Vidura was so expert advisor, counselor, that there was a statement, vaidurikam. Just like the cāṇakya-śloka. On ordinary things, cāṇakya-śloka is evidence. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said... I think you can introduce cāṇakya-śloka amongst the students. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said that vidvatvaṁ ca nṛpatvaṁ ca naiva tulyaṁ kadācana. A man who is learned, and man who is very rich, so how they should be compared? The Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "There is no comparison." Comparison must be there when there is points of similarity. Just like we say, "Your face is just like moon." So if the face is actually similar to the moon, then we can say. Points of similarity. Analogy means there must be points of similarity. The largest number of similarity makes the analogy perfect. This is logical rules. So Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that to a rich man and a learned man, there is no comparison. They are different categories. Why? Sva-deśe pūjyate rājā vidvān sarvatra pūjyate. A rich man, a king, may be very respectful, respectable, in his own country amongst his own men, but a vidvat, a learned scholar, he is respected all over the world. Tri-bhuvane mānyau. So if one is respected all over the world and if one is respected in his own village, so how there can be any comparison? These are the Cāṇakya Paṇḍita's instructions, very valuable. There are many.

And another:

mātṛvat para-dāreṣu

para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat

ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu

yaḥ paśyati sa paṇḍitaḥ



Who is a learned scholar? Now, somebody will say one who has passed the M.A., Ph.D. degrees in university, he is learned scholar. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "No, that is not the criterion." Simply to hold degrees of university examination, that is not the test of his becoming learned scholar. That is not. Then what is the test of his becoming learned scholar? Three things. Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu. Except one's married wife, if one sees all other woman like mother, he is a learned scholar. Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu. Para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat. And other's property, just like garbage in the street. And ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyati sa paṇḍitaḥ. If one has acquired... By education, there must be some effect. So these are the tests how one has advanced in education. He must treat all woman except his mother, except his wife, as mother. In India still, women, especially in āśramas, any woman, visitor, she is addressed as "Mother" by all the... She may be young girl, but she is addressed as "Mother." This is the etiquette. "Mother, what can I help you?" This is the very relationship.



The brahmacārī goes to householders' place for begging alms. The system cannot be introduced here. It is very difficult. Otherwise, another business of these children were to go door to door and knock and ask some alms: "Give us some alms." So in India they have got sufficient stock of rice, flour, ḍāl. They keep at least one month provision in every house, even in poor's man. As soon as he gets his money, he purchases the whole month provisions-rice, ḍāl, āṭā, ghee-and keeps it. So when the brahmacārī goes there, a little rice or little ḍāl, they contribute. In this way by collection of these alms from the neighboring householders, practically the āśrama's eating problem is solved. Brahmacārī is supposed to live in gurukula at the place of guru just like a menial servant. Even Kṛṣṇa, He also lived as a menial servant. His teacher asked Him to bring some fuel from the jungle, and He went with Sudāmā Vipra, and while collecting these dry woods there was a storm and there was heavy rain, and they became lost in the jungle, Kṛṣṇa and Sudāmā Vipra. Then his teacher, Sāndīpani Muni... With the assistance of other boys, they were rescued. So this is the position of the brahmacārī, that they go to collect alms, all kinds of, for gurukula.

So Vidura... Kṛṣṇa consciousness includes varieties of activities. They, in..., the press representatives they asked me, "Whether your students, do you take part in politics? Is it sanctioned?" Why not? Our Bhagavad-gītā is produced in battlefield, in battlefield. So why should I deride battle? No. When there is need for fighting, there must be fighting. This world is like that. Otherwise there is no need of fighting. But there is a class of men who will fight. Still it is existing. When there is fight, those who are meant for military purposes, they fight. Not the civilians go and fight. No. Similarly, in the society, there must be divisions. Not that everyone should be called, "Come on, you go to fight." Where is his training? That was not the system. First of all, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]. These children, according to strict Vedic principle, by practical psychology, they should be tested, "What is the tendency of this boy?" There can be four kinds of tendencies: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Some child is to become a brāhmaṇa, some child is to be become a kṣatriya, some child is to become a vaiśya, and the rest, śūdras. They do not... Śūdras does not require any training. Śūdra means no training. Ordinary worker class. Otherwise other three, especially two, namely the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas, they require very magnificent training. Because they will administer the whole affairs of the society.

So brāhmaṇas, they would give advice to the kṣatriyas, and kṣatriyas, according to their advice, would rule over the citizens. This was the system. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Vibhāgaśaḥ, "by division of quality and work." A brāhmaṇa must be qualified and at the same time work as a brāhmaṇa. So we are training, especially, our students to become qualified brāhmaṇas. We cannot take up all other department. Similarly, others may take up the line of training... Military men... Others may take... There are training classes. Maybe mercantile firm, you can get your lessons. So there was organized method to train these mercantile men, administrator and brāhmaṇa. So Vidura, although he was born of śūdra mother... His mother was śūdra, maidservant. Formerly, when a prince was married, along with the princess, a few dozens of maidservants would go with the king. So to become king, always it is to be understood he has to maintain more than one wife. That is king. Even in Muhammadan kingdom, Nawab was Ridali Shah (?). After the Mogul period... In Lucknow, if you go... So he had 164 wives, begam(?) And all of them had children. And when Britishers occupied, the Britishers had to give them pension according to the share. So amongst the Muhammadans also, polygamy was allowed. And Hindus, especially the higher class, brāhmaṇas and kṣatriya, polygamy is allowed. Now they have made laws. But that is quite natural. If every woman has to be married, then polygamy must be there. Otherwise how every woman is going to get a husband? Because male population is always shorter than the female population.

So Vidura was born of a maidservant. The father was the king. The father was the same, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, er, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and the father, Vidura, the same, and the mother different. So Vidura, because he was not born of the queen, he had no share in the throne. But Dhṛtarāṣṭra loved him very much. Although stepmother's son, he would like him very much because he was very intelligent. So on every occasion he would consult him, and his consultation was so valuable that later on it became vaidurikam, "consultation as expert as given by Vidura." So he was invited. Diplomacy, politics were going on, how to cheat the Pāṇḍavas. That was his politics, Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Dhṛtarāṣṭra was born blind, although he was eldest son of his father, but he was born blind. So he could not occupy the throne. His next brother, younger brother, Pāṇḍu, the father of the Pāṇḍavas, he occupied. He became king. Now, this Pāṇḍu died at an early age, and the sons of Pāṇḍu, they were minor children. So Dhṛtarāṣṭra took charge for their maintenance as his other sons. But his policy was that "I could not be elevated on the throne because I was blind, but actually the kingdom belongs to me. So anyway, my brother occupied the throne. Now he is dead and gone. So why his sons should be king? My son should be king." This was the politics. So he was trying how to kill the Pāṇḍavas from the very beginning. And Vidura was restricting him, restraining him. So this is the subject matter. He called Vidura, "What is to be done?" Vidura, he disclosed everything to Vidura. Vidura said, "No, you cannot do that." That will be discussed next morning.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 3.12: Lectures





750303SB.DAL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.12.19

-

Dallas, March 3, 1975



Nitāi: "By penance only can one even approach the Personality of Godhead, who is within the heart of every living entity and at the same time beyond the reach of all senses."



Prabhupāda:



tapasaiva paraṁ jyotir

bhagavantam adhokṣajam

sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam

añjasā vindate pumān

[SB 3.12.19]



From this verse we can understand the Absolute Truth is realized in three features: bhagavantam adhokṣajam, jyoti, paraṁ jyoti, and sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam. The first realization is jyoti, the next realization is sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam, and the last, final, realization is bhagavantam adhokṣajam. The example we have given many times, that the sun is there. The first realization is that we come in touch with the sunshine. That is very easy. Anyone can come in light of the sunshine. It is open to everyone. Then the another feature of the sunshine is the sun globe. That is not so easily available. You cannot go to the sun globe. According to the modern scientific conclusion, we can understand that the sun globe is away from us by 93,000,000's of miles, and still, we cannot tolerate the temperature. And what will be your position if you go to the sun globe? Before reaching sun globe even by some millions of... We are already apart 93,000,000 miles, and suppose when there is three million miles apart from ninety, then the temperatures is so high that we will be finished. We cannot approach the sun globe even, and what to speak of entering into the sun globe? That requires a different body. Of course, there are living entities in the sun globe, within the sun globe. And there is the predominating deity also, the president. You may call. There is a state. Just like you have got here, United State, there is state also. And there is also president, and the president's name is Vivasvān. Everything is there in the śāstra. We read from Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa said, "I spoke to Vivasvān, the president or the predominating deity in the sun globe." So this is all fact. It is not fiction. You are seeing the sun globe, and you are seeing that the sunshine is coming from the sun globe. So it is a globe; therefore there must be inhabitants. But their body is different. That is... Just like this earthly planet is made of earth or dirt-that is made of fire. This is within these five elements: earth, water, fire, air, ether. So the mixture of these things are there also, but the fire element is there prominent. As here, in this earth, all the mixtures are there, but here the earthly element is prominent. So this is also one of the material worlds.



So there are different varieties of planets. That is God's creation. This is also God's creation, that is also God's creation, but I cannot go there. Land is God's creation, water is God's creation, but you cannot live in the water, and the fish cannot live on the land. Similarly, although there are millions and trillions of planets within this universe, you have to live in that particular planet where you are destined to live. That is condition. You cannot go to the sun planet or moon planet. Otherwise what is the meaning of conditioned life? Conditioned life means you are given opportunity to live on this planet, or the other living entities, they have been given opportunity to live in the sun planet. So they cannot come and live here, and we cannot go there and live there. This is called conditioned life. You must live under condition. You are not free. Otherwise they are attempting so much to go to the moon planet. But we are doubtful whether they are actually going. But no benefit has been derived by this excur... Simply you have spoiled your energy, time and money. That is..., means conditioned, that you cannot violate the conditions of the nature. That is not possible. But they are thinking they are free. They can do whatever they like. That is called ignorance, mūḍha, rascal. They are living under condition, but they are falsely thinking that "We are free." Is it not? Where is that freedom? Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. This rascal civilization do not admit this. They are so fool that they are conditioned in every step, and still they are thinking they are free. This is called illusion.

Therefore, to get that freedom, you have to work for it. Freedom does not come so automatically. Just like you are diseased. You are under the control of fever or some other painful condition, under some disease. So you have to undergo some penance. Just like you are suffering from some boil on the body. It is very painful. Then, in order to cure it, you have to undergo the surgical operation if you want to be cured. Therefore tapasā. That is tapasā. Tapa means painful condition, tapa. Just like temperature. If you are put into high temperature, 110 degree, then it is very intolerable for you. It is very painful. Even for us Indians-we are born in India, tropical climate-still, when the temperature is more than hundred, it becomes intolerable. And what to speak of you? You are born in a different temperature. Similarly, we cannot tolerate lower temperature. If it is below fifty degree, it is intolerable for us. So there are different climates, different temperature. And in Canada they tolerate forty degree less than zero. So it is a question of different condition of life. But we are conditioned: high grade temperature, less temperature, high grade cold. But we can we trained up to any kind of conditional life. That capacity we have got. There is a Bengali proverb, śarīre na mahāśaya ya sahabe taya saya,(?) means "This body is," means, "it can tolerate any condition, provided you practice it." It is not that, that you are under certain condition, and if you are changed, it becomes so intolerable that you cannot live. No. If you practice...

Just like nowadays nobody is going. Formerly they are going to the Himalayan mountain, and there is very cold. And the tapasya... There is practice, method: in high scorching heat the saintly person or sages, they will ignite fire all round. Already there is high temperature, and still they will get fire all round and go on, meditation. This is tapasya. These are the items of tapasya. There is scorching heat and they will arrange that. There is pinching, chilly cold, less than hundred degree, and they will go under water and put the body up to this and meditate. These are the items of tapasya. Tapasya. So for God realization formerly people used to undergo such severe type of penances, and at the present moment we are so fallen, we cannot tolerate these four principles? Is it very difficult? We are imposing some tapasya, that "Don't indulge in these things. No illicit sex, no intoxication, no meat-eating, no gambling." These are the items of tapasya for advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So is it very difficult? It is not difficult. If one can practice, go within the water up to the neck in chilly pinching cold, is it more difficult to give up illicit sex and meat-eating and intoxication? We are not advising, "No sex." Illicit sex. So where is the difficulty? But the age is so fallen that even these primary tapasya we cannot execute. That is the difficulty.

But if you want to realize God, as it is said here, tapasaiva, only by tapasya, only by penance, one can realize. Otherwise not. Otherwise it is not possible. Therefore this word is used, tapasaiva. Tapasā eva: "only by tapasya." There is no other means. Tapasā eva param. Param means the Supreme. If you want to realize the Supreme, the Absolute, then you must agree to certain type of tapasya. Otherwise it is not possible. The preliminary little tapasya. Just like ekādaśī. That is also item of the tapasya. Actually on the ekādaśī days we shall not take any food, even drink water. But in our society we are not doing so much strictly. We say, "Ekādaśī, you don't take food grains. Take little fruit, milk." This is tapasya. So we cannot execute this tapasya? So if we are not prepared to undertake even this very, very easily executable tapasya, then how we can expect go back to home, back to Godhead? No, that is not possible. Therefore here it is said, tapasaiva, tapasā eva. Eva means certainly. You have to. Now, executing this tapasya, penances, are you loser? You are not loser. Now, anyone who will come from outside, they will see in our society, our members, boys and girls. They say, "bright-faced." Do they not? They see distinction. One priest in plain cloth... I was going from Los Angeles to Hawaii. One priest, he came to me in the plane. So he asked my permission, "Can I talk with you?" "Yes, why not?" So his first question was that "I see your disciples very bright-faced. How it has been done?" He's sincere. So where is the loss? By undergoing, by denying all these things, sinful activities, we are not loser. We can live very simple life. We can sit down on the floor, we can lie down on the floor. We don't require much furniture, neither large amount of gorgeous dress. So tapasya required. If we want advancement in spiritual life, we must accept some sort of tapasya. In the Kali-yuga we cannot accept such severe type of tapasya as in the cold, we go underneath, under water, sometimes drowning or sometimes up to this, and then meditate or chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. The minimum. So tapasya must be there.

So we should note it by this verse that some sort of tapasya must be done if we are serious about God realization. That is wanted. And then the first realization is jyoti, brahmajyoti. Generally, the Māyāvādī transcendentalists, they think that this realization of brahmajyoti is all in all. The yogis, they think that realization of sarva-guhāvāsam, sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam... Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. God is there in everyone's heart. This is accepted in all śāstra. In the Bhagavad-gītā says, here also it is said, sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam. Guhā means the heart, core of heart. So He is there. So one feature is brahmajyoti; another feature is sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam. The Lord is everywhere, not only your heart, my heart or any animal's heart, beast's heart, bird's heart, but He is also within the atom. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Paramāṇu means atom. Within the atom there is also. Sarva-bhūta-guhā, within, āvāsa, He is living there. So this is one feature. This is called Paramātmā feature, or Supersoul feature. As it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata: [Bg. 13.3] "I am also owner of this body, but I am distributed in everyone's heart." In another place, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. So God is present everywhere. He is omnipotent, omnipresent. So in our temple He is already there, and still more manifest, He is present here as arcā-vigraha, the form of the body by which He can accept our worship. He can accept. It is not that He is different from the original Kṛṣṇa. No, He is Kṛṣṇa, the same Kṛṣṇa, goloka eva nivasati, who is living in Goloka Vṛndāvana, but akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37], He can present Himself in different forms for accepting service for realization.

So the arcā-vigraha is also Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, adhokṣajam. Adhokṣajam, adhah-kṛtaṁ akṣajaṁ jñānam. Our knowledge is what we see. We can see stone. We can see metal. We can see other material elements, wood. So Kṛṣṇa has appeared as we can see Him. Because we cannot see more than stone, wood, metal, therefore Kṛṣṇa has appeared as stone statue. But He is not stone statue. That we have to understand. He is Kṛṣṇa, but He is so kind that He has appeared before us as we can see Him. This is the philosophy, not that stone is Kṛṣṇa. Stone is also Kṛṣṇa in the ultimate sense because stone is the expansion of energy of Kṛṣṇa, material energy. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva..., bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. This is called philosophy of inconceivable one and different. The same example can be given: just like the sunshine. In the sunshine there is heat and temperature. [break] ...say the sunshine has come... (aside:) Why you are standing? If you stand... This side. "If the sunshine has entered my room, therefore sun has entered my room." This is Māyāvādī philosophy. No. By the entrance of sunshine within your room, the sun has entered and has not entered. This is right philosophy. Acintya-bhedābheda. Acintya, simultaneously one and different. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy, acintya-bhedābheda. We cannot think, adjust, that how one thing can be the other thing. That we cannot experience due to our little fund of knowledge, poor fund of knowledge. But in case of Kṛṣṇa, God, that is possible, simultaneously one and different. So here, if you think... To the atheist this form is made of stone, and they are thinking that "These crazy fellow, they are worshiping a stone." In that sense, Kṛṣṇa is not there. If a crazy man breaks the statue, he does not break Kṛṣṇa, but he breaks the stone. This is simultaneously one and different. For the devotee, He is Kṛṣṇa. All the time He is Kṛṣṇa. Because even if you take it as stone, stone is also Kṛṣṇa because it is expansion of Kṛṣṇa's energy. The same example: the sunshine is also sun. And Kṛṣṇa is, being omnipotent, He can accept your service any way. Provided you want to render service, Kṛṣṇa is ready to accept it.

Therefore our duty is that we should never think of this Deity as something made of stone or metal. We should always think, "Here is Kṛṣṇa personally present." That is devotion. And we should worship Him like that. We should offer respect, that "Here is Kṛṣṇa. We cannot do anything wrong." And therefore there is list of offenses of worshiping, sixty-four... Or how many? It is stated in The Nectar of Devotion. Do you discuss this? So we should avoid these offenses, not that "Here is a stone statue. He is not going to see I am doing this offense." Then that is not very good. We should always feel that "Here is Kṛṣṇa, personally present." Actually He is personally present. Then are we so fool, that we are worshiping a stone deity? No. "We" means we have installed this Deity under the direction of previous authorities, ācāryas. So it is not whimsical. We have installed the Deity exactly under the direction of the previous ācārya, and therefore the Deity is personally present, Kṛṣṇa. As He is present everywhere, sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam, similarly, He can live in many millions of temples simultaneously and live at the same time Goloka Vṛndāvana. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa's omnipotency. So Kṛṣṇa, being very kind, He has appeared in our various temple. So we should very careful that "Here is personally present Kṛṣṇa. Here is... Personally, Rādhārāṇī is there. Personally, Lord Caitanya is there, Lord Jagannātha is there." But He is keeping Himself is such a way that you can handle in any way. Even if you commit some mistake, He does not protest. But we should not commit any mistake. That is our duty. We should not create such thing as it is offensive. Therefore the direction is there in the śāstra that "You do like this. Do like this; there will be no offense." And offenseless service will make you more and more advanced in spiritual life.

So Kṛṣṇa has... Bhagavantam. Here it is said, bhagavantam. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is Kṛṣṇa, but He is adhokṣajam, beyond our sense perception. Adhokṣaja. Adhah-kṛtaṁ akṣajaṁ jñānam. Our knowledge is limited within this sense perception. That's all. We can see so long the light is there. If the light is not there, then our seeing power is finished. Therefore it is limited. And Kṛṣṇa is beyond this limitation. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. Adhah-kṛtaṁ akṣajaṁ indriya-jñānaṁ yena. Akṣajaṁ jñānam means "knowledge acquired by sense perception." Akṣaja. Akṣa means "eyes," and ja means "generated." So I see this book because my eyes are seeing it is book. But as soon as the light is off, I cannot see where is the book and where is the table, where you are. Similarly, we cannot see at the present moment by the imperfect senses what is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is Kṛṣṇa's kindness that He has appeared before you in a manner by which you can see Him. This is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Not that the atheistic philosophy, "They are worshiping Deity, some stone, some metal," not like that. He is adhokṣaja. We cannot see Kṛṣṇa with our present eyes, but we can see Him through the scripture. The "through the scripture" is that although we cannot see Him by our present imperfect senses, adhokṣaja, beyond our perception, still, we can see Him. How? Through the authorities. Through the authorities. The same example, as I have given, that I do not know who is my father, but through the authority of mother, I can see him: "Here is my father." This is called authority seeing. If mother certifies that "My dear child, here is your father," that is the only certificate, authority, you can understand who is your father. Otherwise there is no... By experimental knowledge, by mental speculation, "He may be my father, he may be my father, he may be my father..." That you go on speculating for many millions of years. Still, you will not be able to understand who is your father. But if you take the authority of your mother, immediately you understand. That is, means, adhokṣaja. You cannot speculate what is God, but if you take the authority, then you can understand God. Otherwise it is not possible.

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



This is a verse. It is said, "My dear Lord, Your lotus feet," padāmbuja-dvaya, "can be understood by a person who has received a little favor of You." Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi: [SB 10.14.29] "One who has received little favor, he can understand." And what for others? "For others," na ca anya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan, "if they speculate for millions of years, still, they will not be able to understand." Just like in your country Bhagavad-gītā was being read for the last two hundred, three hundred years. So many scholars, so many Indian scholar or American, they have written Bhagavad-gītā. But not a single person understood Kṛṣṇa, not a single person. But now, when they are reading Bhagavad-gītā As It Is, they are understanding by the mercy of God. The mercy is shown if you follow the process, authoritative process. Prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi. One who has received a little, minute quantity of the favor of Kṛṣṇa, he can understand Kṛṣṇa. And others, if they go on speculating for millions of years, they will not be able to. This is a fact. Therefore He is called Adhokṣaja.



So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the authorized process by which you can understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. By other methods it is not possible. Kṛṣṇa personally says,

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



Nobody can understand. Out of many millions and trillions of persons, one is interested how to make his life success. Otherwise they are not interested even. Like cats and dogs they are jumping here and there. That's all. And out of those persons who are interested, some may understand what is Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa is not so very easily understood, but by the grace of Kṛṣṇa we can understand Him if we follow. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "My dear Dhanañjaya, there is no more superior power than Me, or greater than Me." So if we accept the statement of Kṛṣṇa, then we understand Kṛṣṇa immediately. Otherwise, by speculation, it is not possible. That is the fact. There are so many... Such a person, such a big, who is estimated as very, very big person, Mahatma Gandhi, he could not understand Kṛṣṇa. From his writing we see. He said, "I don't believe that there was any person Kṛṣṇa living ever." Just see. He could not understand. Similarly, Dr. Radhakrishnan, Tilak, so many big, big scholars, they have written comment on Bhagavad-gītā, but they, still they have proved that they're rascal number one. Because they did not follow the process of understanding Kṛṣṇa, therefore they could not understand. And here even a child, our Śyāmasundara's daughter, (s)he used to go to somebody and ask him, "Do you know what is Kṛṣṇa?" He says, "No, I do not know." "He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Just see. And all these boys and children, they are learning so easily Kṛṣṇa, and a person like Mahatma Gandhi, he said that, something different. You see? Just see. This is the position.



So you have to follow the authoritative principles by the paramparā system. Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau [ŚU 6.23]. If you have got faith in God, Kṛṣṇa, and similar faith in the spiritual master and follow his instruction, then you will understand Kṛṣṇa in His different features: jyoti, bhagavān, and sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam. He is the brahmajyoti just like the sunshine, and He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa, and He is the Supersoul, Paramātmā, in everyone's heart. The process is tapasaiva, a little tapasya. So whatever little tapasya we have prescribed, you follow. You will understand Kṛṣṇa. And if you understand Kṛṣṇa, then your life is successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 3.22: Lectures





760808SB.TEH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.22.19

-

Tehran, August 8, 1976



Dayānanda:



ato bhajiṣye samayena sādhvīṁ

yāvat tejo bibhṛyād ātmano me

ato dharmān pāramahaṁsya-mukhyān

śukla-proktān bahu manye 'vihiṁsrān

[SB 3.22.19]



Pradyumna: (chants synonyms, etc.) Translation: "Therefore I shall accept this chaste girl as my wife, on the condition that after she bears semina from my body, I shall accept the life of devotional service accepted by the most perfect human beings. That process was described by Lord Viṣṇu. It is free from envy."



Prabhupāda: Read the purport.



Pradyumna: Purport: "Kardama Muni expressed his desire for a very beautiful wife to Emperor Svāyambhuva, and he accepted his daughter for marriage. He was in the hermitage practicing complete celibacy as a brahmacārī, and although he had the desire to marry, he did not want to be a householder for the whole span of his life because he was conversant with the Vedic principles of human life. According to Vedic principles, the first part of life should be utilized in brahmācārya for the development of character and spiritual qualities. In the next part of life, one may accept a wife and beget children, but one should not beget children like cats and dogs.



Kardama Muni desired to beget a child who would be a ray of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One sould beget a child who can perform the duties of Viṣṇu; otherwise there is no need to produce children. There are two kinds of children born of good fathers: one is educated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that he can be delivered from the clutches of māyā in that very life, and the other is a ray of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and teaches the world the ultimate goal of life. As will be described in later chapters, Kardama Muni begot such a child-Kapila, the incarnation of the Personality of Godhead, who enunciated the philosophy of Sāṅkhya. Great householders pray to God to send His representative so that there may be an auspicious movement in human society. This is one reason to beget a child. Another reason is that a highly enlightened parent can train a child in Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that the child will not have to come back again to this miserable world. Parents should see to it that the child born of them does not enter the womb of a mother again. Unless one can train a child for liberation in that life, there is no need to marry or produce children. If human society produces children like cats and dogs for the disturbance of social order, then the world becomes hellish, as it has in this age of Kali. In this age, neither parents nor their children are trained. Both are animalistic and simply eat, sleep, mate, defend and gratify their senses. This disorder in social life cannot bring peace to human society. Kardama Muni explains beforehand that he would not associate with the girl Devahūti for the whole duration of his life. He would simply associate with her until she had a child. In other words, sex life should be utilized only to produce a nice child, not for any other purpose. Human life is especially meant for complete devotion to the service of the Lord. That is the philosophy of Lord Caitanya.

After fulfilling his responsibility to produce a nice child, one should take sannyāsa and engage in the perfectional paramahaṁsa stage. Paramahaṁsa refers to the most highly elevated perfectional stage of life. There are four stages within sannyāsa life, and paramahaṁsa is the highest order. The Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is called the Paramahaṁsa-saṁhitā, the treatise for the highest class of human beings. The paramahaṁsa is free from envy. In other stages, even in the householder stage of life, there is competition and envy, but since the activities of the human being in the paramahaṁsa stage are completely engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or devotional service, there is no scope for envy. In the same order as Kardama Muni, about one hundred years ago, Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda also wanted to beget a child who could preach the philosophy and teaching of Lord Caitanya to the fullest extent. By his prayers to the Lord he had as his child Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who at the present moment is preaching the philosophy of Lord Caitanya throughout the entire world through his bona fide disciples."

Prabhupāda: So householder life is not condemned. It is required. If there is no householders, then wherefrom the saintly persons will come? They will not drop from the sky. So everything is required. In our society, we have got householders, we have got brahmacārīs, we have got sannyāsīs. Everything is required. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very scientific movement for the total benefit of human society. If it is properly carried out, then everyone will be satisfied and happy and go back home, back to Godhead.



Thank you. (end)



760809SB.TEH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.22.20

-

Tehran, August 9, 1976



Parivrājakācārya:



yato 'bhavad viśvam idaṁ vicitraṁ

saṁsthāsyate yatra ca vāvatiṣṭhate

prajāpatīnāṁ patir eṣa mahyaṁ

paraṁ pramāṇaṁ bhagavān anantaḥ

[SB 3.22.20]



Pradyumna: (chants synonyms, etc.) Translation: "The highest authority for me is the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whom this wonderful creation emanates and in whom its sustenance and dissolution rest. He is the origin of all prajāpatis, the personalities meant to produce living entities in this world."



Prabhupāda: So the purpose of marriage is explained here. Putrātve kriyet bhāryā putra pinḍa prayojanam. For the purpose of one or two nice children one should marry, not for sense gratification. This is the Vedic purport of marriage. So in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we allow marriage on this principle, not for sense gratification. All the chief devotees of Lord Caitanya... Or even Lord Caitanya Himself, he married twice. So marriage is not prohibited, but everything should be under regulative principle according to the law. Then either one is sannyāsī or a married man or a brahmacārī, it doesn't matter.



Caitanya Mahāprabhu stressed, ye kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei 'guru' haya. He never said that the sannyāsīs should be guru and not the gṛhasthas. He says ye kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei 'guru' haya. Anyone who knows the science of Kṛṣṇa, he can become guru. And that guru Caitanya Mahāprabhu says everything very simplified.

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra'sarva deśa

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



Sarva deśa, or ei deśa, wherever you are living, it doesn't matter. Just like our Atreya Ṛṣi, he's gṛhastha, he's living in Iran, Tehran, but it doesn't matter. If he speaks kṛṣṇa-kathā, then he's guru. It is very simple thing. We should not speak beyond what is spoken by Kṛṣṇa. Take Bhagavad-gītā and try to preach the principles, speak whatever is spoken in the Bhagavad-gītā. Then it doesn't matter whether you are a gṛhastha or a sannyāsī or brahmacārī. You become guru.



So our mission, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the same mission as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. This kṛṣṇa-upadeśa I have translated into "Kṛṣṇa conscious," how to make people Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is our mission. On this principle, either gṛhastha or vānaprastha or sannyāsī, everyone can take part. Ye kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei 'guru' haya. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was taking instruction from Rāmānanda Rāya. He was gṛhastha, not even brāhmaṇa. So he was hesitating, that "Caitanya Mahāprabhu is coming from a very exalted brāhmaṇa family, and sannyāsa," and Rāmānanda Rāya was gṛhastha, not even brāhmaṇa. How he could teach Him or give Him instruction? He was hesitating. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in order to favor him, He said, "It doesn't matter. Don't hesitate."

kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei 'guru' haya

[Cc. Madhya 8.128]



By his practical life, He was asking Generally, questions are asked to the superior person, and the superior person answers. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu, although He was superior in everything, He was asking Rāmaṇanda Rāya to answer. He made Haridāsa Ṭhākura-he was Muhammadan by birth-nāmācārya, the ācārya of spreading Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. These are the wonderful activities. Sanātana Gosvāmī, he practically became Muhammadan. Why practically? Absolutely. He was rejected by the brāhmaṇa society because he was minister, he was mixing with the Muhammadan and everything. He was eating with them. So the brāhmaṇa society rejected him. The name was also changed, Sakara Mallika. Nawab Hussain Shah's very confidential man. Nawab Hussain Shah was keeping Sanātana Gosvāmī as his representative in everything. The government was being managed by him. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted them, and they became the Gosvāmīs, Sanātana Gosvāmī.



So in this movement, no such consideration, who is who. Anyone who takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is first class, that's all. So our principle should be how to make people Kṛṣṇa conscious, God conscious. Then our mission will be successful. Either as gṛhastha, as a vānaprastha, as sannyāsī, it doesn't matter. Philosophy, the truth, should be preached. Everyone will be happy. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



760810SB.TEH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.22.21

-

Tehran, August 10, 1976



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



maitreya uvāca

sa ugra-dhanvann iyad evābabhāṣe

āsīc ca tūṣṇīm aravinda-nābham

dhiyopagṛhṇan smita-śobhitena

mukhena ceto lulubhe devahūtyāḥ

[SB 3.22.21]



Translation: "Śrī Maitreya said: O great warrior Vidura, the sage Kardama said this much only and then became silent, thinking of his worshipable Lord Viṣṇu, who has a lotus on His navel. As he silently smiled, his face captured the mind of Devahūti, who began to meditate upon the great sage."



Prabhupāda: Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. There is one instance of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, how the devotee does not lose a single moment without thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. Kīrtaniyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. This instruction we get. So, sadā tad bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6]. If you practice like that, then there is chance of being transferred to Kṛṣṇa just after leaving this body. So somehow or other you should be absorbed in the thought of Kṛṣṇa. We get all these examples from authorities. Just like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, he was emperor, very responsible man. But sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor: he kept his mind always on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor [SB 9.4.18]. So although great emperor, so responsibility, still it was possible for him to keep his mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. In South India there is a class of professional dancer. They take a big jug on the head and without any, what is called? Bira?



Dayananda: Cloth, cap, ring.



Prabhupāda: Yes, ring. It is kept as it is. The head is shaved, but they are so practiced to keep the balance that the pot does not fall down. It remains exactly. This is an art-they will dance, and the pot on the head will never fall down, keeping the balance. So by practice it is possible. There are many professional vendors, they keep their basket on the head, and taking a child, going and canvassing, "We have got this fruit." It never falls down. They are keeping the balance. So this is a crude example that everything can be done by practice. One may be very responsible officer, like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, the emperor. It is not joke. But still his mind is absorbed in the thought of Kṛṣṇa. Sai vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor. There is another example Rūpa Gosvāmī gives, that a woman who has got an extra lover besides the husband. So she's always thinking of that lover although she's busy with household affairs. Para vyasaninanina(?). That means if you want somebody very seriously, you can think of him always, twenty-four hours, in spite of your being engaged in so many duties. It is possible.



So we have to practice this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Here, in this material world, we have to work. Without work, you cannot maintain even your family, your body. That is not possible. Śarīra-yātrāpi te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says (to) Arjuna that without karma you cannot maintain even your body. So you have to work. Śarīra-yātrāpi te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ. And this material world means you have to maintain by working. And spiritual world means na tasya kāryam kāranam ca vidyate. There is nothing to work, as Kṛṣṇa has nothing to work. He is simply enjoying What is called? Swing. So Kṛṣṇa is enjoying, and Kṛṣṇa's associates are enjoying. They have nothing to work. That is spiritual world. Cintāmaṇi prakara sadmasu kalpa vṛkṣa: [Bs. 5.29] that is a different world. There is no material body. Therefore there is no need of the material body. That is a different world. But in this material world we have to work. Tṛtīyā-karma-samjñaṇya avidyā-karma-samjñānya tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. This material world means you have to work and adjust things for your maintenance. That you cannot escape. But still, we have to become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

So things are to be adjusted as it is prescribed by great authorities. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta you'll find the regulative principles. That is called Vaiṣṇava-smṛti. So here we cannot live without working, and still we have to become always Kṛṣṇa conscious. This art, to understand and to practice, is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Then in spite of my being engaged in so many so-called material things Because a devotee has nothing to do with material things. Even if he works for maintenance of the body, that is not material. Just like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who was magistrate. But it is not for a magistrate to write so many books-siddhānta-pūrṇam. So he was in a different transcendental platform. So that is possible. The mind may be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa's thought, satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ [Bg. 9.14], tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca. That is possible by practice. Here Kardama Muni is a living example. And there are mahy other examples, that we can remain fully Kṛṣṇa conscious in spite of being engaged in so-called material activities. That is possible.

Thank you very much. (end)



760812SB.TEH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.22.22

and Initiations

-

Tehran, August 12, 1976



Prabhupāda: He knows the rules and regulations?



Atreya Ṛṣi: Yes, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Let him say. Let him say.



Atreya Ṛṣi: You can say it in English?



Mustafa: I can't say it completely correctly.



Prabhupāda: Say it in English. No illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication, no meat-eating.



Mustafa: ...and eggs and fish.



Atreya Ṛṣi: His name in Parsi, his name is Mustafa.



Prabhupāda: So his spiritual name Vallabha dāsa.



Atreya Ṛṣi: Balab?



Prabhupāda: Vallabha dāsa. Not like that, here.



Atreya Ṛṣi: Vallabha dāsa. His name is, in Parsi, Hussain. It means "all-compassionate."



Prabhupāda: So far the ten offenses, you will teach them. Your name, Śrīdhara dāsa.



Atreya Ṛṣi: Śrīdhara dāsa.



Prabhupāda: Hare Kṛṣṇa. So read one passage from the books.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



so 'nu jñātvā vyavasitaṁ

mahiṣyā duhituḥ sphuṭam

tasmai guṇa-gaṇāḍhyāya

dadau tulyāṁ praharṣitaḥ

[SB 3.22.22]



Translation: "After having unmistakenly known the decision of the Queen, as well as that of Devahūti, the Emperor most gladly gave his daughter to the sage, whose host of virtues was equaled to hers."



Prabhupāda: (repeats verse in Sanskrit) So here is the Emperor Manu, so he decided to give his daughter to Kardama Muni. And the sanction of the Queen, that was also expected. That means the father's sanction, the mother's sanction, and the girl who is going to be married, her sanction. These things are required before marriage takes place. Nowadays, dāmpatye ratim eva hi svīkāram eva udvāhe: marriage takes place simply by agreement between the parties, the boy and the girl. They can go to any magistrate and get it registered. But according to Vedic system, that is not the system. The system is the father, mother also must agree. The agreement must be, the parents' sanction must be there.



So guṇa-gaṇāḍhyāya, Kardama Muni, great yogi, what to speak about his qualities. Dadau tulyām, and Devahūti also equally qualified. So this kind of marriage is very happy marriage, and the result of such marriage is Kapiladeva. Because the marriage was very appealing, therefore Lord Kapiladeva, incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, He appeared in the womb of Devahūti. There are two Kapilas, original Kapila is the son of Devahūti and Kardama Muni. Therefore He is particularly known as Devahūti-putra Kapila. Sāṅkhya philosophy was enunciated by Him. He taught His mother also. You'll find all those instructions of Kapila Muni to His mother. So the system was very nice. Everything was there. There was no question of simply brahmacārīs. No. There are married couples. This Kardama Muni was a great yogi. Still, he married. There was no disturbance. Although he promised one son only to Devahūti, but I think he got another nine daughters. So very nice system, everything was there-but for the purpose of realization of the highest truth. That is the civilization. Nothing has to be stopped; everything can go on. For bodily comforts we are very much busy, that's nice. But if you increase the bodily comforts, there is no limit. That should not be the purpose of life.

In a Bengali proverb it is said, śarīre na mahaseya ye sahaye taya saba. This body is so nice that if you practice something, it will be accustomed. Just like we are sitting on the floor. If we practice to sit on the floor, there is no necessity of this couch. We are not refusing couch if available, but not that without couch I cannot sit. This kind of civilization is condemned. Besides that, we have got our own business. The real business is athāto brahma jijñāsā. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. In the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam you will find, kāmasya nendriya-prītir [SB 1.2.10]. So there are some necessities for sense gratification, but not for the senses, but for spiritual upliftment. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. The life is meant for inquiring about the Absolute Truth.

So we cannot spare our valuable time for bodily comforts, sacrificing our real aim of life, self-realization. That is not civilization. That is animal civilization. First consideration is self-realization. Therefore you'll find Vedic civilization very simple because they took it main business, self-realization. The bodily comforts... Big, big kings, because they had to rule over the country, some gorgeous type, style of living. They were... Ordinary persons, they were satisfied in a cottage. Still you'll find in India in the villages-I think here also the same-they don't mind. I see from the street the original walls.(?) They are not very much interested how to live comfortably. The real purpose of life should be done. At the present moment the civilization is simply for bodily comforts. Divasa-śarīra-sāje. Whole day is spoiled for trying how to make the, keep the body in comfortable situation. That is not the purpose of life. The purpose of life is, we should supply the necessities of the body as you can keep fit for executing spiritual purpose. But at the present moment there is no spiritual purpose, simply bodily comforts. This is the civilization of animals. As animals they do not know anything except bodily comforts. If human society becomes like that, then it is animal society. And because it is animal society, there is no peace in spite of advancement of material conforts.

So we can take instruction from the vivid, living examples of this Kardama Muni and Devahūti. Kardama Muni is an ascetic, very simple living, and Devahūti is the daughter of emperor. And she agreed to marry Kardama Muni, so, engage in the service of her husband. So just imagine a person, ascetic. What assets he has got? No home, no good food, nothing. Still she agreed gladly. Here it is said, dadau tulyāṁ praharṣitaḥ. So 'nu jñātvā vyavasitaṁ mahiṣyā duhituḥ sphuṭam. Duhituḥ, consent of the daughter. It was, the daughter's consent was taken, "Whether you like," but she selected her husband. She told that "There is Kardama Muni. I want to marry him, that Kardama Muni." She expressed her desire to her father, and the father and mother came to offer the daughter to Kardama Muni. The first consent was the daughter's. Now just see, she was emperor's daughter, how comfortably she was living, but she voluntarily accepted all the difficulties for becoming the wife of an ascetic. You cannot expect royal comforts when one becomes the wife of an ascetic. Of course, later on everything was given to her by the mystic power of Kardama Muni, but in the beginning she accepted in a very humble cottage to live with her husband and serve him.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 3.25: Lectures





741101SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.1

-

Bombay, November 1, 1974



Prabhupāda:



kapilas tattva-saṅkhyātā

bhagavān ātma-māyayā

jātaḥ svayam ajaḥ sākṣād

ātma-prajñaptaye nṛṇām

[SB 3.25.1]



So we are reciting from our latest edition of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is Third Canto, Part Four. We have finished Third Canto, publishing. This is very important subject matter. The Kapila, the expounder of Sāṅkhya philosophy, he instructed to His mother, Devahūti. There are two Kapilas. Real Kapiladeva is Kapila. He expounded Sāṅkhya philosophy to instruct His mother. But later on, some imitation Kapiladeva also appeared-atheistic Sāṅkhya philosophy. He has simply dealt with the twenty-four different elements without information of God. Therefore there are two Kapilas. One Kapila is called the devahūti-putra Kapila; another is atheist Kapila.



So about Kapiladeva it is said, Śaunaka Ṛṣ..., that kapilas tattva-saṅkhyātā: "Kapila, the Supreme Person," tattva-saṅkhyātā, "He can explain what is Absolute Truth." Kapilas tattva-saṅkhyātā bhagavān. Without Bhagavān, nobody knows what is the actual position of the Ultimate Truth. Nobody can know it. Therefore Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa or His incarnation occasionally visit to give you information about what is the aim of life. Tattva-saṅkhyātā. Saṅkhyātā means expounder, and tattva means the Absolute Truth. So Absolute Truth is Bhagavān Himself, Kṛṣṇa Himself. So we cannot understand the Absolute Truth or the Supreme Person by mental speculation. That is not possible, especially when we are under the influence of the three modes of material nature because material nature is divided into three status: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, and tamo-guṇa. Those who are in the sattva-guṇa, they are fit for understanding the Absolute Truth. Sattva-guṇa means the brahminical qualification. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. They can understand. Therefore, in our Vedic conception of human society there must be a class of men, actually brāhmaṇa. Then they will be able to expound the real truth of life. If everyone becomes śūdra, then the Absolute Truth cannot be understood.

Just like at the present moment, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ: "In the Kali-yuga, everyone is śūdra." It is hardly to be found, a qualified brāhmaṇa. Of course, there are, but very rare. Practically brāhmaṇa is not a single there, especially in this age.

prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya

kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ

mandāḥ sumanda-matayo

manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ

[SB 1.1.10]



The people of this age, they are short-living and manda, very slow in everything, not interested. Actually human life is meant for understanding the spiritual value of life, but on account of the people being śūdras, they are not interested. They are forgetting the real purpose of life. Manda. Manda means slow and bad. Everyone is bad or slow. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayaḥ. And they have got... Everyone has got a particular type of understanding. Sumanda-matayaḥ. That is not bona fide. Sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyāḥ: "And everyone is misfortunate, unfortunate." Upadrutāḥ: "And they are disturbed by so many causes." And the gradually, the situation will be like this. It is already manifest. Anāvṛṣṭyā durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ: [SB 12.2.9] "There will be no rain in the sky, and there will be scarcity of foodstuff," and kara-pīḍitāḥ, "and government will levy tax very heavily." These are already predicted, and we are experiencing. So this age is very miserable. Kali-yuga is very miserable. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He is Kṛṣṇa Himself. He came. He advised all people of the world that "You simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Very simple thing. Harer nāma harer nāma. It is not His invention, but it is in the śāstras, Purāṇas. This advice is there,



harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



In this age, people being all śūdras, less intelligent, unfortunate, disturbed, how they will be able to understand the Absolute Truth or the aim of life?

So anyway, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā that,

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



So similarly, some time before, some hundreds and thousands of years, Kapiladeva appeared, devahūti-putra Kapiladeva. His father's name is Kardama Muni. So after Kapiladeva's birth, when He was grown up... That is the system of Vedic civilization. When children are grown up, the father retires. He takes sannyāsa, or goes out of home simply for cultivating spiritual life, not that throughout the whole life, rot in this material world, no. Pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. That is the injunction of the śāstra. We have got eight kinds of āśrama, er, four kinds of āśrama and four kinds of varṇas. So the... Formerly they used to follow very strictly. So Kapiladeva's father, Kardama Muni, after the son was grown up, he left his home, giving in charge of his wife. The wife was given in charge of the grown-up boy, not that the boy was in charge of the..., no. So that incident, that narration, is stated in this part.



So kapilas tattva-saṅkhyātā bhagavān. Kapila is Bhagavān. Nowadays Bhagavān is so cheap. They misuses of the word. But here you will find that Bhagavān is not an ordinary man. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]. Because Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa appeared as human being, so the mūḍhas, rascals and fools, they think of Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being, mūḍha. Mohitaṁ nābhijānāti mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam, tribhir guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ, mohitam [Bg. 7.13]. So still there are devotees who can understand. Just like Arjuna understood that "Kṛṣṇa, although He's my friend, playing the part of my friend, but He is Supreme Personality of Godhead." Therefore, when Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna for our benefit... Arjuna is in perfect knowledge, but aiming at Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa is giving instruction for all human society, and he admitted. After knowing Bhagavad-gītā, Arjuna said, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān: [Bg. 10.12] "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are the Paraṁbrahma." Paraṁbrahman. Every one of us, Brahman. Brahman means spirit soul. We are not this body. Bhāgavata... This is realization, self-realization. That is Vedic culture. One must understand what he is. We should not keep ourself in ignorance like cats and dogs, thinking that "I am this body," "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," or so many designations. That is bodily designation. So when one comes to the spiritual understanding, that is called Brahman realization. Bhāgavata...

So we are all Brahman; simply we have to understand it. It is not that we are abrahman; by some practice we become Brahman, no. Just like gold is gold, but if it is covered with some dirt, the dirt can be removed, and the gold is gold; similarly, we are Brahman, spirit soul. Somehow or other we have come in contact with these material elements, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4], and we have got this body, covered, and I am thinking, "I am this body." This is ignorance. This is ignorance. So unless one is enlightened by the spiritual knowledge, he remains only just like cats and dogs. And to understand spiritual identification, that is called dharma. Dharma means that. And the ultimate goal of dharma is spoken by Kṛṣṇa, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. We have created so many dharmas: Hindu dharma, Mussulman dharma, Christian dharma. These are manufactured. Of course, there is indication how to execute dharma, but real dharma-when you come to the conclusion, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19].

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



So this is... Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is for this purpose, that we... We are not preaching any particular sectarian religious system. No. We are preaching the real what is meant by religion. Religion means dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Nobody knows what is dharma. This is the position. Because dharma means the order of the Supreme Being. That is dharma. Just like law means the order of the government, similarly, dharma means the order of the Supreme Being. That is dharma. This is the simple definition of dharma. So God is one; His order is one. How there can be different dharmas? It is not possible. That is ignorance. When we create different dharma, that is due to ignorance: Hindu dharma, Muslim dharma, Christian dharma or this dharma, that dharma... No. Gold is gold. Does it mean that if a Christian possesses some gold, it becomes Christian gold? Or Hindu possesses some gold, it becomes Hindu gold? No. Gold is gold. Either it is in possession of Hindu or Muslim or Christian, it doesn't matter. Gold is gold. So we are preaching that, that "Here is dharma, to surrender unto the Supreme Being." That is dharma. Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. This is bhāgavata-dharma. Everyone should be taught how to surrender to God.



So God is one. God cannot be two. When there is competition of God, they are not God. Just like it has become nowadays-in every state there is a God. That is not... Kṛṣṇa is not that kind of God. He is the Supreme God. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "Nobody is superior than Me." So that is... We are preaching. We are teaching people. These Americans and the Europeans, they have taken it seriously because they are fortunate. They have no information of these hodgepodge gods. That is their opportunity. I have told them, given the information that Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. I have not given any wrong information. Right information. Bhagavān means Kṛṣṇa. God means Kṛṣṇa. So I have given them this information as a peon, that "Here is God," and they have taken it seriously. Therefore they are advancing. See practically. Why they are advancing? Because they are not misled. They have been given the right information, and they have taken it seriously, and they are trying their best to do, to render service. That is the reason. People are surprised how these Americans and Europeans have become such great devotees and dancing in ecstasy. They are surprised. Yes, it is surprising. Even in their country the priests are surprised. But what is the reason they are advanced? Because they have taken the right thing, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. That they have taken. Either you say blindly... Blindly or knowingly, if you touch fire, it will act. Fire is fire. It is not that because a child takes fire, it will not burn. It will burn. So why these Western young men, they are taking this movement seriously? Because it is acting as fire. It is acting as fire. They have taken fire, and it is acting as fire.

So there is information in the śāstra, accepted by the ācāryas. Just like kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam, that is accepted by the ācāryas. Ācāryopāsanam. The Śaṅkarācārya even, although he is impersonalist, he has accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and what to speak of others? Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya and Viṣṇu Svāmī, Nimbārka and, latest, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His followers-all accept Kṛṣṇa the Supreme Personality of..., following the same principle as Arjuna said, "Kṛṣṇa, You are paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]." So this is simple thing. There is no need of speculation, "What is God?" "Where is God?" Here is God, sir. Here is God. You see. Why you foolish, you are searching? Here is God. He is not... Although Kṛṣṇa has come in a form which you can see... Kṛṣṇa has appeared before you just like stone statue. But He is not stone statue. Of course, stone is also God because stone is another energy of God, just like fire is also heat and light. And the heat is also fire, and light is also fire. Without fire, there cannot be light. Without fire, there cannot be heat So this material world is just like the heat and light of the supreme light, of the supreme fire. Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis tathedam akhilaṁ jagat. Eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā, tathedam akhilaṁ jagat. Just like fire is in one place... Just like sun. It is a, mean, a practical example. The sun is in one place. You have seen. It is light and heat, so expanding the light and heat throughout the whole universe, and as soon as you perceive light and heat, you can understand there is sun. So light and heat can be perceived by anyone. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ: "I am the light and heat of the sun." Of course, moon, there is no heat. There is cooling effect. Two things are there. So all these are energies of Kṛṣṇa. Prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ. So why people say, "Can you show me God?" You are seeing daily, every moment. But because you are fool, you have no sense of understanding. As soon as there is some heat, any man can understand there is fire. As soon as there is smoke, anyone can understand there is fire. Similarly, if you can feel the energy of the Lord, then you can feel the presence of the Lord immediately.

Now here, these boys, these girls, they are worshiping Kṛṣṇa, and they are becoming devotee. What is the sign of devotee? The sign of devotee is that the devotees are no more interested with material enjoyment. That is devotee. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. So these young boys and girls, they do not go to cinema. They do not smoke. They do not go any restaurant or club. Why? Virakti! Don't want this! What to speak of here, poor country, but in the European, American countries, everything is available very cheap. But they are not interested. They are interested to sit down on the floor without any chair and follow me, whatever I say. They have no sufficient eating even. I cannot give them to their standard. Still... Why? Because they don't want this material happiness. That is the test. That is the test. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. When one will become detestful to material enjoyment, you will know, or he'll know. Personally one can understand how much he is advanced in spiritual life. Spiritual life does not mean that a sannyāsī is smoking and drinking tea, one gallon of tea. That is not spiritual life. He must be detestful. So this dharma, or spiritual life, means to have no more interest in material activities but only in the understanding of God, the Supreme, and His service. That is spiritual life.

So actually the human life is meant for that purpose, because sense gratification, material happiness, the hogs also, they are enjoying. The enjoying... The hog is also whole day and night searching after stool, and after eating stool, when they get some strength, then sex without any discrimination of mother or sister or anyone. Hog's life. Therefore śāstra says, "Don't lead a hog's life." Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. Vid-bhujām means the stool-eater. They are also working so hard day and night simply for eating stool. And as soon as there is some strength, hypophosphate... Because stool contains all good chemicals. Hypophosphate, they say, who have tested... Of course, I do not know. They say that it is full of hypophosphates, and if you take hypophosphate... Sometimes doctor prescribes sera of hypophosphate for the weak people. So actually the hogs are very fatty. Therefore those who are meat-eaters, they like hog's flesh very nicely.

So anyway, this human life is not meant for imitating the hog's life. Human life is meant for tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. This is Vedic civilization, tapasya, the state, different grades of tapasya-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra-give them chance-gṛhastha, vānaprastha, brahmacārī. They are all meant for inducing people to come to this perfectional stage of understanding God. This is called varṇāśrama-dharma. Real purpose of this is varṇāśrama, four varṇas and four āśramas. Why? Now,

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



The whole aim is how to worship the Supreme Lord. That is human life. So if we make these divisions, so any class of men, if he comes to this social system of varṇāśrama-dharma, then automatically... Just like if you admit your son in a school, there is first class, second class, third class or eighth class. In this way he makes progress. One day that son comes out as a graduate. So the human society must accept. This is school of varṇāśrama-dharma. Then gradually he will be educated and he will come to the understanding. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. One day he will understand what is Brahman, and that is brāhmaṇa. Veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipro brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. By birth everyone is a śūdra. He has to be educated. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. Dvija means twice-born. One birth is by the father and mother, and the next birth is by the spiritual master and Vedic knowledge. So Vedic knowledge is the mother, and spiritual master is the father. Then one becomes dvija. Therefore the sacred thread is offered, that "He is now divja. He has accepted the spiritual master to learn what is spiritual life." That is the significance. Then he is allowed to read this Vedic literature, the essence of Vedic literature. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3], this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is the essence. Nigama means Vedic. Nigama-kalpa-taru. Kalpa-taru means desire tree. A tree, desire tree, means whatever you like, you can take from it. Similarly, Vedic knowledge is so perfect, any knowledge, perfectly if you want to know, then you must... Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet śrotriyam [MU 1.2.12]. Therefore Vedic knowledge is called śruti. Śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham.



So when things are mismanaged and people forget the aim of life, at that time the Supreme Lord comes. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. So dharmasya glāniḥ means the human society, when missing the aim of life, at that time, when things are very much mismanaged, then out of compassion... Because God is more anxious to get us back to home, back to Godhead, than we are, because we are in ignorance. We do not know what is the kingdom of God, how to go back there, how to become happy. We have all forgotten. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes at interval. He sends His representative, the devotee. That is going on. So sometimes He comes personally; sometimes He sends His incarnation. The Kapiladeva is an incarnation of the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is stated here, kapilas tattva-saṅkhyātā bhagavān. Incarnation of Bhagavān is also Bhagavān. Bhagavān ātma-māyayā. Ātma-māyayā means... Māyā means illusion, māyā means affection, and māyā means energy. When Kṛṣṇa comes, or Kṛṣṇa's energy, or Kṛṣṇa's incarnation comes, that is not by force. Just like we. We are forced to come. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. We have to accept a certain type of body by force, not ātma-māyayā. Suppose I have got this human form of body. I cannot demand that "Next life I will have like this." No. That is not possible. Next life you will get according to your karma. Just like you are being educated. You cannot say that "Make me the high-court judge." That is not possible. If you are qualified, then you become. Similarly, karmaṇā... You have to qualify yourself. So there are 8,400,000's of different forms of life. So by your karma, next life you can become a devatā, a demigod. Even if you like, you can become Indra, Candra. Or you can become cats and dogs. That depends... Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. So this will depend on my karma.

But Kṛṣṇa or His incarnation, when He comes, it does not depend on His karma, because He is above karma. He is fully independent. Therefore it is said, ātma-māyayā: "by His own energy," not by any external energy, forced by. Just like if the governor goes to the prison house, it is not that he has been forced to come to the prison, he is a condemned person, no. He goes there out of his good will to see how things are going on. But when an ordinary person is put into jail, he has been forced. He has been proved a criminal. So if the criminal thinks that "Here is governor. Now we are one, the governor and myself, one..." The pocket, pickpocket, criminal, if he thinks like that, that... Similarly, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. Therefore rascals and fools, they think Kṛṣṇa is one of them, the same thing, as the criminal thinks the governor, as... Mahatma Gandhi went to jail, and if a pickpocket thinks that "Now Mahatma Gandhi and myself are the same..." No. Therefore it is said, ātma-māyayā. Mahatma Gandhi went to jail just to show the people: "Now, if you want to drive away the Britishers, so disobey their law, and they will put us into jail, and that jail will be effective." Jail svarājyake mandira hai. Mahatma Gandhi said. That was a policy, not that Mahatma Gandhi had to go to jail; he was a fit (?) for that person. Similarly, this is an example.

Similarly, when Kṛṣṇa or His incarnation comes in this material world, He maintains His position. That, the same thing. Mahatma Gandhi maintained his position. It is not that because Mahatma Gandhi went to jail, he became unpopular and nobody would respect him. No. He is respect was still there. Similarly, when the incarnation of God, Kṛṣṇa, He comes, He is not ordinary man. He is not ordinary man. He comes out of His good will. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. The rascals, they do not understand what is Kṛṣṇa, and they think that "Kṛṣṇa is like one of us, a human being, like that. He is..." No, that is not Kṛṣṇa understanding. Kṛṣṇa...

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



Kṛṣṇa understanding is not so easy. It is said by Kṛṣṇa, "Out of millions of people, one become siddha." Siddha means self-realized. And yatatām api siddhānām: [Bg. 7.3] and after becoming siddha, out of many millions of siddhas, one can understand what is Kṛṣṇa.



But it is our great fortune that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He appeared. He is Kṛṣṇa Himself, and He has given us a very, I mean to say, easy process to understand Kṛṣṇa. What is that? This is the easiest process, that you come here and hear about Kṛṣṇa. That's all. You haven't got to do anything. Simply come here. We are opening all these centers just to invite you, "Please come here and hear about Kṛṣṇa."

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



If you hear about Kṛṣṇa, you become purified. Hearing about Kṛṣṇa means associating with Kṛṣṇa. This secret they do not know. But we are canvassing, "Please come and hear about Kṛṣṇa. Your life will be perfect."



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741102SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.2

-

Bombay, November 2, 1974



Nitāi: "Śaunaka continued: There is no one who knows more than the Supreme Lord Himself. No one is more worshipable or more mature a yogi than He. He is therefore the master of the Vedas, and to hear about Him always is the actual pleasure of the senses."



Prabhupāda:



na hy asya varṣmaṇaḥ puṁsāṁ

varimṇaḥ sarva-yoginām

viśrutau śruta-devasya

bhūri tṛpyanti me 'savaḥ

[SB 3.25.2]



So we have been discussing about the incarnation of Kapiladeva, devahūti-putra Kapiladeva, the propounder of Sāṅkhya-yoga. So in the previous verse He has been explained as bhagavān ātma-māyayā. Bhagavān... Bhaga means opulence, and vān means "one who possesses." Bhagavat-śabda. In Sanskrit, when the meaning is "one possesses," then these pratyayas are used, vat-pratyaya, mat-pratyaya. So the real word is bhagavat-śabda, and the first word is bhagavān. So bhaga means opulence. So all the opulences are there in Bhagavān. It is said in the Vedas,



nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

(Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13)



What is that Bhagavān's opulences? This is: eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. Bhagavān, singular number, and nityo nityānām, and nityānām, plural number.



So these jīvas, we, we are plural number. Jīva-bhāgaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ sa cānantyāya kalpate. How many jīvas are there, there is no limit. Nobody can count. Ananta. Ananta means you cannot get the limit, that "So many millions or so many thousands." No. You cannot count. So all these jīvas, we, living entities, we are being maintained by that one. This is the Vedic information. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. Just like we maintain our family. One man is earning, and he is maintaining his family, wife, children, servants, dependents, workers, so many. Similarly, that one, Bhagavān, is maintaining all the living entities. You do not know how many there are. In Africa there are millions of elephants. They are also eating forty kg's at one time. So that, they are also being maintained. And the small ant, that is also being maintained. There are 8,400,000 forms of different bodies. Who is maintaining them? Maintaining, Bhagavān, that ekaḥ. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. That is a fact. So why He'll not maintain us? Especially those who are devotees, who have taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, leaving aside everything simply for His service.

Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We have got more than one hundred centers. And one center... We were just reading from the statement of Nava Bhārata Times how they are well managed. But we have no business. We have no source of income. That is the only source of income-Kṛṣṇa's shelter. Samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam. Therefore śāstra says that "You take shelter of Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa comes also to say the same truth. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. He never said that "You do this and do that. Then I shall give you for your maintenance." No. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi: "Not only I shall give maintenance, but I shall protect you from the resultant action of sinful life." So much assurance is there. So śāstra also says, tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Kovida means intelligent, very intelligent person. So what should he try for? Tasyaiva hetoḥ: to get shelter at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Human life should only endeavor how to get in touch of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. That should be the only one business.

Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. (aside:) Let them sit down. Upary adhaḥ. Upari adhaḥ. Upari means higher planetary system. There are seven planetary system. This is in the middle. We are in the Bhūrloka. Those who are chanting gāyatrī-mantra, oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur vareṇyaṁ bhargo devasya dhīmahi... So there are fourteen planetary systems within one universe. So we living entities, we are wandering in different types of forms of body and in different planets. That we are... According to our karma, sometimes down, sometimes up, in this way we are wandering. Therefore śāstra says, "Just like you are wandering in this way, your business is how to become materially happy, how to satisfy your senses. But don't do that. Don't do that." Then? What shall I do? Tasyaiva hetoḥ. "How to understand Kṛṣṇa-for that purpose you should endeavor." Then how shall I eat? "No, that eating and sleeping, the business of the body, that is already arranged. That is already arranged. You don't have to work for it." Kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā. Tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham. Our endeavor is to achieve happiness. That is our struggle for existence.

Śāstra says, tal labhyate duḥkhavat. Duḥkhavat means... Just like we don't want anything unhappy or miserable condition of life, but we get it. We don't endeavor for it. Nobody says, "Let there be fire in my house. Let my child die." Nobody aspires these things. Everyone thinks that "My child may live. There may not be any danger. I'll get so much money." Nobody thinks of the opposite. But the opposite number comes. The catastrophes come. You don't pray for it. You don't go to the temple for praying, "My Lord, let there be fire in my house." Nobody goes. He goes for something better. So śāstra says that "Which you do not pray for, still, it comes, duḥkhavat, without your invitation, similarly, whatever happiness you'll have to enjoy, that will also come." Tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham. Therefore the conclusion is that "Don't try for your so-called happiness or so-called distress. Try to achieve that position where you can understand Kṛṣṇa and get shelter at His lotus feet." This is human endeavor. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Upary adhaḥ.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says to Rūpa Gosvāmī,

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



We are wandering in this way, up and down, brahmāṇḍa bhramite. Brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva. If one is fortunate, he can get the information of devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. He gets this information. So this assembly, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is an attempt to make people fortunate. From the unfortunate position, to become fortunate. Everyone is unfortunate, at least in this age. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. Now see everyone. Everywhere, there is simply problems. There is simply problem. One problem in one country, another problem in another country. There is strife, there is government... There is... Even the president, and he is also, has to meet so many problems. At the end he has to be dragged down. Now he's going to die in the hospital. What to speak of others. The problem, only problem. Therefore everyone is unfortunate. This is the conclusion. You may think that "I am very fortunate." President Nixon was thinking, "I am very fortunate. I have become the President of United States." But now he's realizing, "I am the most unfortunate."



So this is for everyone. Don't think that "Only the culprit is President Nixon, and we are, I am very safe." There is a Bengali proverb: ghuṇṭe pore gobar hase.(?) Gobar means cow dung, and ghuṇṭe means... What is called in English? The dried cow dung. So dried cow dung is used for fuel. So when the dry cow dung is being burned into the oven, the safe oven is laughing, "Oh, you are being burned. I am in safe side." (laughter) He does not know that when he'll be dry, he'll be put into the fire also. So we are laughing that "President Nixon is in trouble. I am very safe. I have got so much bank balance." No, nobody's safe. They... As like the same, cow dung soft. When it will be dried up, it will be put into the fire. And that dryness will come to everyone. That is a fact. What is that? Death. You may be safe at the present, for a few years, but you cannot avoid death. "As sure as death." And what is the result of death? The same. As the president is taken out from his position, everything, all honor, all money all..., even life, similarly, at the time of death Kṛṣṇa says, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham: "I come as death and plunder everything, whatever you have got." Your bank balance, your skyscraper building, your nice wife, your children-you have to give up. You cannot say, "My dear death, kindly give me some time. Let me adjust." "No adjustment. Immediately get out."

So foolish people, they do not know what is the miserable condition of this material life. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says real knowledge is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9], to know that "However great I may be, these four principles of miserable condition of life, there are." It is existing in the Brahmaloka, in the Pātālaloka, everywhere, sarvatra. Gabhīra-raṁhasā. Tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā. In the due course of time. This is the most wonderful thing. That is, that was questioned by Dharmarāja to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, that "What is the most wonderful thing in this world?" He said, ahany ahani bhūtāni gacchantīha yamālayam: "Every moment so many people are dying." Śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti kim āścaryam ataḥ param: "But those who are living, he thinks that 'My friend has died, but I will live forever.' " No. The same thing. The soft cow dung will be dried up, and the same condition.

So Bhagavān, Bhagavān is not like that person. Therefore it is said, bhagavān ātma-māyayā. When Bhagavān... We come here to stay for some days, say fifty years or hundred years, enjoy or suffer life, but Bhagavān does not come for that purpose. Na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti [Bg. 4.14]. That is stated in the previous verse. And the second verse it is further... Na hy asya varṣmaṇaḥ: "Nobody is greater than Him." Bhagavān means the person, nobody is greater than Him and nobody is equal to Him. That is Bhagavān. Everyone is lower. The Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā says, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Āra saba bhṛtya. Only one master is Kṛṣṇa, and others, beginning from Brahmā... Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, Indra, Candra, all these demigods... There are hundred and thousands. Thirty-three million demigods. And then this naraloka, there are so many rich men, Rockefeller, Ford, Birla and others, others... So they are bhṛtyas, all servants. When Kṛṣṇa will order, "My dear Mr. such and such, now give up your place. Go away," finish. So therefore they are all servants. This is the position beginning from Brahmā down to the ant.

yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.54]



Everyone is enjoying or suffering the sequence of his karma. Yas tu gopam. Indra-gopa, a small insect. It's name is indra-gopa. Beginning from this indra up to that Indra, the king of heaven, everyone is enjoying and suffering about his karma. Yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma. Sva-karma, one's own activities, we are creating. We are creating our next body in this life. As we have got this life as the resultant action of my past karma, similarly, I am creating another body, after death, on account of my present karma. This is going on.



So we should work in such a way that we may not get another body next life. That is wanted. That is wanted. And how it can be done? It can be done very easily. What is that? Simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa. This is the simple method.

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti...

[Bg. 4.9]



Very simple. And to understand Kṛṣṇa is very difficult? Yes, it is very difficult. But it is very easy also. How? Now, Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. If you become devotee of Kṛṣṇa, then you understand Kṛṣṇa very easily. Kṛṣṇa does not say by jñāna, by karma, by yoga, you can understand Him. No. That is not possible. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. He is... It is stated here that varimṇaḥ sarva-yoginām. There are many different varieties of yogis, and He is the greatest yogi. Therefore He is known as Yogeśvara. Yatra yogeśvaro hariḥ [Bg. 18.78]. So He is far, far above all yogic processes. The yogic, yogis, they can show you some magic. The yogi can walk over the water. There are so many. Aṇimā-laghimā-siddhi. But see Kṛṣṇa's yogic mystic power that big, big planets, they are floating in the air. Can you do that? Can you float even a small piece of stone, floating in the air? Then see... Therefore it is said here, varimṇaḥ sarva-yoginām. What yogis can, these ordinary yogis can show? Of course, we are foolish persons. If some yogi shows some mystic power, and little gold if he can manufacture, we accept him as God. But we forget the real yogi who has created millions of gold mines, floating in the air. So we Kṛṣṇa conscious persons, we are not so fool that we shall accept this kind of yogi as Bhagavān. We want the foremost yogi. Varimṇaḥ sarva-yoginām. That Kṛṣṇa, Yogeśvara. We accept Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because why? Now, because we are trying to become devotee. And Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ, tato māṁ jñātvā tattvataḥ... [Bg. 18.55]. That, the verse...



So very simple process. The first thing is, the problem of life is how to conquer over death. We are now accepting death as compulsory. No. Death is not compulsory. Just like to be put into the prison house is not compulsory. It is due to my work. Because I have become criminal, therefore I have been put into the jail. It is not compulsory that everyone has to go to the jail. That is not. So similarly, we living entities, our proper place is the Vaikuṇṭhaloka.

paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo

'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ

[Bg. 8.20]



yad gatvā na nivartante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

[Bg. 15.6]



Everything is there. You can have eternal blissful life of knowledge, sac-cid-ānanda. It is not compulsory that you shall rot in this material world. But if you like, you can go there. The easiest process. Easiest process is janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ. You try to understand Kṛṣṇa, why He comes, what are His activities, wherefrom He comes, why He comes in the form of a human being. You try to understand, study. And Kṛṣṇa is explaining Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā. So where is your difficulty? God is personally explaining what He is. If you accept Bhagavad-gītā as it is, then, after giving up this body, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], no more birth and death. You get your spiritual body, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and happily live in the family of Kṛṣṇa. Because He is also providing you here, and there also, He'll provide you with very nice preparation. As we have learned from this, what is that, Nava Bhārata Times, how our people are eating preparations from milk very nicely. So back to home, back to Godhead, and eat, drink and be merry in Kṛṣṇa's company. That is our process.



Thank you very much. (end)



741103SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.3

-

Bombay, November 3, 1974



Nitāi: "Therefore please precisely describe all the activities and pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, who is full of self-desire and who assumes all these activities by His internal potency."



Prabhupāda:



yad yad vidhatte bhagavān

svacchandātmātma-māyayā

tāni me śraddadhānasya

kīrtanyāny anukīrtaya

[SB 3.25.3]



So the speaker and the audience.



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



These are the nine different processes of devotional service, devotional life. The beginning is śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. This is the beginning of... śraddadhānasya, and one must be very eager or sincere to hear, śraddadhānasya. Śraddhā. Then it will be successful. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is stated,



satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ

yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā

nitya-yuktā upāsate

[Bg. 9.14]



So we have to speak, or chant, about the holy activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is simply by, if we hear... Just like abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣit. This Bhāgavata was... (buzzing sound) ...was recited by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and it was heard by Parīkṣit Mahārāja. So although there are nine processes... śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. You hear about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu, the same. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of viṣṇu-tattva, and Viṣṇu is expansion of Kṛṣṇa. So when we speak of Viṣṇu, the origin of Viṣṇu is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, aham ādir hi devānām: [Bg 10.2] "I am the origin even of the devas. The most important devas are Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. Creation, in the beginning of creation, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. From Viṣṇu, Brahmā is born; from Brahmā, Lord Śiva is born. And they take charge of the three modes of material nature. Brahmā... Viṣṇu takes the charge of sattva-guṇa, and the Lord Brahmā takes the charge of rajo-guṇa, and Lord Śiva takes the charge of tamo-guṇa. But in the creation, before the creation, when there was no Brahmā, no Śiva, there was Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. All the devas, demigods, or living entities, they are created after this cosmic manifestation is created. Therefore in the Vedas it is said, "In the beginning there was no Brahmā, no Śiva. Only Nārāyaṇa āsīt." Eko nārāyaṇa āsīt. That Nārāyaṇa is also another plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7].



So we have to learn from the śāstra that Kṛṣṇa is the origin, Bhagavān. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. All the viṣṇu-tattvas, all the incarnations, they are plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa, and... Or expansion of the expansion. Thousands and thousands. Millions. Just like there are waves in the ocean and the river, similarly there are incarnations, many thousands. Śaktyāveśa-avatāra, guṇa-avatāra, svayam avatāra... Many avatāras. They are described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So all these avatāras are svacchandātmā. There is no cares and anxiety. Just like if we organize a business or some management, we have got so many anxieties. Even he's a managing director or proprietor or the supreme person in some establishment, he has got so many anxieties. He's not very happy. Although he's sitting in his room without any disturbance, but because he has to manage, the brain is working, "How to do this? How to do that? How to manage that affair?" He's always full of anxiety. This is material nature. In the material world you cannot be without any anxiety. That is not possible. Asad-grahāt.

Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja, when he was asked by his father, "My dear boy, what best thing you have learned from your teachers? Will you explain to me," so Prahlāda Mahārāja immediately replied, tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt: [SB 7.5.5] "Yes, I have learned the best thing is that these materialistic persons, who have accepted the asad-vastu..." Sat and asat. Sad gama asato mā: "Don't keep yourself in the asat; go to the sat." Oṁ tat sat. That is the Vedic injunction. So... Material world means asad-vastu. Asad-vastu means not good or which will not stay. Asat. Sat means which exists, and asat means not existing. So in the material world nothing will exist. It exists for some time, temporary. The Māyāvādī philosopher says that brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. We Vaiṣṇavas, we do not say mithyā, because God, or the Supreme Brahman, is truth, so there can be anything untruth from the truth. That is not possible. Just like if you prepare something from gold, an earring, that earring is also gold. You cannot say it is something else. So yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante. That is the Vedic instruction. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. So Supreme Absolute Truth is that from whom, or from which, everything has emanated. So if everything has emanated from the Absolute Truth, it cannot be untruth. How it can be untruth? It may be temporary. Therefore we Vaiṣṇava philosophers, we do not accept this jagat as the Māyāvādī philosopher says, jagan mithyā. No, we don't say mithyā. We say jagat is also satyam. Because the jagat has emanated from the Supreme, therefore it is not mithyā, but it is temporary. That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. The material nature is temporary. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It comes into existence and stays for some time. Then it is again annihilated. But it is not mithyā. We don't say mithyā. And it can be utilized for the Supreme Truth. This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. Our Vaiṣṇava philosophy is we don't take anything as mithyā. We take it as truth, but we don't use it for purpose of which is not truth.

The material purpose is not true, but spiritual purpose is true. Therefore anything, you use it for the ultimate truth, Absolute Truth, that is realization of truth. This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy.

anāsaktasya viṣayān

yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe

yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate



This is the instruction given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. And on the other side,



prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate



Mumukṣubhiḥ. Mumukṣubhiḥ means those who are aspiring after mukti. Those who are aspiring after mukti. Because when one is disgusted with these material engagements-sadā samudvigna-dhiyām-they want to destroy this. Mithyā. But the Vaiṣṇava says that prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ. Everything has got relation with the Supreme Person or the Absolute Truth. Just like this microphone. It is made of metal. But what is metal? It is another form of earth. So Kṛṣṇa says, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. It is His energy. So His energy... He is the source of energy. So energy, how it can be untrue? That is not untrue. We don't say that "This metal has no connection with Kṛṣṇa." Yes, it has connection. Because it is production of His own energy. So... Just like this material world, this cosmic manifestation, is the production of the sunshine. The sun and the sunshine-you cannot say the sunshine is false and the sun is true. That is not nice philosophy. If the sun is true, then the sunshine is also true. So we don't say that this jagan mithyā. No. It may be temporary, but it is not mithyā. Therefore our Gosvāmīs, they instruct, or Kṛṣṇa also instructs that everything belongs to Him. Therefore everything should be utilized for His purpose. That is wanted.



So this creation is made, or emanation from Bhagavān, but He's svacchandātmā, He has no anxiety. If we want to create something, if we want to construct a building, creation, or anything, a factory, a machine, we have to go through so many anxieties, "How to make it successful?" But Kṛṣṇa's creation, or God's creation, is not like that. Just like see. Kṛṣṇa is standing before you. He has no anxiety. He is very pleasantly with His consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, and enjoying playing on His flute. There is no anxiety. That is God. If God has got anxiety, then what class of God He is? No. So that anxietyless God you'll find in Kṛṣṇa. The demigods... Take any demigod, even Lord Brahmā. He's also anxiety. He's meditating. And... Lord Śiva is dancing with his triśūla. He has got something to do, to annihilate. He has got anxiety. Goddess Kālī. She's also standing with sword and so many things. So they have got activities. Durgā, she is engaged in so many activities. But Kṛṣṇa, you'll find always svacchandātmā, always peaceful. Kṛṣṇa, when He's engaged in killing some demons, that Kṛṣṇa is different from the original Kṛṣṇa. That is Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa. That is Vāsudeva. Kṛṣṇa personally does not go anywhere. Padam, padam ekaṁ na gacchati. Giving up Vṛndāvana, He does not go even step away. That is original Kṛṣṇa. And other things, other activities which are done by Kṛṣṇa, that is Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa. From Kṛṣṇa: Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna. Then from, again Saṅkarṣaṇa: Nārāyaṇa. Again, from Nārāyaṇa, the dvitīya catur-vyūha. Then Viṣṇu, Mahā-Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodakaśāyī... In this way, there is system how Kṛṣṇa expands. Ekaṁ bahu syām.

Kṛṣṇa can expand Himself in many, many forms. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33]. He's the ādi-puruṣa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Brahmā says. Brahmā is not ādi-puruṣa. Brahmā says, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. So Kṛṣṇa is the ādi-puruṣam. And He has got many expansions. Advaitam acyutam anādim. Anādir ādiḥ. He has no beginning, but He is the beginning of everything. That is called anādir ādiḥ. He has no beginning, but He is the beginning of everything. That advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. And He has expanded Himself in so many forms. We are also Kṛṣṇa's form, but we are vibhinnāṁśa. And svāṁśa and vibhinnāṁśa. The viṣṇu-tattva is bhagavat-tattva, ādi-puruṣam, personal expansion, and we are energy expansion. We are also energy. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām, jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho [Bg. 7.5]. So jīva, prakṛti expansion. Parā-prakṛti expansion. So Kṛṣṇa is always svacchandātmā. He has no anxiety. Svacchandātmā ātma-māyayā. Yad yad vidhatte bhagavān svacchandātmā. Whatever... Even if He's killing a demon, there is no anxiety. That is Kṛṣṇa. Even if He's killing, He has no anxiety. Svacchandātmā. That is also, I mean to say, confirmed in the Vedic language. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate, na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. So He has nothing to do personally. His energies act. Then try to understand why Bhagavān is attributed with the word svacchandātmā. Because...

Just like a big man. He wants to do something. He simply says to his secretary, "This thing must be done." He does everything. And he is quite confident that "I have told my secretary, and it will be done." So secretary is a person's śakti, energy. Similarly, if an ordinary man within this world has so much energies or secretaries to act, so just imagine, although Kṛṣṇa is Jagadīśvara, He's managing the whole universe... He's managing. There is brain. The foolish men, they say there is no brain. No, there is brain. But we do not know who is the brain. That is our foolishness. But if we take information from the śāstra, we can understand what is that brain. That brain is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā:

mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate

[Bg. 9.10]



So behind this material energy... Material energy, just like we see, there is cloud, there is thundering sound, there is rain. And from the rain, there is crops, there is food grain. Then we eat those food grains. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. Then, yajñād bhavati parjanyo yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. These things are already stated. Everything, the origin is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yajña. Yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ. Yajña means we have to satisfy the Supreme Person. That is called yajña. And this process can be executed when the human society is very regulated. Regulated means there must be division of these varṇas and āśramas. Varṇa means four varṇas: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. And four āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. They have got their respective duties. So unless the human society is divided into these eight scientific divisions and everyone acts according to his position, there cannot be any peace in the world. That is called varṇāśrama.



Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān, viṣṇur ārādhyate... [Cc. Madhya 8.58]. The ultimate goal is to satisfy the Lord, Supreme Lord Viṣṇu. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. But the foolish people, they do not know. Their ultimate interest is how to satisfy Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur ārādhyate. So when there is dharmasya glāniḥ, then Lord Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa, by His incarnation or personally, He comes. Therefore it is said, yad yad vidhatte bhagavān. But because He comes to paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8], He has no anxiety. Svacchandātmā. And He does by His own internal potency. He does not take anyone's help. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is Bhagavān. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. He has got so varieties of energies that everything is done very correctly and perfectly.

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]



Svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā. Everything is being done perfectly. So there are activities. Those who are impersonalists, they cannot understand. They cannot understand what is the Personality of Godhead. Nābhijānāti mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, tribhir guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ, mohitam. Because they are covered by the influence of three kinds of material modes of nature, one cannot understand what is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. But He reveals Himself to the devotees. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55].



So our business is to understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ, in truth, not superficially. Then our life is successful. Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Not superficially. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa in truth. Therefore here it is said that tāni me śraddadhānasya kīrtanyāny anukīrtaya. Anukīrtaya. Anukīrtana means don't manufacture. Anu means following. Therefore the bhagavat-tattva, or Bhagavān, can be understood by the paramparā system. Anu. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Rājarṣayaḥ. Formerly, the kings, they were rāja, at the same time great saintly persons, ṛṣi. They were not ordinary this king, Nawab Shah, engaged in drinking and dancing. No. They were all ṛṣis, all ṛṣis. Up to Mahārāja Parīkṣit they were trained up in such a way. Although it was monarchy, one man's control, but that man is not ordinary man. They were called nara-deva. Nara-deva means Bhagavān in the form of a human being. A king was worshiped therefore, because they were rājarṣi. Imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ. Bhagavān says, Kṛṣṇa says. Unless the kings, the government head, does not know what is the purpose of this life, what is the purpose of this material world, then how he can rule nicely? It is not possible. He has no purpose. He does not know what is the aim of life. Just like they think that eating, sitting..., eating and sleeping and sex life and then die. They're like animal life. This is not human life. Human life must know what is the aim of life. That they do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. These foolish people, they are trying to be happy-durāśayā. Durāśayā means the hope will never be fulfilled. That is called durāśayā. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ. These external... Here is called ātma-māyayā. But there is another māyā. This māyā is external māyā, external energy. That is this material world. They are trying to be happy in this material world by adjusting material things. That is called durāśā. It will be, never be fulfilled.

Therefore in the history we see, there have been so many material leaders, but they died simply working hard. They could not make things very properly adjusted. There was Napoleon, there was Hitler, there was Gandhi, there was Nehru, there were so many leaders. But nobody could adjust. This is not possible. That is durāśā. Durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ. Because they do not know what is the ultimate goal of life. The ultimate goal of life is to understand Viṣṇu. And people are going on.

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



Andha. Andha means blind man. If one blind man is trying to lead other blind men, then what is the benefit? The leader is blind and the follower is blind. Then there will be no result. They do not know... Īśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ. They are tied. They are tied hands and legs by īśa-tantra, by the regulative principles of the nature.



So one has to learn from the śāstra.

daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

[Bg. 7.14]



The prapadyante means bhakti-yoga. So the śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam is the beginning of bhakti-yoga. Therefore he says, tāni me śraddadhānasya kīrtanyāny anukīrtaya. Anukīrtaya: "Just speak to us by following the paramparā system." Anu. Anu means following. Anu means always, and anu means following. Anu-gamana, anu-karaṇa. Anu-karaṇa means imitation. Anu-gamana means follower and go. So here, anukīrtaya. First of all you must know from the authorities what is the truth. Then you speak. Don't speak nonsense. It will not help you or your followers. That is called anukīrtaya.



So one has to learn how to describe the Absolute Truth, Bhagavān, how He's acting, how He's merciful, how He is so kind to the living beings that He comes personally. He's more anxious to give us education, enlightenment what is the goal of life. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. And He leaves the literature, He leaves His devotee, He leaves His follower, the paramparā system. Take advantage of this. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for giving the whole human society this advantage of understanding what is the Absolute Truth. It is not a bogus thing. It is actually this anukīrtaya. Anukīrtaya. We are not manufacturing our philosophy. There is no business. Why shall I try for..., unnecessarily waste our energy for manufacturing? There are so many things to be learned which is already there in the Vedic literature. Just try to learn and distribute it. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission.

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



That is being attempted. Anyone who has taken birth in this land of Bhāratavarṣa, it is his duty to make his life successful by taking advantage of this Vedic literature. But we are not taking advantage of Vedic literature. We are going to learn technology. That is our misfortune. Technology is śilpa-karma. Just like an artistic man. That is not real education. Real education is how to solve the problems of life, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. That is education. So this education, this transcendental education, is to enlighten people how to become relieved from this entanglement of material life, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi.



Thank you very much. (end)



741104SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.4

-

Bombay, November 4, 1974



Nitāi: "Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: The most powerful sage Maitreya was a friend of Vyāsadeva. Thus being encouraged, Maitreya, pleased by Vidura's inquiry about transcendental knowledge, spoke as follows."



Prabhupāda:



dvaipāyana-sakhas tv evaṁ

maitreyo bhagavāṁs tathā

prāhedaṁ viduraṁ prīta

ānvīkṣikyāṁ pracoditaḥ

[SB 3.25.4]



So this is the process of getting knowledge, to approach the proper person, guru, and submissively hear from him about transcendental knowledge. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Don't try to receive spiritual knowledge or transcendental knowledge very cheaply. Although it is very easy, there is no difficulty, but the process must be known. Just like any machine-we have got experience-just like sometimes our typewriter machine or this dictaphone does not work. So if we go to the proper person, who knows the work, he immediately tightens one screw or changes something; it works. The process we must know. So if I go to a pān-wala for repairing my machine, that will be not good. He does not know the process. He may know to..., how to make pān, biḍi; but doesn't matter, he does not know how to repair a machine.



Therefore the shastric injunction is, Vedic injunction, that tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. If you want to know transcendental knowledge, tad-vijñāna... Tad-vijñā... It is also vijñāna. Actually, human life is meant for understanding tad-vijñāna. Tad-vijñāna means transcendental knowledge, not material knowledge, bodily. Bodily... Even a medical practitioner, he does not know, he has no knowledge of the spirit soul. He simply studies the mechanical arrangement of the body. The body's a big machine made by nature. It is called yantra. Actually it is a machine. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said,

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



Yantrārūḍhāni māyayā. This body is machine. The, those who are very much attached to this machine, for them, the yoga system is recommended because... One who is very much in the conception of the body, so they have been taught just to concentrate the mind on some practice, some gymnastic, so that mind may be concentrated and he can focus the mind towards Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu. Real purpose is to understand Viṣṇu, the Supreme. So the yoga system is therefore a mechanical arrangement. But the bhakti system is above the machine, above this mechanical arrangement. That is... Therefore it is called tad-vijñāna. The mechanical understanding is material, and above that, tad-vijñāna.



So tad-vijñānārtham, if you want to understand spiritual knowledge, then you have to approach a guru. Guru. Guru means weighty, I mean to say, one who has got better knowledge. Heavy. Guru means heavy, heavy with knowledge. And what is that knowledge? "I have got so much knowledge." No. Transcendental... Tad-vijñāna. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet, samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. That heaviness is brahma-niṣṭham, how much one is attached to Brahman, Parabrahman, Bhagavān. That is guru's qualification. Brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam. This is the mantra of Kaṭhopaniṣad, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet. Similarly, in the Bhāgavata also it is said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. Tasmāt, "Therefore one must approach guru." The here, in the Upaniṣad also gives definition who is guru. Guru means śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12], "one who has received knowledge by hearing Vedas," śrotriyam. Because Vedas are called śruti.

So those who are in the line of hearing from the preceptorial succession, disciplic succession... As it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, evaṁ paramparā-prāptam [Bg. 4.2]. Not, I mean to say, upstart knowledge. Standard knowledge. Standard knowledge is received from the paramparā system, disciplic succession. Therefore it is said, śrotriyam. Śrotriyam means "who has heard from the paramparā system." Śrotriyam... And the result is brahma-niṣṭham: "He is firmly fixed up in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Brahma-niṣṭham. He has no other business. This is two qualifications. He must have heard the Vedic knowledge through the disciplic succession. It does not require that he is very learned scholar. No. Simply he must hear from the authority. Śrotriyam. You have... Kṛṣṇa has given you, God has given you the ear. This is our system. Simply they hear and they become big, big preacher. It doesn't require that he has to pass M.A., C.B.A.C., or Ph.D. examinations. Hearing is sufficient. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You remain in your position, in your place. You do not require to change it. Sthāne sthitāḥ.

Sthāne sthitāḥ means the varṇāśrama, four varṇas and four āśramas. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and four āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. So this is civilization. Unless the society is divided into these eight divisions, that is animal civilization. That is not human civilization. You must be systematized, regulated system. Just like in this body there are different divisions: the head division, the arm division, the belly division, and the leg division. Similarly, without these four divisions, no society can be conducted very nicely. Then it will be chaos. So sthāne sthitāḥ means to remain in these regulative principles of varṇāśrama. That is called sthāne sthitāḥ. You remain in your position. It doesn't require you have to change. It is not that a śūdra, without becoming a brāhmaṇa... Of course, śūdra will become brāhmaṇa-by hearing. Brāhmaṇa means brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. If he hears, even a śūdra, he can understand what is Brahman. Then he becomes brāhmaṇa. So this is required. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. With great attention, body, mind and words, intelligence-with everything, one must hear.

So here we see, viduram prītaḥ. Vidura was hearing from Maitreya Ṛṣi, and Maitreya Ṛṣi was very much pleased. Prīti. Unless you satisfy your teacher, or guru, very nicely, you cannot get the right knowledge. That is natural. If you receive your guru, give him very nice place, he can sit comfortably, and he's pleased with your behavior, then he can speak very frankly and very freely, which will be very much beneficial for you. Therefore this word is... He was talking. He was preaching. He was giving instruction to Vidura, being pleased, prīti. Maitreya Ṛṣi was very much pleased. That is also recommended in the Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā: tad viddhi praṇipātena. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Simply going and asking the spiritual master or guru, and not to accept his instructions, then don't waste your time. Don't waste your time. In a challenging spirit, if you go to a spiritual master, without any service, sevayā, and praṇipātena... Praṇipātena... Prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa nipāta. Nipāta means fall down, and pra means prakṛṣṭa-rūpa, sufficiently. No reservation. This knowledge, the transcendental knowledge, is based on this praṇipāta. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You just surrender unto Me." And similarly we have to surrender to Kṛṣṇa or His representative.

So guru is representative, external representative. Internal guru is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Not that Īśvara, Kṛṣṇa, is in Vaikuṇṭha or Goloka Vṛndāvana. He is everywhere, even within the atom. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is Paramātmā. Ātmā is... I am ātmā, you are ātmā. We are all situated locally. You are situated within your body, I am situated within my body. But Paramātmā is situated everywhere. That is the difference between ātmā and Paramātmā. Ātmā and Paramātmā... Those who are mistaking that "There is no difference between ātmā and Paramātmā," no, there is difference. They are one in one sense, that both of them-cognizant. They are living entities. Cetanaś cetanānām. Cetanaś cetanānām, nityo nityānām. But they are different. In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says, kṣetraḥ kṣetra-jñaḥ. Kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata [Bg. 13.3]. Kṣetra-jña means the proprietor of the kṣetra, this body. Body is called kṣetra. So I am proprietor. Not proprietor, I am occupier. Just like in a house, the tenant and the landlord. The landlord is the occupier, tenant, and the landlord is the proprietor. Similarly, we ātmās, we are simply occupier of this body. We are not proprietor. The proprietor is Paramātmā. Sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata. So if the proprietor says that "Get out of this house," or some, by law... Similarly, when the Paramātmā says, "Now you have to leave this body," you have to leave this body. So this is Vedic knowledge.

So one must approach a proper guru. The guru's qualification is, in every śāstra, that... Just like in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, tad viddhi..., er, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. One does not require to accept a guru unless he is inquisitive to understand the ultimate goal or benefit of life. Ordinary man who is interested with the bodily comforts of life, he doesn't require a guru. But generally, the, at the present moment, guru means who can give you some bodily medicine. Approaches some saintly person, "Mahatmaji, I am suffering from this disease." "Yes, I have mantra. Take this..." That sort of guru is accepted. So same bodily... Or some bodily wealth, bodily... No.

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



One should approach guru for seeing the tattva, the Absolute Truth. That is necessary. Not for any material benefit. One should not search out a guru for, I mean to say, curing some material disease. For that, there is medical practitioner. Why should you search out after a guru? But people search out, that "I have got some material disease, and if somebody can cure, some saintly person, then he's guru or he's Bhagavān. I am poor. If he can give me some money, then he's guru." No. The śāstra does not say like that. Guru means śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam, śābde pare ca niṣṇātam [SB 11.3.21]. Guru means who knows the Vedic śāstra, the Vedas. He knows the Vedic conclusion. And the Vedic conclusion is to understand Kṛṣṇa. That is Vedic conclusion. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15].



Therefore those who are trying to understand Kṛṣṇa, or partially... We cannot understand fully Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. We have not so capacity. Because Kṛṣṇa is so big. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta. So with our limited knowledge we cannot understand... Even Kṛṣṇa does not understand Himself, Kṛṣṇa is so great. Kṛṣṇa Himself, He does not know why He's so much attractive. Therefore, to understand this knowledge, why Kṛṣṇa is so attractive, He became Lord Caitanya, taking the ecstatic emotion of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Rādhā-bhāva-dyuti. That's a very great science. Kṛṣṇa is such that Kṛṣṇa... Of course, it is our calculation that Kṛṣṇa does not understand Himself. So to understand Kṛṣṇa, fully Kṛṣṇa, it is not possible. But as far as our limited knowledge is concerned, if we understand Kṛṣṇa so much, that is our perfection. That is our perfection. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9].

So if we understand Kṛṣṇa as a human being like us, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11], then we are mūḍhas. "Kṛṣṇa is also... Kṛṣṇa's body is made of these māyā elements, or external elements, like us." Just like our body is made of these material elements. If we think Kṛṣṇa also made of that elements, of these material elements, kṣitir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ, then we are mistaken. Kṛṣṇa is... Here, in the previous verse, we have learned: ātma-māyayā. There are... Of course, this material energy is also ātma-māyā, Kṛṣṇa's. Not ours. Mama māyā. Kṛṣṇa says, mama māyā. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14]. This material world is Kṛṣṇa's. We cannot say mama māyā. No. We are under the control of this material nature. But Kṛṣṇa is the controller of the material nature. That is the difference. We are controlled by the material nature, but Kṛṣṇa is not controlled, but He's controller. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. One who understands this, that this prakṛti, this material nature, is working under the direction of Kṛṣṇa, that is our real knowledge. How the things are going on? That is not possible to understand. But the summary, sum total, if we simply understand... Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Everything is emanated from the Supreme Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa. That much knowledge is sufficient. Then you can increase-how they are working. How, by Kṛṣṇa's energies, the material energy is working by the direction of Kṛṣṇa, that is advanced knowledge. But on the whole, if we... As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. That is perfect knowledge. If we think that this matter is working independently, as modern scientists, they think that chemical evolution... No. No chemical evolution. Life does not produce by chemical evolution. Life is from life. That... Just like Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, that ahaṁ sarvatra, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. The answer is given there. The Vedānta-sūtra, the question is "What is Brahman?" And the answer is there... athāto brahma jijñāsā, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Indirectly given. The Brahman, Parabrahman, is that from whom everything emanates.

Everything means... There are two things: jaḍa and cetana, living entities and nonliving entiti..., jaḍa. Dull entities. Matter is dull. So everything means including both. Matter is also coming from Kṛṣṇa, and these cetana, or living entities, they are also coming from... And the whole world is combination of this matter and cetana-your body, my body. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām, jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. This material energy is inferior, and the spiritual energy is superior. And superior why? Because the superior energy, the living entity, jīva-bhūta, they are controlling. Not controlling. They are trying to utilize. Just like we advanced living entities, human beings, we have created the modern civilization by utilizing the matter, utilizing the matter. That is our superiority. But we are also prakṛti. Apareyaṁ viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. We are parā-prakṛti, spiritual energy. This is the understanding. In this way we have to understand tattva-jñāna. The human life is meant for understanding tattva. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. The Vedānta-sūtra: athāto brahma jijñāsā. Jijñāsā, tattva-jijñāsā, the same thing.

So explanation of Vedānta-sūtra is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins that what is that tattva. Janmādy asya [SB 1.1.1]. Janmādy asya, from whom everything has emanated, or the Supreme, which is the source of everything, so what is the nature of that source? That is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. That source is abhijñaḥ, cognizant, not matter. Matter is not cognizant. Life. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], cognizant. So these scientists' theory, modern theory, that life comes from matter, this is wrong. The life comes from life. Because in the Bhagava..., Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is explained that janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The identity from whom everything emanates, He's abhijñaḥ, cognizant. He can understand. So cognizant means life. Not only that. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. He instructed knowledge to Lord Brahma, about Vedic knowledge. So unless one is living entity, how he can impart knowledge?

So actually, the Absolute Truth is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or the Vedānta-sūtra's explanation, natural explanation,... Actually, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was written by Vyāsadeva. Here it is said, dvaipāyana-sakha. Dvaipāyana means Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva compiled this Brahma-sūtra, and he explained it, bhāṣyaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇām **, this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If we read some artificial comments on Brahma-sūtra, we'll misunderstand. Generally, these Māyāvādīs give prominence of the comment given by Śaṅkarācārya about Brahma-sūtra, Śārīraka-bhāṣya. But that is unnatural. The natural commentation is given by the author himself, Vyāsadeva. So we have to understand... Vyāsadeva has written Brahma-sūtra, and we have to understand the meaning of Brahma... Brahma-sūtra means codes only. So codes can be explained by the author himself. So our process is to accept the Brahma-sūtra. Brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ [Bg. 13.5]. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā. So Brahma-sūtra is nyāya-prasthāna. Nyāya-prasthāna: very logically, transcendental knowledge. So brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ [Bg. 13.5]. So we must... Therefore, according to our Vedic system, the ācārya must understand Brahma-sūtra and explain. Then he'll be accepted as ācārya.

Therefore two sampradāyas, the Māyāvādī sampradāya and the Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, both of them have explained the Brahma-sūtra. Otherwise, they are not authorities. Without understanding Brahma-sūtra, nobody can understand what is Brahman. Therefore here it is said that Vidura understood the ānvīkṣikyām, transcendental knowledge, from Maitreya. Who is Maitreya? Dvaipāyana-sakha. He's the friend. That means he has association with Vyāsadeva. Just like friend and friend, the one friend knows the other friend, what is his position, what is his knowledge. So Maitreya was friend of Vyāsadeva. That means he knows what Vyāsadeva knows. So we have to approach such spiritual master or instructor who is in disciplic succession of Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva. Everyone claims that "We are also following Vyāsadeva." But not superficially. Actually following Vyāsadeva. Just like Vyāsadeva accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Arjuna said, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12], he accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Parabrahman, the Supreme Person. So one may say that "Arjuna was friend of Kṛṣṇa; he might have accepted like that." No. He gave evidence that "Vyāsadeva also accepts You. Vyāsadeva also accepts You, 'You are the Parabrahman.' " Vyāsadeva begins the comments on Vedānta-sūtra: oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. He begins, janmādy asya yataḥ, paraṁ satyaṁ dhīmahi [SB 1.1.1].

So if we actually are interested to understand spiritual knowledge, we must approach the representative of ācārya. Pratijāne. And ācārya means who follows Vyāsadeva. Just like Maitreya, dvaipāyana-sakha. Maitreyo bhagavān. He has been addressed as Bhagavān. Of course, the Supreme Bhagavān is Bhaga... Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. But other powerful persons, just like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, or Vyāsadeva, Maitreya, very, very big personalities, they are also sometimes addressed as Bhagavān. Nāradadeva. They are bhagavān. Actual Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. But they have attained, as far as possible... It is not possible to have the cent percent knowledge of Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can do that. Even Nārāyaṇa cannot do that. Even Bhīṣma cannot do that. But those who are, I mean to say, devotees or followers of Kṛṣṇa's instructions fully, they are also sometimes called bhagavān. But that bhagavān does not mean artificial bhagavān. Bhagavān means he knows what Kṛṣṇa has taught. He's also bhagavān. Bhagavāṁs tathā, prāha, he said, idam, viduram, unto Vidura, and prītaḥ, being pleased. Not that simply talking between friends and friends. No. Being prītaḥ. Just to... He's also eager. He's also eager, and he's also very much pleased. Vidura was eager to receive the transcendental knowledge, and Maitreya was pleased upon him.

How one can be pleased? That is the process. Praṇipātena sevayā. You can please one simply by surrendering to himself and by rendering service, "Sir, I am your most obedient servant. Please accept me and give me instruction." Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. Even Arjuna was a very intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa, still, while learning Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā from Him, he surrendered himself to Kṛṣṇa and said that "I am no more your friend." Of course, friend is also, a friend of Kṛṣṇa is also surrendered. That is... But specifically he said, śiṣyas te 'ham. Śiṣya means "You can rule over me now." Śās-dhātu. Śās-dhātu. From śās-dhātu, śāstra, śiṣya, śāstra, these things have come. So śiṣyas te 'ham. Śiṣya means "Now I am under Your full control. You can use me in whatever way You like." So in this way, ānvīkṣikyāṁ pracoditaḥ.

So this is the process of asking. Paripraśna is asking question. Of course, one, the śiṣya, must ask. He must... But not challenge. Just to understand. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Not to defeat the spiritual master. But one should be inquisitive, inquire from the spiritual master, being jijñāsu, very inquisitive to understand the spiritual science. Not that "I know better than you. Let us talk." No. That is not with guru. You must find out a guru where you can surrender, praṇipātena. If you don't find a person where you cannot surrender, don't waste your time and his time. First of all surrender. So this is the process of understanding transcendental... Ānvīkṣikyāṁ pracoditaḥ.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741105SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.5-6

-

Bombay, November 5, 1974



Nitāi: "Maitreya said: When Kardama left for the forest, Lord Kapila stayed on the strand of the Bindu-sarovara in order to please His mother, Devahūti."



Prabhupāda:



pitari prasthite 'raṇyaṁ

mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā

tasmin bindusare 'vātsīd

bhagavān kapilaḥ kila

[SB 3.25.5]



So father... What is the name?



Nitāi: Kardama Muni?



Prabhupāda: Kardama Muni. Kardama Muni left home. So Kardama Muni was a great yogi. So he was not interested family life, but once he desired that "Let me marry." So Vaivasvata Manu, he brought his daughter Devahūti, and she was married with Kapila, er yes...



Devotee: Kardama.



Prabhupāda: Hm?



Nitāi: Kardama.



Prabhupāda: Kardama Muni. So Kardama Muni, the wife, a king's daughter, but she was serving the husband, and... The yogi, in a cottage he was living, and she was king's daughter, princess. So working, working, she became very skinny. So Kardama Muni took (com)passion upon her that "This girl has come to me. She is not in a comfortable position." So by his yogic power, he created big palatial house, many servants, maidservants, garden, everything. Not only that. Kardama Muni created one airship. It was just like a small city. The modern airship-they have prepared 747-can carry about five hundred passengers. Of course, very big. But Kardama Muni created an airship just like a small city. In that airship there was nice lake and palaces and garden, and not only that, the airship traveled all over the universe. They could not make any airship to go to the moon planet. But Kardama Muni, by his yogic power, he created an airship which could go to all the planets. This is yogic power. Aṇimā laghimā prāpti. All kinds of siddhi, material siddhi. Whatever he likes, he can do. That is yoga-siddhi. Not simply pressing the nose and making some gymnastic. One must gain the yogic siddhi. By the, by the siddhi-yogī, he can do everything he likes. He can become smaller than the smallest and bigger than the biggest. Whatever he likes he can get immediately in hand. Wherever he likes, he can go. That is yoga-siddhi.



So this Kardama Muni was a siddhi-yogī, and his wife, Devahūti... So he had nine daughters, and they were all distributed to the Prajāpatis. Just like Dakṣa Mahārāja, Prajāpati, and there were many others. And the only son was this Kapiladeva. He is incarnation of God, Kṛṣṇa. And He is one of the mahājanas. Mahājana means authority. There are twelve authorities according to Vedic śāstra. One of them is this Kapila.

svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

[SB 6.3.20]



This is a statement of Yamarāja. Yamarāja is also one of the authorities. So Svayambhū. Svayambhū means Brahmā. And svayambhūr nāradaḥ. Nārada Muni, he's also authority. And Śambhu, Lord Śiva, he's authority. Similarly, Kapiladeva, He's also authority. These authorities should be followed. If we want to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if we want to understand what is the purpose of religious life, then we have to follow these mahājanas. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ. Dharmasya tattvam.



So dharmasya tattvam is explained by the Dharmasetu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is actually dharma. And all these mahājanas-svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kapilaḥ [SB 6.3.20]-they also follow the same principle. Therefore we cannot understand very easily what is the truth of religious system, but if we follow these mahājanas, then we can understand. So that Kapila Muni is explaining to His mother the glories of devotional service. So if we follow Him, then we also get informed what is the truth of devotional service. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Here another feature is that pitari prasthite araṇyam. So it is the system of varṇāśrama-dharma, pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. One who has passed over fifty years of age, he must give, leave home, and go to the forest, and completely devote his life for spiritual realization. That is the system, varṇāśrama-dharma. The name "Hindu" is a foreign name, given by the Muslims on the other side of the ocean. They used to say the inhabitants of this part of the world as "Hindu." Actually, you won't find this word Hindu in any Vedic literature. The Vedic literature you'll find: varṇāśrama-dharma. Civilized human being means who are following strictly the varṇāśrama institution, four varṇas and four āśramas. So four varṇas means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and four āśrama means brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So for brāhmaṇas, the four āśramas should be followed. Brāhmaṇa should become a child born in brāhmaṇa family and trained up nicely as brahmacārī. Then he becomes a gṛhastha. Then he gives up the home. That is called vānaprastha. And after that he takes sannyāsa.

So this Kardama Muni did it. Because he was a yogi, he strictly followed the principle. So as soon as Kapiladeva was grown up, the mother, Devahūti, was given in His charge and Kardama Muni left home. Therefore it is said that pitari prasthite araṇyaṁ mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā. Now it is the duty of the son. Women should be under the protection. In the Manu-saṁhitā it is said that woman should not be given freedom. Na strī svātantryam arhati. They cannot properly utilize freedom. It is better to remain dependent. That is very good. Independent woman cannot be happy. That's a fact. We have seen in the Western countries, on, in the name of independence, so many women are unhappy. So that is not recommended in the Vedic civilization and on the varṇāśrama-dharma. So therefore the mother, Devahūti, was given under the charge of his (her) grown-up son, Kapiladeva. And Kapiladeva was fully cognizant that He has to take care of His mother. Therefore mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā. It is the duty of the father to protect the girl very nicely. Women are very delicate. They should be given... So during childhood, until she attains, I mean to say, youthhood, puberty, the girl is under the protection of the father. Still, in India, the father takes care of the girl until she is married to a suitable boy, the father takes. And then the young husband takes care of the young girl, wife, and then some children are born, and then grown up. Suppose a man marries at the age of twenty... That is, I mean, the highest. A boy is married not later than twenty-five years. And the girl is not, married not later than sixteen years. That is the system. So a sixteen-year girl and twenty-five-year boy, if the child is born, then when the man if fifty years old, the child becomes twenty-five years old. So he can take charge.

So taking this calculation, even Kapiladeva was twenty-five years old, He was quite able to take charge of His mother Devahūti. So He knew that "Father left My mother in My charge, and therefore I must take charge of My mother and keep her always pleased." Mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā. This... The boy is not irresponsible. He is always ready to please His mother. Here we have given these pictures in this Bhāgavatam. Here Kapiladeva in a brahmacārī dress, and mother is taking lesson from the son. Now, sometimes it is asked, "How the mother will take lesson from the son?" That is the prerogative of the male. Strī... In the Bhagavad-gītā it is also said, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32], striyaḥ... Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyāḥ. A woman is considered in the level of śūdra. Although a woman is married with a brāhmaṇa, the woman is not offered the sacred thread. And in the Bhagavad-gītā it is also accepted like that by the Supreme Personality... Striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ. And another place it is said that Mahābhārata was compiled by Vyāsadeva because the direct Vedic knowledge is not understandable... Strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā [SB 1.4.25]. Trayī means Vedic literature. They cannot understand. Strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnām: women, and the śūdras, and dvija-bandhu. Dvija-bandhu means born in a brāhmaṇa family, but not qualified as brāhmaṇa. They are called not brāhmaṇa. They are called dvija-bandhu.

So this Mahābhārata was made by Vyāsadeva for these strī-śūdra-divja-bandhūnām. Therefore Mahābhārata is called "Fifth Vedas." There are four Vedas, Sāma, Yajuḥ, Ṛk, Atharva, and Mahābhārata is the fifth Veda. And the essence of Vedic knowledge is given within the Mahābhārata, this Bhagavad-gītā. So although woman is inferior than the man, still, the Vedic civilization is so perfect that the man, as father, as husband, or as son, takes care, full care of the woman. This is Vedic civilization. Therefore it is said that mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā. The son was ready always to see that "Mother is not unhappy. My father has gone away. So she may not feel the absence of my father." This very word is very significant, mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā. He was always ready to take care of the mother. And the best care is to give her knowledge. Because women are supposed to be less intelligent; therefore they should be given knowledge. And they should also follow. They should follow the father's instruction, they should follow the husband's instruction, they should follow grown-up, learned, scholar like Kapiladeva. Then their life is perfect. Dependent, remain dependent.

Tasmin bindu-sarovare avātsīt. They lived there in the Bindu, on the bank of the Bindu-sarovara, lake. Avātsīd bhagavān kapilaḥ. Now, Kapiladeva is Bhagavān. There is another Kapiladeva, Kapila Ṛṣi. He is atheist. But here, this Kapiladeva is authority and Bhagavān, incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān. Most powerful. Bhagavān means most powerful, all-powerful.

aiśvaryasya samagrasya

vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva

ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itīṅganā

(Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47)



Bhagavān, all-powerful means that aiśvaryasya, all opulence, all wealth, all reputation, all knowledge, all beauty, all renunciation. In this way, Bhagavān is opulent. Six opulences. And these six opulences is fully represented in Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is accepted: kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. And others, they are expansion or incarnation. Viṣṇu-tattva. In the Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the Gosvāmīs, they have analyzed the characteristics of Bhagavān. The first Bhagavān is Lord Brahmā. Lord... Not first... First Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa, but the Bhagavān realization, the opulences realization, begins from Lord Brahmā. He is jīva-tattva. Jīva-tattva means he's ordinary living being like us. If you become powerful in spiritual strength, then you can also have the post of Lord Brahmā. And better than Lord Brahmā is Lord Śiva. And better than Lord Śiva is Viṣṇu, or Lord Nārāyaṇa. And the best of all of them is Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. That is the analysis of the Vedic śāstra. So all śāstras accept... the Brahma-saṁhitā and, I mean to say, other, all śāstras... Kṛṣṇas tu... Even Śaṅkarācārya accepts. Sa bhagavān svayaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ. Śaṅkarācārya. He... These Māyāvādī philosophers, impersonalists, he also accepts Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And all the ācāryas-Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Viṣṇu Svāmī, Nimbārka, and lately, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu-all accept kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam.



So Kapiladeva is incarnation, and He instructed His mother Devahūti. Therefore to distinguish two Kapilas... One Kapila is the atheist Kapila, and the other Kapila is Bhagavān Kapila. Therefore Bhagavān Kapila is known as Devahūti-putra Kapila. Both of them expounded the Sāṅkhya philosophy, but the atheist Kapila expounded without understanding or without perception or realization of God, and here, Kapiladeva, He's expounding Sāṅkhya philosophy to His mother personally. Just like Kṛṣṇa personally expounded the knowledge of Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna, His friend, similarly, Kapiladeva, Bhagavān, He expounded the Sāṅkhya philosophy to His mother, Devahūti, and that we are explaining.

So next verse is:

tam āsīnam akarmāṇaṁ

tattva-mārgāgra-darśanam

sva-sutaṁ devahūty āha

dhātuḥ saṁsmaratī vacaḥ

[SB 3.25.6]



So this philosophy, we'll begin from the next verse, and we shall be... [break] ...of understanding Kṛṣṇa. Because Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name is identical... [break] We should always remember this, that you cannot chant and dance with any material name. Because Kṛṣṇa's name is spiritual, He's Kṛṣṇa, therefore if you go on chanting for twenty-four hours, you'll never feel tired. That is the advancement. So, so here, Kapiladeva... This is tattva-jñāna. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



Just like these Māyāvādīs, they cannot understand that this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa name is actually getting direct association with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī in Benares, He considered Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu as a crazy fellow. Crazy fellow. Why? Now, because He was sannyāsī, and He was not reading Vedānta-sūtra. He was simply chanting and dancing. So some devotee of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu very much praised Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu at the, in the presence of Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, and Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī became very angry, "Ah, don't talk of this rascal sannyāsī. He is a sannyāsī, He does not read Vedānta-sūtra, and in sentimental moods He chants and dances. Don't talk about Him. Better don't go there." So that devotee became very sorry, and he arranged a meeting between this Māyāvādī sannyāsī and Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



Then, in the meeting... Caitanya Mahāprabhu was beautiful, very beautiful in His bodily features. So... It is summary I am speaking. So the Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī inquired from Him that "You are a sannyāsī. You do not engage Yourself in studying Vedānta-sūtra, but in sentiment, with some foolish devotees, You some chant and dance. What is this?" So Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied, "My dear sir, My Guru Mahārāja saw Me a great fool number one." Guru more mūrkha dekhi' karila śāsana [Cc. Ādi 7.71]. "Therefore He has chastised Me." "What is that?" " 'You don't read Vedānta-sūtra. You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.' He has ordered Me like that. Because I am a fool, I have no knowledge; therefore he has given Me this engagement, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. So I am chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and I do not know. I become mad after chanting. And I get, I feel transcendental pleasure. And sometimes I act like a madman. So My Guru Mahārāja has said that 'You are very fortunate. You are very fortunate.' " Then Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī very mildly said, "It is all right, You're chanting. What is the wrong if You study Vedānta-sūtra?" Then Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "Vedānta-sūtra We know, but not like you. We know. If you don't mind, then I can explain Vedānta-sūtra." So He explained Vedānta-sūtra that Brahman, Brahman means "the biggest." So Brahman is ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa, biggest, means He's full of all opulences. That is biggest. He's the richest. He's the wisest. He's the most beautiful. He's most famous. And... In this way He explained that Brahman, the biggest, He cannot be impersonal. He's personal. He gave many instances from Vedic literature. In this way, He convinced that "The way you study Vedānta-sūtra, that is not the proper way. Vedānta-sūtra means to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa."

As Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. By the study of Vedas, if you have attained perfection, then you should know what is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa also said. Yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3]. Siddha means those who are liberated. Liberated means those who have no more the bodily concept of life. They are called liberated, brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. Prasannātmā. So long one is in the bodily concept of life, he's conditioned. He's conditioned. He's conditioned; he's not liberated. And when one understands fully that he's not this body, he's pure soul, bhāgavata, when he realizes, then that stage is called liberated. So liberated stage is not final. If you simply understand that you are not this body, you are a spirit soul, that is not sufficient. You must act as Brahman. You must act as Brahman. Then you will stay.

So,

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



So bhakti is attainable for the liberated person. Bhakti is not for the conditioned soul. Bhakti is for persons who are already liberated. How it is possible? Yes, it is possible. Kṛṣṇa says,



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



If you engage yourself in devotional service,



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



Tan manye adhītam uttamam. One who is engaged in these nine different processes of devotional service... The first beginning is śravaṇam, hearing. So under the direction of the spiritual master and the śāstras, immediately he is liberated person. He doesn't require to make separate endeavor for becoming liberated. Because immediately he engages himself in devotional... Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa [Bg. 14.26]. Avyabhicāreṇa, unfailing. Strictly. Dṛḍha-vrata. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. Dṛḍha-vrata, firm conviction that "I am engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. I am now free from all material contamination." Dṛḍha-vrata.



So one has to do it. This is tattva-jñāna. Tattva-jñāna. Here it is said, tattva-mārga-agra-darśanam. This is tattva-jñāna. of course, as it is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. The Absolute Truth are differently understood according to the different position of the student. The Absolute Truth... Some of them understand that Absolute Truth as impersonal Brahman. And some of them understand the Absolute Truth as localized Paramātmā. And some of them understand the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu. They are not different. Brahman, Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead-they are one. They are simply different phases. It is simply angle of vision. Just like a mountain from a very distant place, you'll see just like hazy cloud. And if you come nearer, then you see something green, very high, raised, I mean to say, earth. That is one vision. But you are seeing the mountain. From the distant place you see it is hazy cloud. As you come nearer, you see something green. And if you actually enter the mountain you'll find there are so many houses, so many trees, so many animals. The vision is the same mountain. But on account of my different position, I see hazy cloud or something green or something animated. But the final stage is the varieties. A mountain, there are so many trees, so many animals, so many men, so many houses-varieties.

So the Absolute Truth is not without varieties. That is spiritual variety. That is not material variety. But the Māyāvādīs, they think that... Because they are seeing the Absolute Truth from distant place, far away, they think that in the Absolute Truth there is no variety. As soon as there are varieties, it is material. That is their misunderstanding. No. The Absolute Truth is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā:

cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]



There are, in the spiritual world, there are Vaikuṇṭhalokas. There are inhabitants, the devotees. They're all liberated persons. They're akṣara. They do not fall down. Kṣara akṣara. We are kṣaras. We have fallen down in this material world. But there are devotees in the spiritual world, in the Vaikuṇṭhaloka, they never come down. Never come down in this material world, but they are also persons like us, but eternal persons, with full knowledge and life of blissfulness. That is the difference between them and us.



So that is tattva-jñāna. Unless we understand the varieties of the Absolute Truth, if we simply stick to the indefinite, impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth, then there is chance of falling down. Generally, they fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Because they are not allowed to enter into the Vaikuṇṭha planets, they simply remaining in the Brahman effulgence, and that does not stay. They fall down. Again they come down in these material varieties. We have seen many, many sannyāsīs. They first of all give up... Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "The jagat is mithyā." And ahaṁ brahmāsmi: "I have no more anything to do. I have become Nārāyaṇa." Then he comes down again to feed the daridra-nārāyaṇa. That's all. He becomes Nārāyaṇa, but he comes to take activities in feeding... But why? It is mithyā. You have already left. Why do you come here again? That means he hasn't got anything. The unnecessary labor... Āruhya kṛcchreṇa. They undergo severe penances and austerities, and they reach up to the impersonal Brahman, but because there is no pleasure... Suppose if I send you in a nice aeroplane in the sky... There is no varieties. Just like so many aeronautics. They, after flying in the impersonal sky, they become tired. And sometimes they pray to God, "Please let me go back to the land." And I have read in the paper, when the Sputnik was carrying the Russian aeronautics, he was simply seeing down, "Where is Moscow?" (laughter) "Where is Moscow?" Because this impersonal traveling was very much agitating, he was finding out, "Where is Moscow?" So this kind of realization of the Absolute Truth will not stay, will have, will have to fall down. Exactly like that. The Russian aeronautics, without getting any shelter in the sky, he was simply hankering after Moscow. That my book, that Easy Journey to Other Planets... One gentleman, he became very much enthusiastic, that "Oh, we can go to the other planet?" And "Yes, you can go. Read this book." "Then I shall come back again?" "And why you shall come back again? You shall remain there." "No, no, no. I don't want that. I don't want that. I shall go and come back."

So this is the, I mean, the mentality. Why this mentality? The mentality is that "Without varieties we cannot enjoy." Variety is the mother of enjoyment. So the impersonal Brahman realization, or Paramātmā realization, does not give us steady ānanda. We want ānanda. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). The living entity, or Brahman, or Parabrahman... Just like our Kṛṣṇa. He's Parabrahman. He's enjoying ānanda. Similarly, we also, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, mamaivāṁśo jīva... [Bg. 15.7], we want ānanda. So ānanda cannot be in impersonalism, or voidism. That is not possible. Ānanda means varieties. When you get varieties of foodstuff, made of the same ingredient-same, I mean to say, grains, or milk and sugar-but we can prepare hundreds and thousands of preparations... At least, hundred preparations, and we enjoy: this is peṛā, this is baraphi, this is kṣīra, this is rābṛi, this is dahi, and so many things. So variety is required. Variety is required. So therefore the last word of tattva-jñāna is to understand Kṛṣṇa, who is full of variety.

So here Kapiladeva is tattva-mārga, tattva-mārga-agra-darśanam. So Kapiladeva is the incarnation of Supreme Personality of Godhead. He would explain to His mother. That we shall read from the next verse, what is tattva and how we can approach the tattva-jñāna and how we can enjoy. Not that simply dry speculation. Dry speculation. One, that professor, who has said, that "This Bhaktivedanta's book is not dry speculation. Order all the books made by him." So our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not dry speculation. There are varieties, but they are spiritual varieties. People misunderstand that these varieties are material things. They want nirviśeṣa, nirākāra, void. But our philosophy is not voidness. It is full of varieties and full of transcendental bliss.

Thank you very much. (end)



741107SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.7

-

Bombay, November 7, 1974



Nitāi: "Devahūti said: I am very sick of the disturbance of my material senses, for because of this sense disturbance, my Lord, I have fallen into the abyss of ignorance."



Prabhupāda:



nirviṇṇā nitarāṁ bhūmann

asad-indriya-tarṣaṇāt

yena sambhāvyamānena

prapannāndhaṁ tamaḥ prabho

[SB 3.25.7]



So this material world is described in the Vedic literature as darkness. And actually it is darkness. Therefore we require the sunlight, the moonlight, the electric light. If it had not been darkness, then why so many light arrangements? Actually, it is darkness. Artificially, we made it light. Therefore Vedic injunction is that "Don't keep yourself in the darkness." Tamasi mā jyotir gama. "Go to the light." That light is the spiritual world. That is directly the effulgence, or bodily rays, of Kṛṣṇa.



yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.40]



So real business of, especially of human being... The animals, they do not know. They have no capacity to know that we are in the darkness-darkness of knowledge and actually darkness. So one has to be, become nirviṇṇā, disgusted. One, intelligent man should be disgusted. One must be intelligent to know that "I am eternal." Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. It is the preliminary study of Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa is instructing about the constitutional position of the soul: na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20], na jāyate na mriyate kadācit. Kadācit, at any time, the soul does not take birth, does not die. And more explicitly it is said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. The covering, the body is the covering. So after destruction of this body, the soul is not destroyed. Just like if I change my shirt and coat or somehow or other the shirt and coat is destroyed, I, the person who put on this dress, I am not destroyed. This simple knowledge is instructed in the beginning of the Bhagavad-gītā. There are so many big, big scholars, big, big leaders, and still, they cannot understand that "I am not this body." This is the result because they do not study Bhagavad-gītā in the proper way. We have got so many leaders, big, big leaders. They are teaching Bhagavad-gītā. But nobody is fully aware or convinced that "I am not this body." This is called darkness. This is called darkness. And when one becomes disgusted with this darkness, or this position in the darkness, that is human life. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. Such person, who has become disgusted with this material existence, he requires the instruction of a guru.



So here Devahūti, because she is the wife of a great yogi, she understands what is the constitutional position of herself, and she has got her son, the incarnation of God. So she is getting here, mean, problem to the teacher. It doesn't matter... Because Kapiladeva is the son of Devahūti, Devahūti does not deny to take instruction from Him. She does not say, "Oh, He is my son. What He can instruct me? I am His mother. I shall instruct." No. Instruction has to be taken from the person who is in knowledge. It doesn't matter what is his position. It doesn't matter, whether he's son or a boy or a śūdra or a brāhmaṇa or a sannyāsī or a gṛhastha. It doesn't matter. You should take instruction from a person who knows, who is in the knowledge.

That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. He said, when He was talking with Rāmānanda Rāya... Rāmānanda Rāya was a śūdra by caste. We have got the four divisions: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. So he was, Rāmānanda Rāya was by caste a śūdra, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was a high-class brāhmaṇa. Not only brāhmaṇa, He was a sannyāsī, the most exalted post. First of all He's brāhmaṇa. Of course, unless one is brāhmaṇa, he cannot take sannyāsa. That's a fact. So He was, from social point of view, He was son of Jagannātha Miśra, grandson of Nīlāmbara Cakravartī. Personally, He was learned scholar, born in a very high class brāhmaṇa, very beautiful body, young man-all qualified. And He was taking instruction from Rāmānanda Rāya, who was a śūdra. The Caitanya-caritāmṛta, you'll find. So Rāmānanda Rāya, he was not only śūdra, he was gṛhastha. And he was a politician, governor of Madras. Governor of Madras. But he was very exalted in spiritual knowledge. So after converting Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, when Caitanya Mahāprabhu decided to go to the southern part of India, South India, at that time... Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, he was a very learned scholar, logician, nyāyī. So he wanted to teach Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because He was a young man. But later on he accepted Caitanya Mahāprabhu as his guru. He was impersonalist, Māyāvādī. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained to him the Vedānta-sūtra, that Vedānta-sūtra is personal philosophy. So he was convinced, and he became his disciple.

So when Caitanya Mahāprabhu was going to South India for His touring, he specially requested Him that "I neglected this person, Rāmānanda Rāya. He was talking with me about spiritual subject matter, very highly elevated, and that I thought that he was a sentimentalist. So I neglected him. But I can understand now that he is a very exalted personality. When You are going to South India, please meet him. Please try to meet him. You'll be very much pleased." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu, at Kabur,(?) He met Rāmānanda Rāya, and He was talking about spiritual subject matter, very highly elevated, simply. So because he was born in a śūdra family and a gṛhastha and a politician, so he was hesitating, that "Caitanya Mahāprabhu is a brāhmaṇa and sannyāsī. Such an exalt..." Hesitating. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that

kibā vipra kibā nyāsī śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei guru haya

[Cc. Madhya 8.128]



"Don't hesitate. Why you are hesitating because you are a gṛhastha or you are in politics or you are a, born a śūdra family? Why you are...? I am learning from you." This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's preaching. He did not think anyone negligible. Anyone who is qualified with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he can become guru. It doesn't matter where he is born, what is his family and identification. It doesn't matter. He must know the science. It is very practical. Just like when you go to consult an engineer or a medical man or some lawyer, you do not ask him whether he's a brāhmaṇa or a śūdra. If he's qualified, if he can help you in the particular subject matter, you consult with him, you take his help. That is practical. So similarly, in the spiritual matter it doesn't matter what he is. If he knows Kṛṣṇa, then he can become guru. It doesn't matter.



So here also, Devahūti, she was taking lesson from her son because the son knew the science of Kṛṣṇa. It doesn't matter whether one is son or one is something else or born in śūdra family or brāhmaṇa family or a sannyāsī. We are concerned with the science of Kṛṣṇa. That is required. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita also. He was a politician. You know Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. Under his name there is, New Delhi, quarter: Cāṇakya Purī. He was a great politician, prime minister of Ma..., Samrat, Emperor Candragupta. He also advises. He has got a moral instruction, Cāṇakya-śloka. He says that viṣād apy amṛtaṁ grāhyam: "In the poison pot, if there is nectarine, you should accept it. Don't neglect it because it is on the poison pot. You are concerned with the nectarine. Take it." Viṣād apy amṛtaṁ grāhyam amedhyād api kāñcanam. In a filthy place... Suppose in your laboratory (lavatory?), in a very filthy place, there is gold. So it doesn't matter. You should take it, gold. It is not that the gold is in the filthy place, therefore you should not touch it. Other metal you cannot touch. That is the Vedic injunction. But gold you can take. Amedhyād api kāñcanam. Viṣād apy amṛtaṁ grāhyam amedhyād api kāñcanam, nīcād api..., duṣkulād api. You can take some teachings even one is born in lower-grade family. And the wife you can accept even she is, if she is qualified, and... Strī-ratnaṁ duṣkulād api. Strī-ratnam. Ratna means jewel. If one girl is very qualified or beautiful, even she is born of lower family, you must accept. You can marry. This is Cāṇakya Paṇḍita. Strī-ratnaṁ duṣkulād api. Viṣād amṛtaṁ grāhyam amedhyād api kāñcanam, nīcād apy uttamā vidyā. If a man born in nīca, in lower-grade family, but if he's qualified, it doesn't matter. That is practically being done.

So this is Vedic system. Not that one is lower in the estimation of the society by birth or so on. But he must be qualified. So here also it doesn't matter. This is going on. That is Vedic system. Devahūti does not deny to take instruction from her son. It is the system. It doesn't matter whether he's inferior. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... Yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei guru haya: [Cc. Madhya 8.128] "You will accept anyone as guru if he knows the science of Kṛṣṇa." That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... And Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed everyone to become a guru. The world is suffering for want of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That was His mission. He wanted that from India everyone should become a guru and preach outside, because there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' sarva-deśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Or tāra' ei deśa. "You become a guru on My order, and you deliver your country or other countries." "So I have no so qualification, I have no education. How I can become guru?" Now, Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, āmāra ājñāya: "By My order." "Then what is Your order, Sir?" "Now, My order is yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. This is My order. You simply explain what Kṛṣṇa has said. Or what has been said about Kṛṣṇa." That is kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa means what Kṛṣṇa is instructing. The Bhagavad-gītā, the Supreme Personality, Kṛṣṇa, He is instructing. That is kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is speaking about Kṛṣṇa. That is also kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. Kṛṣṇasya upadeśa iti kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, and Kṛṣṇa, subject matter Kṛṣṇa and upadeśa, that is also kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "You simply preach kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. Then you become guru.'

yāre dekha tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



Not only that. He has empowered all Indians.



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the best welfare activity in the human society, the best. There is no more better welfare... There are so many welfare activities in the human society, but this kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, to instruct people about the primary principles of Bhagavad-gītā in the human society, that is the best para-upakāra. People do not know how to become happy. They are... Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. They are simply making struggle for existence by mental concoction. Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. In this material world, they are simply struggling. There is no solution. Therefore the every Indian should study Bhagavad-gītā and if possible Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and assimilate it, and preach all over the world. This is the duty of India. India has no other duty. Para-upakāra. So with our one man's endeavor, teeny effort, you, we can see that so many outsiders, they're attracted to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unless there is something substance... They are not illiterate. They are not fools. They are not poor. Why they are attracted? There is something to be learned from Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So if this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is spread all over the world regularly, then the face of the world will change. That's a fact. Sarve sukhino bhavantu. This is the Vedic mission: "Let everyone become happy." And how he'll be happy? He cannot become happy by mental concoction. That is not possible. Manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ [SB 5.18.12]. If one is situated on the mental platform, speculating, he will simply go to the asat. Asat means this material world. Asato mā sad gama. Vedic says, "Don't remain in this asat. Come to the sat. Oṁ tat sat."



So if one is on the mental speculation, manufacturing something for the welfare of the human society, that is not possible. Human society cannot be happy without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That's a fact. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā:

bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

[Bg. 5.29]



If you want śānti, individually or collectively, nationally or internationally, then you must become Kṛṣṇa conscious. What is that Kṛṣṇa consciousness? The summary is that Kṛṣṇa is the supreme enjoyer: bhoktā. We are not bhoktā. We are simply servant. Just like anywhere, there is a master and the servant. The master is the enjoyer, and the server, servant, is helping the master enjoyment. This is the process. So we living entities, we are eternal servant of God, or Kṛṣṇa. When we speak of Kṛṣṇa, means God. So we are eternal servant of God. So our duty is to help the master to enjoy. Just like here is Kṛṣṇa. The Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, She is the topmost servitor of Kṛṣṇa. So Her business is to keep pleased always Kṛṣṇa. That is... That is the symbolic representation. Rādhā. Rādhā means anaya(?) ārādhyate. She is serving, the best service. Anaya(?) ārādhyate. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is very much fond of Rādhārāṇī, because She gives the best service to Kṛṣṇa, in so many ways. She has got sixty-four qualifications. That is mentioned. Therefore She is so, I mean to say, pleasing to Kṛṣṇa. Anaya(?) ārādhyate iti rādhā.



So our business is also like that. We are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, and we should give, render, we should render service to the best of capacity. That is our real constitutional position. But here Devahūti says that bhūmann asad-indriya-tarṣaṇāt. Asad-indriya-tarṣaṇāt. At the present moment in this material world, we are busy to enjoy these material senses. This is our position. Everyone is satisfying. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ, manasas tu parā buddhiḥ... [Bg. 3.42]. In this way, you go, and when you go beyond the range of buddhi, that is soul. That is spiritual platform. In the ordinarily we are, in the material platform, we are interested in gratifying senses: "I like it. I must have it." But that sense gratification means we are becoming implicated, implicated in the laws of nature. That is also stated in the śāstra.

nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti

na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

[SB 5.5.4]



This is the instruction in the Vedic literature, that the people in this material world, they are very, very busy. Not only men-even the animals, even the birds, beasts, insect. We see on the beach, there are so many dogs, and they are assembled there for sex. So this is the material world, indriya-prīti. Therefore śāstra says that human life should be, consider... They should think, "Whether we shall spoil our life simply by sense gratification, or there is some other business?" Yes, there is some other business. That is tapasya. That is tapasya means we should restrict sense gratification. Sense gratification, either regulated or nonregulated, is meant for animal life. Sense control is the human life. Therefore you'll find in Vedic culture big, big learned scholars, big, big kings, they dedicated their life for tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. If you want to purify your existence, then you must take to the process of tapasya. Tapo divyam.



And what is that tapasya? Tapasya for realization of God. And then we shall be purified. What is meaning of purify, purification? Purification means we are eternal, and if we become purified from this material contaminating, then we get back our eternal life, back to home, back to Godhead. That is required. That is... For that we have to accept little tapasya. Not to become sense gratifier like the dogs and hogs. That is not civilization. Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. This human life should be regulated in such a way that he hasn't got to satisfy the senses after taking so much hard labor. The modern civilization is like that. Everyone is engaged in hard labor simply for satisfaction of the senses. So they have become mad. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vi... And they are acting without any consideration of the effect. They do not consider whether it is sinful or not. They do not believe in the next life. They do not discriminate what is sinful, what is pious-nothing. Exactly like animals.

So śāstra says, "This is not good." Here also, Devahūti says that bhūmann asad-indriya-tarṣaṇāt. Asad-indriya-tarṣ... Actually, these senses are not real senses. It is covered. Just like my, this body, covered with this shirt, or this cloth. It is not my real body. Although you see the shirt has got a hand, that hand is not real hand. The real hand is within the shirt. Similarly, our real body is within this body. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehe. Dehinaḥ. Dehinaḥ means the real body, or the spiritual body of the soul, is within this body. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe. And the body is changing. Kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā. It is sometimes child, sometimes youth, sometimes a young man, sometimes old man. And then vanishes. It is... There are six changes. So this is not real body. But... And we are engaged in this unreal body, sense gratification. We have got senses. So therefore Bhagavad-gītā says, sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. Atīndriya-grāhyam. Beyond the senses. Therefore these senses are to be purified. That is called tapasya. Tapo divyam [SB 5.5.1]. And... Yes. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. When we purify our senses... Senses you cannot destroy. That is not possible. Just like some, somebody said that "You become desireless." Desireless... Desire is the mental activities. So we cannot be desireless. That is not possible. We have to purify the desire. That is required. That is recommended.

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



Bhakti means that. Bhakti means that you are not required to destroy your senses, but you have to purify your senses. And when you purify your senses, then you can serve Kṛṣṇa. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam...nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], senses; hṛṣīkeṇa, by the senses; hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam, serve Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses. Kṛṣṇa's senses... We are just like part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Just like this hand or this finger are part and parcel of my body, similarly we are also senses, part and parcel of the spiritual body of Kṛṣṇa. So when we purify ourself, then we act in our original, constitutional position. Just like the finger is meant for serving my body, similarly when, as soon as we are in the position of our original constitution, then we serve Kṛṣṇa.



So here Devahūti says that bhūmann asad-indriya-tarṣaṇāt: "I am in this material world." In simple words there is a Bengali poem:

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



We are purely part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. We are actually the senses of Kṛṣṇa. And when we forget this position and we want to satisfy ourself, that is our material condition.



kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



Then that is māyā. When we are in ignorance that we are the part and parcel of the Supreme Being and our duty is to satisfy Him... Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. This is called bhakti. When we forget it, then we are fallen in this material world, and we are busy in our personal sense gratification and implication. Implication means so long we'll have, we'll continue to have this desire to satisfy our senses, we have to accept another body, according to our desire. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. If we want to become a tiger, Kṛṣṇa will give our next life a tiger's body. And if you want to be a devotee, He will give you the same body. If you want to eat stool, then He'll give you the body of a pig. And if you want to... That requires our own qualification. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vra... [Bg. 9.25]. It is a preparation for the next life, as you want to enjoy your senses. So why not prepare yourself to go back to home, back to Godhead, and prepare your senses like that? That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



Thank you very much. (end)



741108SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.8

-

Bombay, November 8, 1974



Prabhupāda:



tasya tvaṁ tamaso 'ndhasya

duṣpārasyādya pāragam

sac-cakṣur janmanām ante

labdhaṁ me tvad-anugrahāt

[SB 3.25.8].



So sac-cakṣur, to see oneself and to see God, it is not very easy. Janmanām ante. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, jñānavān. The so-called learned scholars, Vedantists, so-called Vedantists... One who is actual Vedant..., knower of Vedānta, he understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Because veda means knowledge, and anta, "the late phase." Knowledge, there are different types of knowledge. Ordinary knowledge, as we are now interested for economic benefit, that is not actual knowledge. That is art of livelihood. That is not knowledge. Suppose you are a very big engineer, and another man is ordinary electric mistri. The qualification is the same: earning livelihood by some art. If there is some wrong in the electric line, I cannot repair it. I call one mistri. He knows the art. He immediately revives the electric current. So this sort of knowledge is called śilpa, śilpa-jñāna, "artistic knowledge." That is not knowledge. Real knowledge is Vedic knowledge, Vedānta knowledge, to know oneself, "What I am, what is God, Bhagavān, what is my relation with Him, and what is my duty, and what is the ultimate goal of life." This is knowledge. Etaj jñānaṁ tad ajñānam anyathā. Kṛṣṇa says, "This is jñānam." Kṣetra-kṣetra-jña-jñānam. If one can understand oneself and the Supreme Self and what is this material world, why we have come here, what is my relation with God, what is my relation with this world, this is knowledge. They are called jñānavān. Jñānavān, they are searching after knowledge. Ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya.



This knowledge begins, inquisitiveness, athāto brahma jijñāsā. Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī went to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was minister, very big minister of Bengal, Nawab Hussein Shah's government. He left everything. He resigned from the post and became follower of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So when he met Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu at Vārāṇasī, at that time, he placed this question that ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. This is the inquisitiveness, knowledge. Tāpa-traya. Tāpa-traya means three kinds of miserable condition: adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. We are suffering always. Ātmā means body and mind-even soul. But soul is aloof from body and mind, but he is absorbed. On account of material contamination, the soul feels the pains and pleasure of mind and body on account of contact. So this is called adhyātmika. And adhibhautika, pains given by other living entities. Even if you sit down silently, without any, mean, cares, still, the mosquito will come and bite you. Or the bugs will come and bite you at night. And there are other, dogs and cats and envious persons, serpents. So many enemies. Even if you want to remain peaceful, the other living entities will not allow you to remain peaceful. This is material existence. You have got this body. From the body you'll have to suffer. At least, you have to suffer śītoṣṇa. When it is scorching heat, you'll have to suffer. Why you are running on this fan? Because you are feeling heat, extraordinary. Therefore you invented this fan. Or mosquito curtain. Just struggle. This is called adhibhautika.

Then adhidaivika. If there is no rain, there will be no food production, and the rice will go eight rupees per kilo. And you have to suffer. Durbhikṣa. Even people are not willing to give you bhikṣā. "Because the rice is so costly, how can I give?" That is called durbhikṣa. Durbhikṣa means when you do not get even bhikṣā. This is the most lowest profession. It is highest also. The sannyāsīs, they go door to door, bhikṣā. Brahmacārī go to door to door. Our Vedic civilization is that in the society there are four divisions: the brahmacārī, the gṛhastha, the vānaprastha, and the sannyāsī. Suppose there are hundred men in a village or in a place. The society is divided into four āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha... So... This is material calculation. Suppose if there are hundred men, seventy-five men are to be considered brahmacārī, vānaprastha and sannyāsī. So these seventy-five men will live at the cost of the twenty-five men, gṛhastha. Gṛhastha has to give alms to the brahmacārī, to the vānaprastha, and to the sannyāsa. Just see how nice communism. The one twenty-five-percent group, they are earning, and they are maintaining seventy-five men. So they are living by bhikṣā. Brahmacārī will go door to door, "Mother, give me alms," and they'll give. The sannyāsī will go. So when this bhikṣā will not be available, that is called durbhikṣa, famine. This is adhibhautika. Adhibhautika, er adhidaivika. You have no control.

That is coming gradually. The more people are becoming godless, the more there will be scarcity of food. Because nature is the servant of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, mama māyā. The nature is the maidservant. Nature is mother, goddess Durgā, material nature. But she is not independent. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is stated, sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. Durgā, Mother Durgā is so powerful that she can make, create... Sṛṣṭi-sthiti. She can maintain. Maintenance also in her power. So because she is the maidservant of Kṛṣṇa... Chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā. Durgā bibharti, maintains. But it works like chāya. Icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. She is not independent. She works under the direction of Govinda. And Govinda says also in the Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "Under My order." So prakṛti will be unkind. As we have seen, the Mother Durgā is chastising the asura on the chest; the trident, triśūla, is piercing. Why? Because he's asura. Asura means nondevotee. The asura. Sura and asura. There are two kinds of men: daiva āsura eva ca. Dvau bhūta-sargau loke 'smin daiva āsura eva ca [Bg. 16.6]. There are two kinds of men in the world. One is called daiva, devatā, demigods, and the other is called āsura. You have heard about the devatā and asura, there is always fight. Daivāsura. So who is asura, who is deva? Viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daivaḥ. Those who are devotees of the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, they are devatā. Āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ. And those who are not devotee of Viṣṇu, but other demigods, even if he's devotee of Lord Brahmā or Lord Śiva, he's to be considered as asura.

Just like Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa was a great devotee of Lord Śiva, but he's considered as asura, rākṣasa. Nobody gives him credit. You have got, seen the rāma-līlā. Rāvaṇa is insulted. But he was a great devotee of Lord Śiva. You know that. Why he's insulted? Because he was not a Vaiṣṇava. He was against Rāmacandra. Therefore he's asura. When he was in danger, when Rāmacandra was in his front to kill him, so he began to offer his prayer, Rāvaṇa, "Please come and protect me." He knew that "I cannot be saved from the arrow of Lord Rāmacandra." That he knew very well. Therefore he was praying to Lord Śiva, "Please come and save me." But Lord Śiva could not come and save. Pārvatī was requesting him, that "Your, such a great devotee, he's in danger, and he's praying to, for protection, and you are not going?" Lord Śiva said, "What shall I do? I cannot give him protection." Therefore the simple word is rākhe kṛṣṇa māre ke and māre kṛṣṇa rākhe ke. If Kṛṣṇa wants to kill somebody, nobody can give protection. It is not possible. And if Kṛṣṇa wants to protect somebody, nobody can kill him. This is the...

So asura and deva, there are two kinds of men. Viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva āsuras tad... It is Vedic injunction. Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ... Ṛg-veda mantra. Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. This is the Vedic mantra. Sūrayaḥ, those who are learned, advanced people, they look forward for the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu. So this viṣṇu-bhakta... Here it is said, tasya tvaṁ tamasaḥ and andhasya duṣpārasyādya pāragam. If you want to get relief from this duṣpārasya andhasya... We have already tried to understand that this material world is andha, andhakāra. It is simply darkness. Just see, now it is dark. Because the sun is not visible, it is just on the opposite side of the sun, therefore we are in darkness. Actually, the position of this material world is darkness. Just like here is now electric light. If the, some way or other, the current is off, it will be dark. Everyone knows it. We require artificial light because it is darkness. So Kṛṣṇa has given this artificial light both day and night. In the day there is sunshine, and there is moonshine at night. Because without light you cannot work. Without... You are very much proud of your eyes: "Can you show me God?" So the answer will be, "Have you got the eyes to see God? You rascal, you want to see God. Have you got the eyes to see God?" "No, sir." "Then why you want to see God?" God can be seen in a different way. God can be seen... Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. When you will be devotee, lover of God, then, by that ointment, your eyes will be cleared and you will be seeing God. Now, here is God. Kṛṣṇa. Here is God. Why the people in Bombay, those (who are) challenging, "Can you show me God?" they do not come here? Because they have no love. A few devotees here, they understand that here is God. They can see here is God. But the rascals, they cannot see God. So even though he has got eyes, he cannot see God. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25].

So to see God you have to make your eyes cleansed. Just like with cataractic eyes you cannot see anything. Everything is dark. But if you have operation, the cataract is taken away, then you can see. Similarly, with these eyes, these material eyes, you cannot see God. Not only you see God, you cannot understand Him although His name is there. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi. Nāmādi. To understand God means to understand first of all His name, nāmādi. Therefore... From the beginning with nāma. Therefore Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra means the name of God. God is not different from His name, absolute. "Kṛṣṇa" and the Kṛṣṇa person is the same. I have already explained that absolute means Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's name, Kṛṣṇa's form, Kṛṣṇa's place, Kṛṣṇa's dress, Kṛṣṇa's throne, Kṛṣṇa's prasādam, everything Kṛṣṇa, they are not different. Advaya-jñāna. So Kṛṣṇa is there in the name, in the form, but because we have no love for Him, we cannot see. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Those who have developed God consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, love for God... Unless they have got love for God, why they have sacrificed their life for Kṛṣṇa? They could earn. They know how to earn money in America, and there is money also. Here if, even if I know how to earn money, there is no money. But America is not like that. You can earn money like anything. Like anything.

I went to America. I had forty rupees. Now I have got more than forty lakhs. (laughter) Yes. It is fact. Our American property, it is not forty lakhs-forty crores. So it is not joke. If you want to earn money and if you have got little brain, you can earn money in America like anything. That's a fact. Because the bank is canvassing, "You want money?" Here, if I want some money in business, I have to flatter so many men: "Please give me money. Please give me money." But in America the bank is canvassing: "For this business purpose you want money? Take money." That facility is there. Therefore anyone who wants money to do something, the money is immediately supplied. If you want to purchase one house, one lakh worth... In America you cannot get any house with one lakh. At least, four lakhs, five lakhs, ten lakhs. So if you have got ten thousand rupees in your pocket, you can purchase that one-lakh-worth house immediately. You give ten thousand rupees downpayment, and the bank will pay ninety thousand. And gradually, you take it. So there is so much facility that you can earn money. So the country's so like that. There is no economic problem. There is no poverty. Nobody is poverty-stricken. So these people, these boys and girls, American, they have not joined me... Their belly's filled up. Not only that. They can send money for filling up your belly. They are sending money actually. Just today I have got, received information from the American Express. Whatever we are spending, lakhs and lakhs of rupees here, in Bombay, in Māyāpura, in other places, I am getting contribution from there. This is a fact.

So still, it is darkness. It is darkness, that this world... Unless you get information, this money will not save you unless you get information of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. Here it is also said like that: tasya tvaṁ tamasaḥ andhasya duṣpārasyādya pāragam, sac-cakṣur janmanām ante. Janmanām ante. Janmanām. Janma is singular number, and janmanām is plural number. Many, many janma, many, many births we are spoiling in this darkness. We do not know that. The university education is blind, andha. They cannot give you this information that we are going to the university, we are spoiling our time simply. Spoiling, actually spoiling. What university education? They give some technical education, that śilpa-vidyā, to earn money and eat and sleep and have sex life and die. This is the education. This education is described here that duṣpārasya, andhasya duṣpārasya. This kind of education will not help us because our sufferings are different. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9].

So this Sanātana Gosvāmī, I was speaking to you. He was minister. He had enough money. When he retired, he came to home bringing money with him, one big boat full with golden coins. Just imagine. Big, big coins in those days. Aseraphee.(?) It is... At that time it was eighty rupees worth. Now there is no gold. Where is aseraphee.(?) It is paper only. One-rupee note. So, so Sanātana Gosvāmī, in those days... Even we have seen in our childhood in India, there was gold coins available, any number you want. People used to purchase this guinea gold for making ornament. We have seen it. There was no... Now you cannot get this guinea gold. So that is all finished. So Sanātana Gosvāmī was very rich man. Still, he's asking Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu that grāmya-vyavahāre paṇḍita tāi satya māni: "These foolish villagers, or my neighbor men, they call me 'Paṇḍitajī.' " He was brāhmaṇa. Actually he was paṇḍitajī. You know, in India, the brāhmaṇa is addressed as "paṇḍita." Because a brāhmaṇa is expected to become very learned. A foolish man cannot be a brāhmaṇa. Learned means Vedic knowledge. Veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipraḥ. How one becomes brāhmaṇa? By studying thoroughly the Vedic literature, when one can understand Brahman, he realizes himself, hṛdayānanda, then he becomes brāhmaṇa. Therefore a brāhmaṇa means naturally paṇḍita. But nowadays simply by birth. That is another thing.

But Sanātana Gosvāmī was a great learned scholar in Urdu, Farsi, Sanskrit. And he was a very rich man, minister. Everything honorable. Coming of a very respectable, aristocratic family, Sārasvata brāhmaṇa. But still, he says to Caitanya Mahāprabhu that grāmya-vyavahāre paṇḍita tāi satya māni. "These, my neighborhood men, they call me 'Paṇḍitajī',and I am very much satisfied that I am paṇḍita." "Why you are dissatisfied?" Now, he says, āpanāra hitāhita kichui nā jāni: "I am such a paṇḍita that I do not know what is the goal of my life and what is real benefit for me. I am such a paṇḍita." That means, "I am mūrkha. I do not know my own self-interest. I am simply being carried away by the sense gratificatory means." Therefore he came to Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He did not come to Caitanya Mahāprabhu to get some gold or some medicine for curing some disease. As people go, Bhagavān: "Bhagavān will give me some gold. Bhagavān will..." If you want to have gold, you can have. You can get a gold mine and get, as much as you like. Why you should go to a Bhagavān? So... But..., but they do not know. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu's disciple, this Sanātana Gosvāmī, he had enough gold. But he was not satisfied. He went to Caitanya Mahāprabhu to take from Him that āpanāra hitāhita kichui nā jāni: "I do not know actually what is my self-interest. You please tell me." This is the real approach of guru. "So I have got you after many, many births. I have got your contact. Kindly enlighten me because I am thinking I am very learned, I am very rich, but actually I do not know my self-interest. I have therefore come to you."

So here also, Devahūti, the same principle. She says, tasya tvaṁ tamaso 'ndhasya duṣpārasyādya pāragam, sac-cakṣur janmanām ante: "My dear Kapila, You have come as my son. But You are my guru. You are guru because You can give me information how I can cross over the nescience of darkness, of this material life." So one who is feeling the necessity of going across the dark nescience of material existence, he requires a guru. Not for curing some disease or getting a little portion of gold. That, that does not require that one should go to guru. Guru is required for whom? Just like Devahūti or Sanātana Gosvāmī. Those who are inqui... athāto brahma jijñāsā. Those who are interested in the matter of Brahman. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. If one is interested to understand things which is beyond this darkness, he requires a guru. To keep guru is not a fashion. Just like you keep a dog or a cat as a fashion. So things should not be done like that, that "I have got a guru. I don't care for him. That's all. I give him some money; therefore he must be my servant." That kind of keeping guru is not use. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. Uttamam. Here is called tamaḥ. Here is called tamaḥ. Tamasaḥ, tamaso 'ndhasya. Tamaḥ and uttama. Udgata tamam. If you can transcend this tamaḥ, this darkness, that is called uttama. We use this word, uttama... Uttama means very good. Generally, we take. How it is very good? When it is transcendental, above this darkness, that is called uttama.

So one who is inquisitive to inquire about that portion of God's creation which is beyond this darkness-na tad bhāsayate sūryaḥ. There is description in the Upaniṣads and the Bhagavad-gītā. Uttama means there is another world, another nature. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20].

na tad bhāsayate sūryo

na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ

yad gatvā na nivartante

tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

[Bg. 15.6]



There is another world, but what the scientists have got information? They have no information, sufficient information of this material world. But there is another world, another nature. This nature, we can, although we cannot reach, there are millions and trillions of stars glittering in the evening. We can see simply. Simply we can see. We cannot go even to the moon star. Moon is also a star, nearest star. That's all. Similarly, all these stars, they are like moon. Nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī. Kṛṣṇa says, nakṣatrāṇām. They are nakṣatra. The nakṣatra, the modern science, they say they are all suns. No. They are like moon, glittering. If we have to believe our śāstra. Nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī. So we cannot even go to the nearest planet, nearest star, and what to speak of going beyond? Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. The spiritual, there is spiritual sky, paravyoma. That is called paravyoma. This is called material vyoma, and... The vyoma means ākāśa.



So duṣpārasya... Duṣpārasya, this material world is duṣpārasya, very, very difficult to cross over it. Therefore unless one understands what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa, what is His position, where does He live, why our relation should be revived, then he's in darkness. He's darkness. But one can be enlightened by the mercy of God. Because Kṛṣṇa comes Himself to inform. He sends His devotee door to door. He leaves behind Him Bhagavad-gītā, but we are so foolish, we do not take advantage of it. We do not take advantage of Bhagavad-gītā. We do not take advantage of His devotees who are hankering after giving this knowledge, sacrificing everything. But we are so stubborn, dogs' obstinacy, that we'll not take advantage of them. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said,

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



The bhakti-latā-bīja, the seed of devotional service, is gotten by the most fortunate person. So those who are cultivating bhakti in this institution, they are the most fortunate persons in the world. That is the statement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



Bhramite. Therefore it is said, sac-cakṣur janmanām ante. This knowledge, this clue of bhakti-latā, is not so easily available. How it is available? It is... Labdhaṁ me tvad-anugrahāt: "By Your mercy." By Kṛṣṇa's mercy, you can get the bhakti-latā-bīja. Not ordinarily.



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



Unless you are free from the reaction of all sinful life, you cannot understand what is bhakti, what is Bhagavān. Therefore puṇya-karmaṇām. Janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. We should act piously. Piously means we must first of all give up impious activities: illicit sex life, meat-eating, drinking and gambling. Then you can lead pious life. Then you can understand what is God. Mean... These things are... Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means training people to become pious to understand Kṛṣṇa and make his life successful.



Thank you very much. (end)



741109SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.9

-

Bombay, November 9, 1974



Nitāi: "You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin and the Supreme Lord of all living entities. You have arisen to disseminate the rays of the sun in order to dissipate the darkness of ignorance of the universe."



Prabhupāda:



ya ādyo bhagavān puṁsām

īśvaro vai bhavān kila

lokasya tamasāndhasya

cakṣuḥ sūrya ivoditaḥ

[SB 3.25.9]



So there is the Supreme Person, Bhagavān. Originally, the... It is very common sense. Just like we require a leader. To organize some business, some nationality, any group of organization, it requires a leader. Without leader, you cannot organize anything. Nobody has got any such experience that without direction, without leader, anything has sprung up automatically, by nature. The foolish philosophers say like that, that the whole cosmic manifestation has come out of a chunk. They say like that. The rascals say like that: "There was a chunk." And wherefrom this chunk came? No, that is not fact. Fact is that there must be a good brain behind all this organization. This cosmic manifestation, there must be a leader. That is the information we get from Vedas. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). Nitya, we living entities, we are nitya. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. We do not die. Na jāyate na mriyate vā. Neither we take birth or we die. We simply change the body. Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. As old garments, old shirts and coats, we change, similarly, when this body becomes old enough, not to be used, we change to another body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. This is real knowledge.



So we are eternal, and God is also eternal. In that way we are the same quality. God is eternal; we are also eternal. God is cognizant, cetana, abhijña; we are also cetana. We are not dull matter. So what is the difference between God and me? The difference: He is great, we are small. He is vibhu, we are aṇu. He's all-pervading, we are very small. He is infinite, we are infinitesimal. That is the difference. So nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). That is the Vedic information. So you apply your reason, arguments. As you find here, you are more intelligent than me, somebody else more intelligent than you, other is more intelligent than he... In this way, if you analyze, there is not, all of us not on the same level. One is more intelligent, one is less intelligent. Similarly, you go on analyzing, one after another, one after another, throughout the whole universe. Then you come to the demigods. And the most important demigod is Lord Brahmā. So he's the original creature within this universe. So he is also not enough intelligent. You'll have to find out a person more intelligent than him. So that is, we get information... Just like Brahmā. He was alone in the beginning. Wherefrom he got knowledge? There was nobody else. So śāstra says, "Yes, he got knowledge..." Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. He got knowledge from Kṛṣṇa. Brahmā haite catur-mukha.(?)

So there must be some leader. In order to get knowledge, we have to find out some leader. And actually, by our experience, whatever we're doing... Just like we got independence. So there was a leader, Mahatma Gandhi. He led the country. Then you came to your national consciousness, and you combined together, and the Britishers went away. The opinion was against them. So there must be leader. And that leader is a person. That leader cannot be an imperson. No. That is not possible. I think there was a news in the newspaper, Free Press Journal, that the faith in personal God is diminishing. That means they are becoming more foolish. The faith in personal God is diminishing, percentage diminishing. That means people are becoming more and more foolish. That is natural. This is Kali-yuga. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. The more this age of Kali will increase, people will diminish in their bodily strength, in their memory, in their mercifulness, in so many ways. Eight kinds of diminishing, decreasing. Actually, we find, even in Western countries, the present generation, they are not as strong as their father or grandfather. Bodily strength decreasing. Memory is decreasing. There is no mercifulness. Now, at the present moment, if somebody is being killed and you are passing, nobody takes care. "Let him be killed." Because dayā, mercifulness, is diminishing. The duration of life diminishing. The bodily stature diminishing. The memory diminishing. Everything is diminishing.

So because we are diminishing in everything, therefore our God consciousness is diminishing also. Therefore there are news word that "Personal God conception is diminishing." That is natural. Mūḍha. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, that one who does not accept the personal God, he is described in the Bhagavad-gītā: mūḍha.

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



These classes of men... As soon as you'll find somebody godless, he does not know what is God, what is meaning of God, or he does not surrender to God... He does not know what is God-where is the question of surrender? Then we have got a test tube, statement of Kṛṣṇa. Then what class of man he is? If he does not believe in God, if he does not know what is God, what is our relationship with God, then what class of man he is? So we have got this test tube of Bhagavad-gītā. What is that? Duṣkṛtinaḥ. Always engaged in sinful activities. Therefore he does not know. Duṣkṛtinaḥ. And what other qualification? Mūḍha, ass, rascal. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. Narādhama means the lowest of the mankind. Why lowest? Now, because the human life is meant for understanding God and he does not know. Therefore he is lowest of the mankind, narādhama. Why it is so? There are so many university degrees-M.A., Ph.D., D.A.C., and so on, so on, delete.(?) Still, he does not know? Still, he's mūḍha? The Bhagavad-gītā says, "Yes." Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ: [Bg. 7.15] "The knowledge he has achieved, that has been taken away by māyā." He's superficially simply degree holder. His actual knowledge is taken away. So therefore māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. Why this has happened? Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Because he defies, "What is God? I am God. You are all God. Why you are searching God? There are so many Gods loitering in the street. Take care of them."



So this is not advancement of civilization. Because such kind of civilization is increasing, therefore in the paper we find that "Faith in personal God is decreasing." But God is person. Here it is said. What is that? Ya ādyaḥ bhagavān. Originally Bhagavān. Ādyaḥ means originally. There are three conceptions of Absolute Truth. What is that? That is stated in the Bhāgavata:

vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



The Absolute Truth, tattva... Tattva means the truth, original. Tat tvam asi. That tattva is Bhagavān. In the... The Absolute Truth is understood in three features, three angles of vision. The first is Brahman, impersonal Brahman. The second is localized Paramātmā. And the ultimate is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So Brahman realization is not complete realization of the Absolute Truth. Neither Paramātmā realization is absolute, or the complete understanding of the Absolute Truth. When you realize Bhagavān, then you understand what is Paramātmā, what is Brahman, and what is Absolute Truth. Yaj jñātvā... No. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. That is the Vedic instruction. If you understand Bhagavān, then you understand Paramātmā, you can understand Brahman also. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



This is Paramātmā. Ekāṁśena sthito jagat [Bg. 10.42]. That is one portion, partial understanding of the Absolute Truth. So far Brahman is concerned, that is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā: "I am the origin of Brahman effulgence." Amṛtasya śāśvatasya ca. This is described. And so far He is concerned, Kṛṣṇa, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. This is the understanding of Bhagavad-gītā. So far He is concerned, He says, "There is no more superior truth than Me." Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7].



So everything is resting on Kṛṣṇa. That is to be understood. That is the Vedānta understanding. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Everything includes Paramātmā and Brahma, and what to speak of other demigods. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. This is the statement. Everyone reads Bhagavad-gītā, takes Bhagavad-gītā and takes photograph: "I am very good scholar of Bhagavad-gītā." But he does not know what is Kṛṣṇa. Just see. "I know everything-except Kṛṣṇa. This is my knowledge." No. If you understand Kṛṣṇa-kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati-then you understand everything. Just like if you understand what is one hundred thousands of rupees, then you can understand automatically what is ten rupees and what is fifty rupees. So everything is within that, the Absolute Truth.

Now, Devahūti has understood. Therefore she says, ya ādyaḥ bhagavān, "My dear son, Kapiladeva, I know that You are the, the same Supreme Person, Bhagavān." And the Bhagavān is ādyam. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Vāsudeva is ādya. Arjuna, when he understood Bhagavad-gītā, he accepted Kṛṣṇa as all in... Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, puruṣam ādyam: [Bg. 10.12] "You are the Supreme Person, original person." Now, Brahmā says, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. He says that "I worship the original person, Govinda." Govindam ādi-puruṣam. Everywhere you'll find. And the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa says also, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat... [Bg. 7.7]. "I..." Govindam ādi-puruṣam. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, anādir ādiḥ [Bs. 5.1]. He has no ādi. Somebody will say, "Why not? Kṛṣṇa is born of Vasudeva. Vasudeva is His father." That is His acceptance, a devotee as father. There are dealings of the devotee and the Bhagavān in different ways: śānta, dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, mādhurya. We can have relation... We have that relation. Now it is covered. We can revive it again. Simply appreciation of the Supreme, that is called śānta-rasa. When one appreciates fully, then he wants to give some service. That is called dāsya. And giving service, when he becomes more intimate, then he becomes friend. That is called sākhya. And then, more advanced, the devotee wants to give service to Kṛṣṇa as father. Father-mother means to give service to the son. From the very beginning, even as a sweeper, all taking care.

So this is service. The Christian conception of God as Father is not so perfect. Because if we conceive God as Father and Mother, then the policy is to take from Him. Because everyone wants to take from the father: "Father, give me that. Mother, give me that." But this philosophy, that to accept the Supreme Lord as son, that means to give service. Yaśodāmāyi, she has gotten Kṛṣṇa as her son. So always anxious: "Kṛṣṇa may not be in danger. Kṛṣṇa is crawling. Some animal may not attack. He may not fall down in the water. He may not touch fire." Always anxiety, giving protection to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is giving protection to the whole universe, and Yaśodāmāyi is giving protection to Kṛṣṇa. This is conception of philosophy, Vaiṣṇava philosophy. She is anxious to give protection. Kṛṣṇa was taken away by the... What is that asura?

Yaśomatī-nandana: Tṛṇāvarta.



Prabhupāda: Tṛṇāvarta. Yes. So Kṛṣṇa was taken, and mother Yaśodā became mad: "My son has been taken." But Kṛṣṇa became so heavy that the asura could not stay in the sky. He fell from a deep, distant place and immediately died. Kṛṣṇa... And Yaśodāmāyi saw that "God has saved my Kṛṣṇa." Yaśodāmāyi saw: "God has saved." She began to thank some other god, some devatā. Because she knows, "Kṛṣṇa is my son." She does not know that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If she thinks that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then the relationship between mother and son will be destroyed. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is playing just like an ordinary child, and mother Yaśodā is treating Him as her son. All Kṛṣṇa's friends complained to mother Yaśodā, "Mother Yaśodā, your Kṛṣṇa was eating dirt." "Eh? I gave You sandeśa, and You are eating dirt?" (laughter) "No, Mother, I did not eat. They are telling all lies. This morning we had some quarrel." "No, Baladeva says also." "Yes, elder brother, He has also become My enemy." (laughter) "No, You open Your mouth." "Yes." When He opened His mouth, she saw the whole universe within the mouth. So she did not take very seriously. "All right, don't do it again." That's all. She never could take Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Neither Kṛṣṇa's friends, the cowherd boys. Neither the gopīs. The gopīs used to chastise Kṛṣṇa like anything.



So this is Kṛṣṇa's love. Kṛṣṇa is the Īśvara. Here it is said, puṁsām īśvaraḥ: the controller of the whole universe. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. But a devotee can control the Supreme Controller. Why they shall become one with God? They'll be God's father, God's controller. This is bhakti-mārga. Bhakti-mārga is not satisfied... They do not want to be equal with God or one with God. No. They want to give service. This is bhakti-mārga. Therefore Bhagavān. Bhagavān means "full of all opulence, all-powerful, almighty." That is Bhagavān. So to understand the Absolute Truth, you have to understand what is the meaning of Bhagavān. That is Absolute Truth. Here Devahūti... Devahūti is not ordinary woman. She was the wife of Kardama Muni, one of the greatest yogis. She has learned something from her husband. Otherwise, if she's not a very exalted woman, how Bhagavān has become her son? She is not ordinary woman. Therefore she says... She has understood Kapiladeva that ya ādyaḥ bhagavān.

Ādya is Bhagavān. Ādya is not Brahman or Paramātmā. Origin of everything is neither Paramātmā nor Brahman. Brahman is the bodily rays of Bhagavān. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. Yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ. Yasya prabhā. The... Just like the sunshine. Sunshine is not ādya; the sun-god is ādya. The sunshine is distributed all over the world, all over the universe. Everyone knows it. But is it ādya, is it the origin? No, no, no. It is not origin. The origin is the sun globe, or the sun-god. As soon as the sun disappears, there is no more sunshine. Therefore sunshine is not ādya. Sunshine is dependent on the sun globe. Similarly, this Brahman effulgence is dependent on the body of Kṛṣṇa. Brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā. Similarly, Paramātmā is also Kṛṣṇa's expansion. Ekaṁ bahu syām. That is the Vedic instruction. He becomes many-as many living entities are there. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣam... [Bs. 5.33]. Ādyam again. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam. That ananta-rūpam, as Paramātmā or incarnation. Advaitam acyutam. But it does not mean that, because Kṛṣṇa has become many, it does not mean that, because Kṛṣṇa has become many, it does not mean Kṛṣṇa is finished. No. Kṛṣṇa is there. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation].

This is Vedic instruction. Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa, and if He expands Himself in millions of Kṛṣṇa... Actually, He has done so as Paramātmā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61]. There are millions. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). This bahu-vacana, living entities, they are anantyāya kalpate. They are unlimited number. There is no counting. So many. But He is the leader. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. So the, we are, living entities, we are expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Viṣṇu-tattva also expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Svāṁśa, vibhinnāṁśa. We are vibhinnāṁśa. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. But there are svāṁśa, personal expansions, and separated expansions. The separated expansions we are. We are also expansion of Kṛṣṇa. And viṣṇu-tattva also expansion of Kṛṣṇa. But viṣṇu-tattva is vibhu; we are aṇu-very, very small. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca, jīva-bhāgaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ [Cc. Madhya 19.140]. The, if you divide the top portion of your hair into one hundred parts, then take one part, again divide into one hundred parts, that is the dimension of the jīva. Therefore aṇu. Aṇu means like atom. And Kṛṣṇa is vibhu. So therefore Kṛṣṇa is ādya. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Kṛṣṇa says, and Devahūti says also, the same thing.

Therefore by studying Vedic literature, we can understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore one must seek for a Vedic teacher. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Not that "At home, by speculation, I can understand what is God." That is not produce.(?) Vedas says... Just like if you want to be educated, you must accept some school. It doesn't matter whether the school is perfect or not perfect, but you cannot avoid school going. That is not possible. If you think that "Without going to school, I shall learn everything," that is not possible. Vedas says that if you want knowledge actually... Tad-vijñānārtham. Tad-vijñāna means transcendental knowledge. Because Vedic knowledge... There is material knowledge also. Just like Āyur Veda, Dhanur Veda, and Jyotir Veda. Veda, veda means knowledge. There are all different types of knowledge. But real knowledge is brahma-vidyā, to understand the Absolute Truth. That is real knowledge. Other knowledge, they are temporary. We require medicine; therefore there is Āyur Veda. We require sometimes to fight; there is Dhanur Veda. And... So that is also required. Because the body is there. But real requirement is to know the Absolute Truth, Absolute Person. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. That is our self-interest. That is our self-interest. If we want to become perfect, then we must see what is the ultimate Absolute Truth. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the instruction of Vedānta.

This life is meant for simply how to understand the Absolute Truth. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Jīvasya... But that is missing now. Nobody is inquiring, neither there is any institution throughout the whole world where there is tattva-jijñāsā, what is the Absolute Truth. Simply technical knowledge-how to become this, how to become that, to fill up this belly. But we cannot see even that the birds, beasts, they do not become technologists. How they are getting food? There are 8,400,000 forms of body. The human form of body are 400,000. Out of many bodies that live in jungle, they have also no technology, no education, no systematic government, nothing-but they are also eating. The birds and beasts are eating. Everyone is eating. The ants within your home, within the hole of your room, they're also eating. So who is not eating? Everyone is eating. Why you have made a civilization to work hard like an ass for your eating? What is this civilization? If everyone is, without working, they're getting their food, then what is your advancement of civilization that you have to work like an ass to get your food? That is not advancement of civilization. Therefore, because we are becoming animal, less than animal, therefore they are decreasing the personal God. This is the idea.

But here it is said, ya ādyo bhagavān. This is human civilization. Everyone should know what is Bhagavān and take lessons from Bhagavān. Bhagavān is coming. Kṛṣṇa says,

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



He comes. He's very anxious. People are ignorant, so therefore Kapiladeva has come. And the mother says, lokasya tamasā andhasya cakṣuḥ: "My dear son, Kapila, You are just the real eyes of these blind men, who cannot see You, or who cannot see God." Cakṣuḥ. So how cakṣuḥ? Because by knowledge. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. By knowledge, when we shall develop or awaken our dormant love for God, then we can see God-with these eyes. Simply it has to be treated. Premāñjana-cchurita. You have to apply the ointment, eye ointment, of loving God. Then you'll see God everywhere. How? Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. He sees twenty-four hours God and nothing but God. Not only within his heart, but everywhere he sees God. If he goes to the sea, he'll see Kṛṣṇa. If you are thoughtful, you'll see, "Why such a big sea does, cannot touch my feet? I am walking on the beach. There is order. There is order, 'You cannot come beyond this limit.' " Otherwise, it can overpower you at any moment. Is it very difficult for the sea. One wave can overpower you. A whole Bombay city can be washed off. But it cannot do so.



So an intelligent man can see God even while walking on the beach. That requires intelligence. Therefore mūḍhāḥ. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Those who are asses, they cannot see God. Those who are intelligent, they can see God everywhere. Everywhere. God is present everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi. He is within this universe. He is within your heart. He is within everything, even within the atom. Why you cannot see God? And God says that "Try to see Me in this way. If you are so dull, then you try to see Me in this way." What? What is that easy way? Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: [Bg. 7.8] "I am the taste of the water." And Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the taste of the water." So have you not tasted the water? You are drinking water. Who has not tasted? Everyone has seen God. Why he says that "I do not see God"? Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ. "I am the sunshine." Who has not seen the sunshine? Everyone has seen the sunshine. Why he says that "I have not seen God"? First of all, try to see God, A-B-C-D; then you'll see the personal God. You'll see everywhere.

So then you will understand ya bhagavān. Ya bhagavān puṁsām īśvaraḥ. Bhagavān means Īśvara, controller. You are not independent. Everyone is dependent. Somebody is dependent of somebody, somebody... But you are dependent. Nobody can say, "I am independent." Even President Nixon, he's not independent. He was dragged down from the post. So you cannot say that "I am independent." That is a foolish proposal. You must always think that you are dependent. That is said, stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ, and there is said, te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ. Īśa-tan... We are bound up by the laws of nature, hands and legs, tightly, and you still think that you are independent? You don't care for God? This is the mūḍha. The mūḍha says like that. No intelligent man will say like that. So why it is so happened? The Devahūti says that tamasā andhasya, lokasya tamasā andhasya. Generally, all these people in this material world, lokasya, they are blind by the darkness of ignorance. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. Therefore Kapiladeva comes. When they become dark, when they become blind out of ignorance-"There is no God," "I cannot see God"-then God comes, "Here I am. See. See My feature. I am a person. I am a flute-player. I am... I enjoy in Vṛndāvana. Why don't you see Me?" That is called yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7].

So God comes, God explains Himself. He leaves behind Him His instruction, Bhagavad-gītā. Still... He says, "You try to see Me like this, see Me like that," raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi... [Bg. 7.8]. Still, if we do not know what is God, then what kind of man I am? Just imagine. A mūḍha. That's all. So try to see God through the instructions of Devahūti and Kapiladeva. Your life will be successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



741110SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.10

-

Bombay, November 10, 1974



Prabhupāda:



atha me deva sammoham

apākraṣṭuṁ tvam arhasi

yo 'vagraho 'haṁ mametīty

etasmin yojitas tvayā

[SB 3.25.10]



So Devahūti is accepting or accepted her son Kapiladeva as guru, and now she is placing the problem and how to solve it. So to go to guru means to solve the material problem. Not temporary problem, "I have got some disease. Give me some mantra so that I may cure," or "I am in poverty. Give me some mantra where I can get money." Not like that. "To deliver me from the sammoha, illusion, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]."



This material life is sammoha, ahaṁ mameti. Atha... The material life begins: puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam. This material life is described in four lines. What is this material life? Now, puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam. Etam, this material life, is nothing but an attraction of sex. Puṁsaḥ striyā. The man is after woman, and woman is after man. This is material life, beginning. Everywhere, not only human society. Even in bird society, dog society, cat society, or demigods' society-everywhere you'll see the sex attraction. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ. And... They are seeking, and as soon as they are joined together to satisfy the sex desire, their the, I mean to say, attraction becomes more and more tight. Then ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. So as soon as they are combined, they require one house or apartment or cottage or nest. Something must be private. Ataḥ gṛha-kṣetra. Then to work, to earn livelihood, one must have some land. Either you construct skyscraper building or till it for get some food grain. Ataḥ gṛha-kṣetra, suta. Then without children, married life is frustrated. Putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam. Married life without children is void. Avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyam. If one is not educated, his life is vacate, or vacant. Avidyaṁ jīvanaṁ śūnyaṁ diśaḥ śūnyā abāndhavāḥ. And if you go to some foreign country, if there is no deva, temple, God's temple, or friend, that is also useless. And putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam. And if you have no children, the so-called married life is also void. And sarva-śūnyā daridratā. And if you are poor, in poverty, then everything is zero. Even if you have got a wife, or even if you have got education, even you have got friend, everything is... That is Cāṇakya Paṇḍita's advice.

So this family life is attraction. Gṛha-kṣetra, then suta, children. Then āpta, relatives. In this way, janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], he becomes entangled in this material life. But that is moha. That is not fact. It is moha in this sense because we have to change this body. In this body I have created something, gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ, and at the time of death, as Kṛṣṇa says, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham. Kṛṣṇa takes away everything as death. Your gṛha, your house, your land, your wife, your children, your friend, your reputation-everything is taken away. And then you have to begin another life. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. You are not dead. You are living eternally. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This body is finished, you have to accept another body. And that you do not know what kind of body you'll get. There are so many bodies. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati: 8,400,000 forms of body. So you have to enter some of the, some of them, one of them. So in this way our life is going on. But temporarily, if we are situated in a position, "This is my wife, this is my children, this is my house, this is my country, this is my nation, this is my, mine..." Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This illusion. You'll not be allowed to stay in these circumstances of ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. That's a fact. Everything will be taken away, but we are attached to this. This is material life.

Therefore Devahūti proposes, "Sir,..." Yaḥ avagrahaḥ. This false conception of life, ahaṁ mameti... [SB 5.5.8]. "I am American,""I am Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian..." Or "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya..." This avagraha... It is called upādhi, designation: "For the time being." Just like you become minister for five years or three years. Or president. Just like Nixon was president; now he's not president. So this is an upādhi. You are Indian, American, this, that-they are all upādhis. Therefore if we are attached, if we are attached to the upādhi, that is called avagraha. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. And according to the upādhi, I become attached to "me" and "mine"-"I am this," "I am that," and "It is mine, it is..." But actually, they are all illusion. Fact it is. If you suppose... Just like the president was five years very powerful. Now he's dragged down. Then what is the value? What is the value? So it may be for five years or fifty years or utmost hundred years. Or a million years. Just like Brahmā. But they are all temporary. In the eternal time, five years or ten years or hundred years or five million years, they are all limited. They are not eternal. But we are eternal. We living entities, we are eternal. So why we should be illusioned by the noneternal?

That is called illusion. That is called jñāna, that "I learn from Bhagavad-gītā that 'I am eternal. There is no birth and there is no death.' Na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit. Kadācit, at any time. Not that it has begun now. No. Never we are born. Na hanyate hanyamāne... [Bg. 2.20]. So this is the fact. So why I shall be interested in something noneternal?" This is called knowledge. If I am eternal and my position is to enjoy life... Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). By nature, I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1], and Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. So qualitatively I am also sac-cid-ānanda. So why I am enjoying this temporary life for ten years or twenty years or two hundred years? This is called knowledge. Etaj jñānam. Other jñānam, they are not jñānam. I have said many times. They are arts, śilpa, to live for some time and make some artistic way of living condition and forget my real problem-janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. So for this purpose one should approach guru. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. One who is actually interested for spiritual life, he should inquire about a guru. Not as a fashion, that "I may... Let me keep one guru and..." No. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Just like Devahūti is doing. Uttamam, something beyond this darkness. Tama means darkness, and ut means above. Uttama. That is uttama. So one who is interested... Uttama life means the spiritual life. Tama life means this material life. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. If you can transcend this darkness, the world of darkness, and if you come to the world of light, that is required.

So Devahūti, in the previous verse, accepted her son, Kapiladeva: puṁsām īśvaro vai bhavān kila lokasya tamasāndhasya..., lokasya tamasāndhasya

cakṣuḥ sūrya ivoditaḥ. "You are just like the sun. Sun, when the morning the sun is arisen, then all darkness immediately gone. Similarly, You have arisen..." God, Kṛṣṇa, or His incarnation, when They come, the darkness of this material world, illusion, is dissipated. Just like Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, came, the darkness, illusion, Arjuna's illusion, was counteracted. He was also thinking ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. "Why shall I fight with my relatives, the other side?" So this was darkness, aham mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Because either you maintain or..., or you love this illusory position, that is sammoham. This very word is used here: atha me deva sammoham apākraṣṭuṁ tvam arhasi. Sammoha. Samyag-rūpeṇa moham. Sammoha. The, the material life, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], we have created some situation, "my" and "mine," all this is false, illusion. "Although it is false, we are so much attached to it. So You require to dissipate that." Apākraṣṭum. This misconception.

That is the business of guru.

ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



This is guru. Guru's business is that we are in the darkness of this illusion, "my" and "mine." The whole world is going on. They fight between nation and nation, between society and society, community and community, brother and brother, father and mother, or so many... Simply this ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. "This much mine. Why (they) are interfering in my business? There must be fight." This illusion is going on. But we do not belong to any one of them. It is temporary. Just like in a railway compartment, if there is some crowd, somebody fights, "Why... Why... Why you have pushed me? Why you have taken my seat?" And there is very big fight. And somebody tolerates that "I shall sit here for two hours or for three hours. Why shall I fight?" This is one mentality. And another mentality is that he knows that for the two hours or three hours or some other hours he'll remain in that compartment, but there is fight, because ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. But two hours' seat, he's thinking, "It is my permanent seat. Why you should intrude upon my seat?"



This is going on. Nobody will be allowed to stay here in this material world. He will have to change the body, his position. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. And so long you'll remain here, you'll have to fight, struggle for existence. This is material life. And at the same time, if you make compromise, that "Never mind, it is full of miseries. I shall stay here," no, you cannot be allowed. You'll be kicked out. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. This is the material world. So... And we have got very much attachment for this material world. We cannot... Therefore according to Vedic system there is compulsory renunciation. "Get out, please, immediately." Pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. "You are now past fifty years. That's all right. You have falsely fought in this material world, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Now stop this business. Come out." This is Vedic civilization. As soon as you are fifty years, you may... Just like children, they play on the beach, making sand house and so on. Now, the father, when the time is up: "Now, my dear children, stop this business. Come out. Come here, home." So we have to do that.

So this is the business of guru, to teach the student detachment, that "This world is not your place. Your place is Vaikuṇṭhaloka." Kṛṣṇa comes for this purpose. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. This is dharmasya glāniḥ. When we become too much attached with this material world, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ. What is dharma? Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means the order of the Supreme Person. That is dharma. The order of the Supreme Person is, I mean to say, open to everyone. Nobody can say that "I do not know what is the order of the Supreme." "I do not carry out," that is another thing. But the order of the Supreme is there. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Just become My devotee. Always think of Me." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī: "You worship Me. You haven't got to worship anyone else." Mām ekam. The order is open. But we'll not do it. That is another thing. We'll not accept. But still, Kṛṣṇa comes. When this dharma is disobeyed, Kṛṣṇa comes. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna that "Because you are My friend, I am just talking to You the most confidential dharma. Because I have spoken to you in so many ways, but because you are My intimate friend, so I am talking to you now the most essential part of dharma." What is that? "Now, whatever I have said, you can give up." Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. "I have explained to you about so many yoga systems, but this is the real yoga system: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Bas."

So this dharma is taught by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His incarnations, by His devotee, by saintly persons. This is real dharma. But we do not take it. That is another thing. But if we take it, then we become benefited. So here it is said, "You are my spiritual master, although You are my son. But I accepted You as my spiritual master. I know You can deliver me from this darkness of ignorance." So atha deva sammoham apākraṣṭum: "I am attached to this material world. That is illusion." Sammoham apākraṣṭum: "Now You dissipate this sammoham." So guru means repeatedly his business is to enlighten the disciple how to become detached to this material world. Simply detachment will not help you. The other philosophy, Śūnyavādi, that you make zero this material detachment... No. That is not possible. We have got... Because we are ānandamaya, we want ānanda, sac-cid-ānanda. Actually, we are searching after eternal life, sat. That is sat, eternal life. And cit means knowledge. And ānanda... Sac-cid-ānanda. We are seeking that. Partially, if we simply understand eternity, that will not help us. We must have blissful knowledge. So the Māyāvādīs, those who are impersonalists, they want to make these material varieties of life zero. Because they are very much disgusted with this material life. So jagan mithyā. They say, "This is mithyā. This is false."

But we say that it is not mithyā. It is... Mithyā means false. It is not false. It is truth, but you are using it in a false way. That is our philosophy. This is the expansion of energy of Kṛṣṇa. So this energy, you are not utilizing for Kṛṣṇa, but you are utilizing the energy for your sense gratification. That is mistake. But otherwise, how it can be false? It is not false. It is creation of God. Mama... Kṛṣṇa says, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhiḥ, bhinnā prakṛtir me aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. Me. It is Kṛṣṇa's energy. How Kṛṣṇa's energy can be false? If Kṛṣṇa is truth, Kṛṣṇa's energy is also truth. But it may... Just like the cloud. You cannot say the cloud is false. Cloud is fact, although it is temporary. The cloud does not remain in the sky permanently; it appears and again disappears. But when it appears there is rain, there is reaction of the rain, vegetation on the ground, on the field. How you can say it is false? But it is temporary. That is actual philosophy.

So this material world is not false, as the Māyāvādī philosopher says. Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. Jagat is not mithyā. It is fact, but we are using it in the way for our sense gratification. That is false. But the material world is not false. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is just to teach people how to use it properly. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Just like we are using this microphone. It is not false, but we are utilizing it for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And if you use it for something else, for some political propaganda or some other propaganda, then it is false. But if you use it for propagating Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is not false. Therefore the conclusion is the microphone is not false. Its use is false. So if you properly use, that is wanted. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is for that purpose. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Everything Kṛṣṇa's. Everything of the Supreme Personality, belonging to Him. Actually, that is the fact. So if we misuse it for our purpose or for our sense gratification, that is false.

So here Devahūti is requesting Bhagavān Kapiladeva that "I am in this illusion, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], by false conception of life. Kindly You dissipate this illusion because You are my guru." Yaḥ avagrahaḥ ahaṁ mameti iti etasmin yojitas tvayā: "You can say that 'How I am engaged in these material activities...' " That is also, the chance is given, the opportunity is given by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. He says, ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. If you want Kṛṣṇa to give you material advantages, He'll give you. Take it. And if you want from Kṛṣṇa again revival of your spiritual life, then He will give you. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, ye yathā māṁ prapadyante. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. Just like a kind father, he says sometimes, "My dear boy, you don't do this." But if the boy, if the son persists, "All right, you can do it at your risk." This is going on. This is going on.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



Māyā means when we forget Kṛṣṇa and we want to enjoy this material world to the best capacity, means as far as we can do with our senses, Kṛṣṇa gives us opportunity. Kṛṣṇa gives us opportunity, and therefore so many varieties of life. If somebody wants to eat without any discrimination anything... There are many persons, even in the so-called civilized world, they eat anything and everything. But that is misuse of life. Human life is meant for eating Kṛṣṇa's prasādam, not anything and everything. That is not human life. Human life is meant for eating... Yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ.



Because this material life is all sinful life. Because everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and we are possessing things for my satisfaction. This is sinful. Criminal. Suppose if your property I use for my sense gratification, it is criminal. Similarly, everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the proprietor." So if you don't acknowledge that, if you use this world for your sense gratification, then you are criminal. Therefore it is said that you offer yajña, offer to Kṛṣṇa. Then you take it. Yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ. You bring things... You have to eat. That's a fact. Kṛṣṇa is giving you opportunity of eating nice things: food grains, fruits, flowers, milk, so many things. So you prepare, offer to Kṛṣṇa. That is called yajña. Yajña means satisfaction of the Supreme Person. That is called yajña. So yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. If you do not work for performing yajña, then you are becoming entangled. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ. And if you perform yajña and then you enjoy... Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthāḥ [Īśo mantra 1]. We require our, I mean to say, maintenance of life and soul. That is, that is a fact. But tena tyaktena bhuñjīthāḥ. You enjoy everything which is given to you as prasādam, as remnants, as mercy. This is Vaiṣṇava life. Vaiṣṇava life means they do not... What is this temple? The temple is they are being trained up how to accept the remnants of foodstuff of Kṛṣṇa. We don't cook for ourself. If we cook for ourself, then, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, it is said, ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt, bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpāḥ [Bg. 3.13]. They are simply eating sinful things.

And people are doing that. They do not offer to Kṛṣṇa, and they eat whatever they like. The result is that you have misused this opportunity of human life, to understand Kṛṣṇa and go back to home, back to Godhead, so that you'll be happy eternally. You'll be freed from this entanglement of bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. You enjoy one duration of life; again you have to give it up. Then you accept another duration of life. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate. This human life is meant for getting rid of this business, taking birth and dying, taking birth and dying. This is meant. This is... This opportunity's given, but if you do not use it properly, you use it as cats and dogs and hogs, then the..., by nature's law, you will get the body next life cats and dogs and hogs. You eat even stool. Because you had no discrimination in eating, the "All right, you can now eat..." the pig's body, hog's body you get, and eat even up to stool. That opportunity is given. And you have sex life with your mother and sister. You see hog's life. They have no sex discrimination. They do not discriminate, "It is..., she is my mother," or "She is my sister." No. So this is hog's life. Therefore śāstra says that "Don't be foolish to lead a life like hogs." Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. The material civilization should not be like that. What is that? Now, simply for sense gratification. Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān. That sense gratification is also not very easy. People are working so hard. They are stealing even, risking life. So many things they are... This is not very easygoing life. Kaṣṭān kāmān. Everything is studied by śāstra. Arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye. This kind of life is meant for the hogs.

So human life is not meant for like that. Human life is meant for tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam, śuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. You have to purify your existence. Now our existence is not purified. We get this contaminated body and change it; again another contaminated body, another... Just like one man is suffering from disease: one contamination, then another contamination, another... This is not life. You purify yourself. And that purification begins when you accept the life of austerities, tapaḥ, tapasya. Tapasya means voluntarily accepting some... This is not inconvenience. Just like in our society it is enjoined, the students, they should voluntarily accept the principle: no illicit sex life, no meat-eating, no fish-eating, no, nothing of the sort, no intoxication, and no gambling. This is tapasya. Especially for these European and American students, they are, from the beginning of their life, they are accustomed to these habits. But they have voluntarily given up on my word. And that is guru's business. So to purify so that he may be saved from this illusion-he must be purified-so this little inconvenience for higher happiness, that is desired, that is required.

Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvaṁ yasmād brahma-saukhyam anantam [SB 5.5.1]. Anantam. You are after happiness, but you do not know how to enjoy happiness. That you do not know. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. Atīndriya. Not these false senses. We want sense enjoyment, but not these covered senses. We are spiritual. We have got spiritual body. That body is now covered with this material garment; therefore it is covered. The senses are covered. With covered senses, you cannot enjoy actually. The senses must be open. That means you can enjoy life when your senses are open, not covered by this material body. That is recommended. One who is interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness... It is said, sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Nirmalam means purified. You have to become purified. And sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam. Now we are in, covered, by this material body, means I am covered by so many designations: "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim." These are all coverings, material. So we have to get free, freedom from this covering. You should not think that "I am American" or "Indian" or this or that. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. When you understand simply that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa," that is sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], nirmalam. And with that conception of life, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate. Hṛṣīkeṇa means when your senses are now clean, without any covering, then with that senses, when you try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam... [Cc. Madhya 19.170].

Kṛṣṇa's name is another, Hṛṣīkeśa. Senayor ubhayor madhye hṛṣīkeśa sthāpaya me acyuta. The Hṛṣīkeśa name is there. Hṛṣīkeśa means actually Kṛṣṇa is the master of the senses. We are not proprietor of the senses. Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor of the senses. So when our senses are purified and we apply them... After all, our senses are employed for satisfaction of somebody, myself or somebody else. Actually, somebody else. That is kāma, krodha, lobha, moha, mātsarya. That is illusion. We are not serving ourself; we are serving our lusty desires, kāma, krodha. I am angry; therefore I am killing somebody. So that is not mine. But I am servant of the anger. I am servant; I am not master. If I would have been master, then I could control my anger. But I am not. I am servant of anger. I am servant of lusty desires. So I am servant, but this servitude should be transferred to Kṛṣṇa. That is perfection of life.

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



That is bhakti. And if you sta..., if you are situated in that transcendental position, bhakti, then you can understand Kṛṣṇa. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Not by so-called speculation. No. That is not possible. Otherwise Kṛṣṇa would have said, "By jñāna, by yoga, by karma, one could understand Me." Kṛṣṇa says "No" clearly. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know Kṛṣṇa as He is, then you have to accept this process of bhakti, and that bhakti means sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. You should not consider yourself...



So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is actually, factually the movement for unity of the whole world. And that is actually beginning. It is actually being happened. All classes of men, from all groups of men, all religious societies or nation, they are joining this movement. They are joining. Actually there is the possibility. The United Nations could not unite the nations, but if you push on this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, all people of different dimensions, of different nations, different religions, they will join. That is required.

So otherwise, we are in the moha, illusion. So it is the business of guru to dissipate this illusion, darkness, and enlighten the student to the real life.

ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



He is guru.



Thank you very much. (end)



741111SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.11

-

Bombay, November 11, 1974



Nitāi: "Devahūti continued: I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet because You are the only person of whom to take shelter. You are the ax which can cut the tree of material existence. I therefore offer my obeisances unto You, who are the greatest of all transcendentalists, and I inquire from You as to the relationship between man and woman and between spirit and matter."



Prabhupāda:



taṁ tvā gatāhaṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ kuṭhāram

jijñāsayāhaṁ prakṛteḥ pūruṣasya

namāmi sad-dharma-vidāṁ variṣṭham

[SB 3.25.11]



So Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the real shelter, śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam. We are seeking shelter, everyone, because we are servant constitutionally. Originally, we are servant of God. So that is our nature, to take shelter. Everyone is seeking a nice shelter. Somebody's seeking some occupation, service of some big man. Somebody's seeking oc..., servitorship of the government, government servant. But the ultimate shelter is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



Here Kṛṣṇa's incarnation, Kapiladeva... Kapiladeva is also Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's incarnation and Kṛṣṇa, they are all the same. Svāṁśa, vibhinnāṁśa. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Kṛṣṇa has got ananta, unlimited forms, unlimited incarnations. It is said in the Bhāgavatam the incarnations are expanding or going on exactly like the waves in the sea or in the river. You cannot count. So many incarnations, and all of them are Kṛṣṇa. Therefore in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Just like Kṛṣṇa as arcā-vigraha, Deity worship in the temple... Now, in India there are many thousands of temples. Now outside of India we are increasing not many thousands, but many hundreds. So Kṛṣṇa is expanding. All these Kṛṣṇas, They are not different; They are one. Advaita. Kṛṣṇa in the Vaikuṇṭha and Kṛṣṇa in this temple, They are not different. Advaita. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta. Although ananta, They are not different. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37].

Kṛṣṇa is staying in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am residing in everyone's heart." He is witness. Upadraṣṭā anumantā. Upadraṣṭā. He is seeing all our activities. We cannot hide anything. Therefore we get the resultant action of our karma. Because the witness is Kṛṣṇa Himself within your heart, how you can avoid? Upadraṣṭā, anumantā. And without Kṛṣṇa's permission, you cannot do anything. So why Kṛṣṇa gives permission to do something wrong? Because we want to do it. We persist. Kṛṣṇa does not say that you do anything else than to "Surrender to Me." He says only these things, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam... [Bg. 18.66]. But we want to do something else. But anything else, you cannot do without Kṛṣṇa's permission. Exactly like the child. The child persists to do something, but still wants to take permission from the mother: "Mother, I want this. I want to do this. I want to do this." Mother sometimes says, "No, no, you don't do this." But when he persists, "All right, you do it." It is like that. We are... Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca. I wanted to do something, and Kṛṣṇa sanctions, and we do. But we do it at our own risk. Kṛṣṇa is not responsible. But without sanction of Kṛṣṇa you cannot do anything. That is a fact.

So here it is said, sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ. Actually, we are constitutionally servant of Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, ayi nanda-tanuja patitaṁ kiṅkaraṁ māṁ bhavāmbudhau. Ayi nanda-tanuja patitaṁ kiṅkaraṁ māṁ bhavāmbudhau. What is the...?

Yaśomatī-nandana: Viṣame bhavāmbudhau.



Prabhupāda: Ah! Viṣame bhavāmbudhau. That is our position. Actually we are servant of God, servant of Kṛṣṇa. We are servant in every... Even though we declare independence, we are not independent. We are servant. That is a false declaration, that "We are independent." No. There cannot be independence. Therefore this is self-realization. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya

[Cc. Antya 20.32, Śikṣāṣṭaka 5]



"My dear Lord, Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja..." Patitaṁ kiṅkaraṁ mām: "I am Your eternal servant, kiṅkara." Kiṅkara means servant. "Now, somehow or other, I am fallen in this ocean of nescience, saṁsāra." Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **. Unless one has got the knowledge what is this position, where we are staying, we cannot understand. That is called moha. We have discussed this. Illusion. We are under illusion. So Devahūti says, sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ kuṭhāram. In the Bhagavad-gītā the tree is described, aśvattha tree. So aśvattha, as we have got experience, the banyan tree, the root is very strong, very strong. So it is also compared, this material world is compared with the aśvattha tree, banyan tree. Very strong root. So... But any tree can be cut with an ax, kuṭhāram. So that kuṭhāram, if we take shelter at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, that is the real kuṭhāram, or ax, to cut the strong root of material existence. Sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ kuṭhāram. Taṁ tvā gatāhaṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam. Gato mukundaṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam.



There is another similar verse that... Because we have given up the servitorship of Kṛṣṇa, we are servant of so many other things. We are obliged to serve, ṛṇī. Ṛṇī means debtor. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41]. We are debtor to so many persons. We are debtor to the demigods. Just like the sun is demigod. He's giving you heat and light. You are not paying any bill, but you are ad..., taking the advantage of the sunlight and sun heat. Now, if you take the advantage of electric light and heat, you have to pay bill. But here we don't pay bill. That means we are becoming debtor. If we don't pay bill anywhere, then we become debtor. So we are debtor to so many demigods. The sun is supplying heat and light. The king of heaven, Indra, he is supplying water. These rascals, they say it is coming by nature. It may come from nature, but nature is controlled. Just like we are getting water. If somebody says, "Oh, what is that? It is coming from the water tank. So where is the question of paying taxes or rent?" No. The water tank is being filled up by the Municipality. If you don't pay tax, it will be cut off. Similarly, don't think that the water is coming as your father's property. No. You are becoming debtor. You are becoming debtor. Therefore, if you don't pay debts, if you don't perform sacrifices, then there will be scarcity of water. And one day it will come there will be no water. That you expect. Because you are not paying any tax. You are thinking, "Water is coming, my father's property." No. Your father's property... That's all right. But you are not father's son at the present moment. You are māyā's son. You don't care for your father.

Therefore father said, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Kṛṣṇa says, the supreme father, ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]. He's the supreme father. You don't care for father. Therefore... The nature is working under the direction of the supreme father. That's a fact. So if you do not care for your father, then the result will be nature will reduce supply. Reduce supply. Nature will not allow to the demons to flourish. No. That is not allowed. Tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān kṣipāmy ajasram andha-yoniṣu [Bg. 16.19]. The demons are always liable to be punished. Some big, big demons like Rāvaṇa, Hiraṇyakaśipu, the Lord personally comes to punish them. Otherwise, the ordinary demons, they are punished by the laws of nature. Kṛṣṇa does not require to come to punish these petty demons. But when there is big, big demons like Rāvaṇa, like Hiraṇyakaśipu, like Kaṁsa, then Kṛṣṇa, or Lord Rāmacandra, They come to punish them.

Therefore we have to follow the rules and regulation. That is called sad-dharma. Dharma means the laws given by God. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Bhagavat-praṇītam. It is given by Bhagavān, the laws. That laws, laws means they are written in books. Because... Just like Manu-saṁhitā. There are many other books, Vedic literature, what is dharma. But real dharma is... Just like law means to obey Kṛṣṇa, or God. Kṛṣṇa means God. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. So dharma means if one does not care for Kṛṣṇa, or God, that is not religion. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat... [SB 6.3.19]. You cannot make your law at home. Law means the law given by the government. Similarly, dharma means the orders given by God. That is dharma. You cannot manufacture, that "We have manufactured this dharma." That is not dharma. That is, in the Bhāgavata, is called cheating. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavaḥ atra: "The so-called dharmas, which are cheating the public in the name of dharma, such kind of dharma is kicked out from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." Dharmaḥ projjhita. Projjhita means prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa ujjhita. Just like you sweep over the floor and the dust throw away. Similarly, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the real dharma is there. Real dharma. Dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90], this is ordinary dharma. Real dharma is, as Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is real dharma. And all other dharmas, so-called dharmas, they are simply cheating. Because that will not benefit anybody, the followers or the dictators. So real dharma is... And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins from there. if you accept the principles of Bhagavad-gītā, that is the preliminary study, A-B-C-D of dharma, and if you accept this principle, that to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam...

But this sense comes after many, many births. Not very easily. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births struggling, when one comes to real perfection of knowledge, he surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. Why? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. Because at that time he understands perfectly that Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is everything. This is Bhagavad-gītā lesson. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca prakṛtir bhinnā me aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām, jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā... Everything is Kṛṣṇa's energy. Everything is Kṛṣṇa's energy. Sarvedam akhilaṁ jagat. Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ. Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ. Whatever we are seeing, that is exhibition or manifestation of two energies. Just like the sun has got two energies, heat and light. Everyone knows. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa has got many energies.

So out of many energies, three energies have been taken into account. One is the external energy, another the internal energy, and the other is the marginal energy. The external energy is this material world, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca. This is material world. And internal energy is the spiritual world. And marginal energy-we, the living entities. Marginal means we may remain in this material world or we may remain in the spiritual world, living entities. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā there are two kinds of living entities who are living in this material... Kṣara, they have fallen down. Fallen down in this... And attracted in this tree of saṁsāra, banyan tree. This is described in the Fifteenth Chapter of... So asaṅga-kuṭhāreṇa. We have to disassociate with this tree. Asaṅga-kuṭhāreṇa. By detachment. To cut this tree, it is very difficult. But we have to become detached. Detached means... There is a Bengali proverb: dhari mach nacoi pane.(?) Means that "I'll catch the fish but will not touch the water." That is, that intelligence required. You see in the beach... Here we do not see many, many. But in America we see on the beach, old men. They have got no business. They simply waste their time catching fish. Yes. But they are not very interested in this way, nacoi pane.(?) They also touch water also.

So we have go live in this material world in such a way that we shall do everything for Kṛṣṇa, but we'll have no attachment for this material world. We may have big, big buildings, big, big temples, but we should not be attached to this. But for Kṛṣṇa's sake we must have. Because it is Kṛṣṇa's property. That is our mission. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. We have to teach people that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Why you are occupying it unnecessarily?" Stena eva sa ucyate [Bg. 3.12]. "You are thief. Why you are claiming Kṛṣṇa's property, 'This is my land, America,' 'This is my land, India,' 'This is my land, Pakistan'?" It is not your land; it is Kṛṣṇa's land. You are imagining, "This is my land." You come here for, say, twenty years, twenty-five years, fifty years, and fight between yourselves, "This is my Pakistan," "This is my Bhāratavarṣa," and fight. And when you die you do not claim either Pakistani or Indian or American or European. You flat, fall flat. That's all. And then taken away this body and thrown. That's all.

This is called māyā, moha, illusion. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. We have discussed this verse. This is illusion. Nothing belongs to us, but unnecessarily we are claiming, "This is my land," "This is my country," "This is my home," "This is my family," "This is my, my, my..." Mama. This is illusion. And in this way we are attached to this tree, saṁsāra-taroḥ, from one branch to another. Now I am Indian. I may be American next life, or I may be something else. I may be a cat, I may be a dog, or I may be something else. I may be a cat, I may be a dog, or I may be a demigod. That will depend on my work. But after death, you are completely under the grip of this material nature. Your dictation will not be that "Make me like this, make me again Indian," or "Again, again make me the nationalist of this country or that country." No. After death, everything is finished. You are no more nationalist or this proprietor or head or this nothing. But this is going on. So long we are in a position, falsely we are thinking and we are attached and we are suffering. This is the disease.

Therefore she prays that sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ kuṭhāram. If we transfer our attachment to Kṛṣṇa, then we can understand that vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. It is not my land, not your land. It is all Vāsudeva's property. That knowledge comes. When comes? Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. But we are giving that knowledge immediately. The knowledge which you are expecting after many thousands of births, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving you immediately. If you are intelligent man, you should take it, take advantage of it. We are preaching that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Everything should be utilized for Kṛṣṇa's purpose, Kṛṣṇa's benefit. He is the beneficiary. Then everything is all right." If one comes to this knowledge-vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti... [Bg. 7.19], īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]-sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ, then immediately you become the greatest mahātmā. Mahātmā does not mean simply having a big beard and some dress, saffron dress. No. This knowledge, that nothing belongs to...

bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

[Bg. 5.29]



This is the formula. "I am the bhoktā." The all best foodstuff should be offered to Kṛṣṇa. That is arcana-vidhi. First-class foodstuff, all sandeśa, rasagullā, kacuri and... Best, best foodstuff. Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, of course... If you haven't got very nice foodstuff, Kṛṣṇa can be also offered also whatever you have got. "Whatever" means not anything beyond the jurisdiction: patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. You can give Him little fruit, little flower, little leaf, little water. That you can collect without any price; anywhere it is available. Anyone's garden you can go, and if you say, "My dear sir, I'll take a little flower and leaf for Kṛṣṇa," nobody will ask you, "No, don't take." "Take it." Still, at least in India. In also, USA also. So that you can collect. If you haven't got to offer... But offer something to Kṛṣṇa. That is required. Bhaktyā.



That is bhakti. That offering is not required... But Kṛṣṇa is not hungry, that He's asking from you little fruit, little flower, little... He is feeding... Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. He is supplying all the necessities of everyone. So why He's begging from you? Because He wants that you love Him. That is Kṛṣṇa's want. You are suffering in this material world, you are entangled in this tree from one branch to another, rotating and suffering. So Kṛṣṇa wants that you do not suffer. You give up this business of jumping like monkey from this branch to that branch, but come to Him and surrender to Him. Śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam. When this knowledge comes, that is perfect knowledge. Gato mukundaṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ parihṛtya kartam.

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṛṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

[SB 11.5.41]



If... This is required. Kṛṣṇa also says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. But if you take shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then you are no more debtor to anyone. You are no more debtor. Nāyam ṛṇī na kiṅkaraḥ.



So this is the solution. Otherwise, you are debtor to so many persons: devatā, ṛṣi, devarṣi, bhūta, all living entities, āpta, friends, relative, and general people, pitṝṇām, the family in which you are born. Now nation also. That is nṛṇām, āpta, national. So you are debtor to so many persons, but if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa says,... You may think that "If I surrender to Kṛṣṇa and give up all our duties, then I may remain debtor and I will have to suffer." No. Kṛṣṇa gives you assurance, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ. "I'll give you relief." That is wanted. Therefore Devahūti takes shelter of Kapiladeva. And she says that "You are the kuṭhāram, You are the ax to make me detached." Just like the tree, when it is cut into two pieces, they become detached. Similarly, if our attachment is cut into pieces, two pieces, then the other portion becomes free from this material attachment.

Therefore this, to develop this detachment... Bhakti, bhakti-yoga, or the path of bhakti, means detachment. Bhakti, they are... That is vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Bhakti-yogam means vairāgya-vidyā, the learning in the science of detachment. That is bhakti-yoga. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam. This verse was composed by Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. When he understood Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he composed one hundred verses. He was a very learned logician of India, Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. So some of the verses are available. Because when the verses were offered to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He torn it and... Because He was a sannyāsī. That was His another vairāgya. Anyway... So this verse is that "You are, Sir, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, You are the same Kṛṣṇa. You formerly came to teach people this vairāgya." Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. This parityajya means vairāgya. "Don't care for all this material world. Surrender unto Me." This is vairāgya. Jñāna and vairāgya. Vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ [SB 1.2.7]. Bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ. If you apply bhakti-yoga to Vāsudeva-vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]-on this platform, then janayaty āśu vairāgyam. Āśu, "very soon." This is the sign of bhakti-yoga. Janayaty āśu. If a person is advancing in bhakti-yoga, the result will be that he is detached from material attraction. That is the sign.

Just like these European, American boys. They are born to enjoy material happiness. They are, in their country, the affluence of material happiness, money and women, they are thrown in the street. You pick up as much as you like. But they are now vairāgya, because they are devotees of Vāsudeva. They have no more attachment. This is bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means vairāgya, detachment for material enjoyment. That is the sign. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. Not that "I am a big, big devotee, but I have got very great attachment for material enjoyment." That is not bhakti. This is the sign. If you have got bhakti, then you will have no attachment for material enjoyment. That is the test. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktiḥ. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is... Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā. Param means better, superior things; dṛṣṭvā, by seeing, these lower inferior things is rejected. That is... Two things cannot go on.

So because we cannot do it ourself, by our own endeavor, therefore we have to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. He will help. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. He'll help. Our only business is to take shelter. Therefore Devahūti says, gatāhaṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam. "You are the only shelter. Therefore I am taking shelter. And You can cut my attachment for this material life. And why You shall do it? Because I am Your eternal servant." Bhṛtya. Somehow or other... Anādi karama phale paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale, taribāre nā dekhi upāya. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, that "Somehow or other, I am fallen..." The same prayer as Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:

ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya

[Cc. Antya 20.32, Śikṣāṣṭaka 5]



Dhūlī-sadṛśam. Dhūlī means dust, and bhavāmbudhi is water. So if you are thrown into the water, you may be a very big swimmer, but it is a struggle. It is. There is no peace. Therefore in this material world, however expert you may be to deal with this material world, it is simply struggle. You cannot live here peacefully. That is not possible. Even you become nonviolent, if you don't harm anybody... In our country the ideal man was Mahatma Gandhi. Still, he was killed. Just see. This is material world. This is material world. He was doing harm to nobody, but he was killed. So bhavāmbudhi, in this material world, or ocean, you may be very expert in swimming, but that does not mean you'll be peaceful. That is not possible. But if you are taken away from the water even one inch, you'll find peace. Therefore the prayer is tava pāda-paṅkaja-sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśam. Just as from the water, if you are taken one inch up, then you become, you feel relieved, similarly, some way or other, if you become one of the particles of the dust of lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then you are liberated.



That is stated here: sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ kuṭhāram, jijñāsayāhaṁ prakṛteḥ pūruṣasya namāmi sad-dharma-vidāṁ variṣṭham. Sad-dharma. Not sad-dharma. Asato mā sad gama. So sad-dharma required. The, in this material world the so-called dharmas, this Hindu dharma, Muslim dharma and Christian dharma and Buddhist dharma and so many... They are not sad-dharma. They are asad-dharma. "Because I am born in the family of a Christian, I am Christian." "Because I am born in the family of Hindu, I am Hindu." And next time I may (be) born in the family of a dog. There is no dharma. So these are not sad-dharma. These are all asad-dharma, for the time being. Asad means "that will not stay." You are Hindu. How long you are Hindu? Say, fifty years. Or you are Indian. How long you are Indian? Say, fifty, sixty, hundred years. But again you have to become something else. That we do not know. We are working very hard, "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Indian," "I am American." These upādhi. But the upādhi may be changed next moment. At any moment. So what is your real dharma? This is temporary dharma for the body. What is your real dharma? Real dharma is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is sad-dharma. That is sad-dharma. That will continue eternally.

So sad-dharma... Here it is said, namāmi sad-dharma-vidāṁ variṣṭham: "There are many propounder of sad-dharma. But actually, You are the best of the propounders of the sad-dharma because You know the reality." And that is the actual reality. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... [Bg. 18.66]. That is sad-dharma. So the Gosvāmīs worked... Sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau. So these Gosvāmīs, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's direct disciples, they tried to establish sad-dharma, and we are trying to follow their footprints, footsteps, to establish real dharma all over the world. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)



741112SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.12

-

Bombay, November 12, 1974



Nitāi: "After hearing of His mother's uncontaminated desire for transcendental realization, the Lord thanked her within Himself for her questions, and thus, His face smiling, He explained the path of the transcendentalists who are interested in self-realization."



Prabhupāda:



iti sva-mātur niravadyam īpsitaṁ

niśamya puṁsām apavarga-vardhanam

dhiyābhinandyātmavatāṁ satāṁ gatir

babhāṣa īṣat-smita-śobhitānanaḥ

[SB 3.25.12]



So transcendentalists, those who are advanced in spiritual life, when they hear some questions from persons to understand about spiritual life, they become very happy. Those who are transcendentalists, they are not interested in these worldly talks. That is very disgusting to them. They avoid such company who talks nonsense about these worldly affairs. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised His disciples, grāmya-kathā nā kahibe. Grāmya-kathā. Grāmya means pertaining to the village, society, neighborhood. People are interested in talking this grāmya-kathā. Grāma, from grāma, grāmya. Just like the newspaper. This newspaper is full of grāmya-kathā. There is no spiritual understanding. The whole newspaper... Here we have got four, five, ten pages newspaper, and in USA they have got bunch, one load of newspaper-full of grāmya-kathā. There was an estimation that the New York Times required, to publish one day's publication, to kill so many trees. Because the paper is now in scarcity. Why? Because they're killing the trees and making this grāmya-kathā newspaper, bunch of. Useless. They are making profit.



Na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśaḥ. The devotees, Bhāgavata, they say, na yad vacaś citra-padam [SB 1.5.10]. Very nicely spoken, figuratively, metaphorically, ornamentally, citra-padam. Na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśaḥ pragṛṇīta karhicit. But there is no sense of kṛṣṇa-kathā. There are two kinds of kathās: grāmya-kathā and kṛṣṇa-kathā. So any literature which is very nicely presented from literary point of view, metaphorically, figuratively, but there is no glorification of the Supreme Lord... Na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo jagat-pavitraṁ pragṛṇīta karhicit, tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham uśanti mānasāḥ [SB 1.5.10]. That is like the place for pleasure of the crows. Even in the birds' society there are crows and there are swans. You'll find the crows are interested in a place where filthy things are thrown out. All nasty things are thrown out. The crows will come and they will enjoy there. By nature. But the swans will not come. The white swans, they'll require very nice, clear water, with lotus flower in a garden, and birds are chirping. They're interested there. Similarly, there are men crowslike, and there are men swanlike. That is nature's division.

So na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo jagat-pavitraṁ pragṛṇīta karhicit, tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham uśanti mānasāḥ [SB 1.5.10]. Mānasāḥ means those who live in the mānasa-sarovara. In Bombay I don't find any such place, but even in Western countries, especially in London, there are many nice parks, very clear water. And in America also. Wherever these Europeans have settled. In Sydney, Australia, there are many nice parks with water. Formerly, in India also, in old Dvārakā, Mathurā, the parks were there. Parks are necessary for cleansing the mind. So the fact is that as there are classes of birds which are called crows and there are classes of birds which are called swans, white swans... "Birds of the same feather flock together." That is an English proverb. The crows will mix with crows, and the swans will mix with swans. Therefore the devotees are swans, and the most advanced devotee is called haṁsa, paramahaṁsa. Paramahaṁsa. So those who are haṁsas, they are not interested in the matter for the crows. Therefore a haṁsa, a paramahaṁsa, when he hears a question from a person about transcendental, uttamam, śreya uttamam... Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. A person who is interested to enquire about the transcendental subject matter, kṛṣṇa-kathā, then the person who is questioned, he becomes very glad.

Therefore Kapiladeva, when she..., when He heard from His mother so many nice questions, "How to be delivered from this material bondage, envelopment?"... Sammoha.

atha me deva sammoham

apākraṣṭuṁ tvam arhasi

yo 'vagraho 'haṁ mametīty

etasmin yojitas tvayā



This verse we have discussed. "I have taken shelter unto You..." This is the process. The mother is not ordering the son. It doesn't matter whether he is son or somebody else. When one is interested in uttamam... Tasmād jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Śreya and preya, there are two things. Śreya and preya. Just like children, they like to play. That is called preya, preya. Very nice. But śreya means go to school and take education for future improvement of life. That is called śreya. So human being should be interested in śreya, not in preya. That is not human life. Preya means immediately gives me some sense pleasure: "Oh, it is very nice." No. That is human life. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. We require these things. We require to eat something for maintaining the body. But not that we shall be accustomed to eat very palatable things. No. That is not good. Bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe. Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised His disciples, "Never eat very palatable foodstuff. Never talk these village talks." Ordinary novel, literature, newspaper, He forbade. Fortunately, in our Society there is no newspaper. You may be surprised that "How is that, in modern age, especially these Europeans and Americans, they do not take any interest in newspaper?" In their country, if one does not get newspaper, it is horrible. It is horrible. Newspaper is so popular in the Western countries. There are so many newspapers. And each newspaper is publishing three, four times editions. But they are selling. But you'll find that these boys, these Americans boys who have come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they have kicked out newspaper. No more newspaper. Because there is no kṛṣṇa-kathā, they don't like to read it. This is called bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. This is the test. We do not know what is the happening daily. It is, it does not matter, newspaper. It is a waste of time. Better that time read some literature like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. You'll be benefited. Why you should waste the valuable time of your life?



So Kapiladeva was very glad. Iti sva-mātur niravadyam īpsitam. The mother, when He saw the mother is interested only for spiritual advancement... Niravadya. Niravadya... "I am contaminated." Avadya. Niravadya, īpsitaṁ niśamya, "after hearing the question..." What, what sort of question? Puṁsām apavarga-vardhanam. To answer to this question means "One who will hear these answers which I shall give, that is very, very congenial for liberation." Apavarga. This material world is called pavarga, and to nullify it is called apavarga. Pa and... Pavarga means pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. This is called pa-varga. In the letter arrangement, there is ka-varga, ca-varga, ṭa-varga, ta-varga... Five vargas. And pa-varga. The material life is called pa-varga. Pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. Pa means pariśrama, simply laboring. And so much labor, now, pha, there is phena, foam. You'll find in the horses; hard labor, there is foam. We have sometimes foam, dry throat. That is pha. Pa, pha, ba. Ba means, bha means bhaya, and ba means vyartha. Vyartha means futile. Why they are laboring so much? Big, big men, they have no time. Big, big businessmen... I have seen in New York, big, big businessman. No time even to eat. Simply eating a dry bread and cup of tea. But he is working very hard, day and night. Pa-varga, pha-varga, and ba-varga. Ba-varga means..., ba means vyarthatā. And bha means always fearful, bhaya. In this way, pa, pha, bha, and ma. Ma means maraṇa, mṛtyu. Finish. Pa to ma. Pa means beginning with pariśrama, and ma means mṛtyu. So this is material life, pavarga. So if you want to nullify this, that is called apavarga.

So here it is called apavarga-vardhanam, how to increase interest in liberation. People have become so dull, they do not understand what is the meaning of liberation. They do not understand. Just like animal. He... If an animal is informed that "There is liberation," what he will understand? He will not understand. It is not possible for him. Similarly, at the present moment, the human society has become exactly like animals. They do not know what is meaning of apavarga or liberation. They do not know. But time was there when people understood that this human life is meant for apavarga. Apavarga, to cease from the business of pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. That is called apavarga-vardhanam. So the questions made by Devahūti and the answers, which will be given by Kapiladeva, that is apavarga-vardhanam. That is wanted. This is the instruction of the whole Vedas. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. For apavarga everyone would try. Everyone should try his best. "And what about my maintenance?" To maintenance the śāstra never gives any stress, that "You try for maintenance." The śāstra says, "It will come. It is already there. It will come." But we have no such faith that "God is given..., giving food to the animals, to the birds, to the beasts, to the trees, everyone, and why He shall not give me? Let me engage my time for apavarga." They have no faith. They have no such education. Therefore good association required, not the crow's association, but swan's association. Then this sense comes.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means they are creating a society of swans, not of crows. Not of crows. The crows are not interested. They are interested in that left-out, I mean to say, garbage. They are interested. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām. Just like we throw away... After eating, we throw away the leaf. There are some remnants of foodstuff, and the crows come, the dogs comes. They are interested. They will not say... A sane man will not go there. But these crows and dogs will go there. So this world is like that. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Chewing the chewed. Just like you chew one sugarcane and throw it on the street. But if somebody comes again to chew it, then he's a fool. He must know "The juice has been taken away from that sugarcane. What shall I get by chewing?" But there are animals like that. They want to chew again. So our this material society means chewing the chewed. A father gives education to his son to earning livelihood, gets him married, and settles him, but he knows that "This kind of business, earning money and marrying, begetting children, I have done, but I am not satisfied. So why I am engaging my son in this business?" This is called chewing the chewed. Chewing the same thing. "I have not been satisfied with this business, but why I am engaging my son also?" The real father is he who does not allow his son to taste the chewing the chewed. That is real father. Pitā na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt, na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum. This is real contraceptive. A father, a man should not desire to become a father, a woman should not desire to become a mother, unless they are fit to save the children from the impending clutches of death. That is the duty of father and mother.

And how one can be saved? The saved means if the father and mother together gives education to the son about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he can be saved. The father-mother's duty is... The same, apavarga-vartmani. Apavarga-vartmani. To give education in such a way that no more pavarga. No more pariśrama, no more phena, no more bhaya, no more vyarthatā, no more maraṇa. That is called apavarga-vardhanam. This is here real human life-human society cultivating knowledge in such a way that apavarga-vardhanam, gradually we are going forward for liberation. That is human civilization. Otherwise it is cats and dogs civilization. The same thing. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Again eating, mating, sleeping... That's all. Fearing and dying. This is general process. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. Eating, sleeping and sex life, and defending, and dying. So this is... Under these regulations the dogs and cats are there. But the human life is meant for other purposes besides this. Of course, we have got this body. We have to maintain it. It is not that we should neglect... In our society we don't advise that you should neglect your body. But don't unnecessarily be engaged simply for maintaining the body.

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Janeṣv abhijñeṣu. Just like we are reading this literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. They are very abhijña. Kapiladeva... Devahūti is asking from Kapiladeva because He's abhijña, He knows very well how to liberate. So people who are not interested janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ... [SB 10.84.13]. The animals are not int... Here, in this temple, the human beings are expected to come here, not the animals. Cats and dogs, they cannot come here. So anyone who does not take advantage of the instruction of abhijñaḥ, they are simply cats and dogs. They are not human beings.



Here we have got, in India especially, so nice literature. Vedic literature. Essence of Vedic literature-Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam [SB 1.1.3]. It is recommended that nigama means Vedas. Nigama is compared with a tree. Nigama-kalpa-taru. Kalpa-taru means desire tree. From the Vedas you can take all kinds of education, knowledge. Therefore it is called kalpa-taru. So as of the tree there are fruits and ripened fruit... Just like mango tree. There are fruits, green mango and ripened mango. The ripened mango is very interesting. So Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the ripened mango of the desire tree of Vedic knowledge. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalaṁ śuka-mukhāt [SB 1.1.3]. And everyone knows that the, if the ripe fruit in the tree is tasted by the parrot, it becomes twice tasteful. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī, śuka-pakṣī. Śuka means parrot. He's speaking. Śuka-mukhād amṛta-drava-saṁyutam, pibata bhuvi bhāvukāḥ rasam ālayam. These are the recommendations. So people are not interested. It is a great regret, matter of regret, that in India, where these literatures are available, where the sages and saintly persons left for us such nice literature, vidyā-bhāgavatāvadhi, the limit of all education, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, they are not interested. They are interested in some other, Marx literatures, Karl Marx literature, not Bhāgavatam. This is the India's misfortune.

So anyway, if somebody's interested, it is his fortune because such kind of instruction as they are available in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Bhagavad-gītā, they are apavarga-vardhanam, apavarga-vardhanam. Niśamya puṁsām avaparga-vardhanam. Puṁsām, for the people in general. Apavarga-vardhanam, dhiyām, dhiyā abhinandya. When actually a person advanced in spiritual knowledge, somebody comes to him to enquire... Because it is the system. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. This is the instruction. So when a person comes to a transcendentalist to inquire about śreya uttamam-uttamam means transcendental subject matter-he becomes very happy. He becomes very happy. One who hears very attentively about the spiritual subject matter, the spiritual master becomes very happy. So Kapiladeva became very happy by seeing His mother so eager to understand about the spiritual subject matter. Therefore, dhiyā abhinandya, thanked her, "Oh, My dear mother, thank you very much. You are so interested in the subject matter." Because people are not interested. But when He saw that the family, head of the family, His mother, was interested, He became very happy, and therefore abhinandya, thanked her, "Yes, thank you, mother." Why? Now, ātmavatāṁ satāṁ gatiḥ: "You are asking the subject matter to know from Me which is approved by the ātmavatām."

Ātmavatām means self-realized persons. Self-realized... Without self-realized person, nobody can inquire about uttamam, śreya uttamam. Everyone is interested the immediate pleasing things. Immediate pleasing things. "I want to taste something which is very tasteful to my tongue. Never mind whether it is not eatable or eatable..." Just like hogs and pigs. They have got a taste to eat stool, and they like it. They like it, immediately. Everyone have, I think, in India, they have got experience. When they go to pass stool in the field, the hog is waiting to taste. They are so much addicted. Similarly, we have become to taste anything and everything, like hog. There is no discrimination. There is no restriction. Because they have no tapasya. Tapasya, when you are engaged... And this subject matter, spiritual realization, means tapasya. Tapasya. But it has been made easy by Caitanya Mahāprabhu, very easy. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam, paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Little tapasya. Just spare little time and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. This much tapasya, we are not ready. Etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is more interested to get us in the apavarga-vartmani, in the path of liberation. And He has given very simple method: chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. Still... Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. And to practice this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, there is no hard and fast rule. Niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. Any time suitable you can chant and you get perfection. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. This much little trouble, austerity, or whatever you call. But we have no interest. Being contaminated by this material, this Kali-yuga... Etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam, misfortune, durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. "I have no attraction."

So therefore Kapiladeva or His representative, when he sees somebody is little interested, he becomes very glad and thanks him, "Thank you very much." Because people are not interested. So Kapiladeva, when He saw His mother interested, He thanked within. Not openly, but within the mind: "Thank you, mother. You are so interested." So dhiyā abhinandya ātmavatāṁ satāṁ gatiḥ. The process, the questions which she put, that is ātmavatāṁ satām. Not ordinary persons. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. Kṛṣṇa-kathā becomes interesting in the association of satām ātmavatām, those who are interested in self-realization, those who are devotees. Satām means devotees. Ātmavatāṁ satāṁ gatiḥ, their path. Then He begin... Babhāṣa. He began to talk. And because He was very glad... Īṣat-smita, smiling: "Thank you, mother. You are so much interested. So I shall speak." And because He is incarnation of God, Kapiladeva, naturally, young boy, He... śobhita ānanaḥ. His face became very beautiful; to answer this question, He became very beautiful. Naturally He's beautiful, and when He smiled, being very much pleased with the question of mother, He became very much beautiful. Śobhitānana.

So similarly, Kṛṣṇa also becomes very... Kṛṣṇa and Kapiladeva, no difference. So Kṛṣṇa also becomes very beautiful. He's already beautiful. But when a devotee serves Him, a devotee comes to Him, He also becomes very beautiful. A devotee, when with his heart and soul, serves Kṛṣṇa in dressing Him, in feeding Him, in giving Him flower, He becomes smiling. And if you can get Kṛṣṇa, once smiling upon you, your life is fulfilled.

Thank you very much. (end)



681110SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.13

-

Los Angeles, November 10, 19



Prabhupāda: ...this Sāṅkhya philosophy is very much well-known, especially in the Western world. The propounder of Sāṅkhya philosophy, Kapiladeva, son of Devahūti, is the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. He says that yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ mato niḥśreyasāya me [SB 3.25.13]. Niḥśreyasāya: ultimate benediction.



Śreyaḥ and preyaḥ, there are two things. One is called preyaḥ. Preyaḥ means immediately pleasing. And śreyaḥ means ultimately benefit, benediction. Generally, conditioned souls, they are attracted with immediate pleasing things. Just like children. They are attracted by playthings more than education. They do not like to go to school. They like to play the whole day. In my childhood also, I was very naughty boy, and I was not going to school. And my mother kept a special man to drag me to the school. At that time, there was no system like in your country, school buses. One had to go to school on foot. So my father was very lenient. I was not going to school. Preyaḥ, pleasing. Children like to play. Similarly, there are two paths, śreyaḥ and preyaḥ.

So śreyaḥ means... Preyaḥ means sense gratification. We have got our senses, material senses, and we want to satisfy them without consideration, the sequence, the bad results of sense gratification. In the Bhāgavatam there is one passage in which it is stated that yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Persons who are conditioned in the society, friendship, and love, this is the attraction for material life. "Society, friendship and love," they think, "divinely bestowed upon man." But that, it is not divinely bestowed upon man. From spiritual point of view, it is the gift of māyā. Society, friendship and love is the gift of māyā, illusion. Actually, the society with which we associate, and friendship which we make here, and so-called love, how long? Now, supposing I am now in human society. How long I shall remain in human society? I am preparing for my next life, or the next society. I may be transferred to dog society. And I may transfer, I may be transferred to god society. That will depend on my work.

So we like society, friendship. Oh, I do not know how many intimate friendship I had, but those are now just like dream, everything finished. Now I am making new friendships with your countrymen, with you younger boys of this country, and I have forgotten the friendship which I made the whole life in India. So this friendship, this love, this society, this country-everything illusion. Just like dream. At night we dream, "Oh, I have been made a king," and in the morning I see everything finished. So we should not be attached to these temporary attractions. We admit these are temporary attractions, but we are still... Just like children. They are attracted to the..., but the parents, they're guiding, "Oh, you must go to school." Niḥśreyasāya. That is śreyaḥ. The boy, the child, does not like it, but the parents, they are anxious, "Oh, my child is not going to school; he is being spoiled." So dragging him.

Similarly, the scriptures, the sages, the saintly persons, the devotees, the representative of Kṛṣṇa, God, they're very much anxious to take us back to Godhead, back to home. That is niḥśreyasāya. That is the ultimate benediction. To be repaired(?), enamored by the temporary society, friendship and love. And it has become a thankless task for the saintly persons, devotees of God, to drag them: "Oh, please come here. Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Please be Kṛṣṇa conscious. Please be God conscious." Nobody likes it. They think it botheration, "Why Swamiji comes here and bothers us?" But it has become the business. Therefore the qualification of a saintly person is titikṣava, very tolerant, very tolerant. Just like Lord Jesus Christ, he was crucified. Still, he was so tolerant he, at the time of crucification, he's praying to God, "My Lord, these people do not know what they are doing. Please forgive them." Just see how much tolerant. Titikṣava. This is the first qualification of saintly person or God's servant or God's son. Very tolerant. They have to push on their Kṛṣṇa conscious movement or God conscious movement through so many odds. Through so many odds. Because they are just like the child; he's attracted with playthings.

So yoga means, here it is stated, yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ mato niḥśreyasāya. Yoga system means to lead one to the ultimate benediction. And ādhyātmikaḥ. Ādhyātmikaḥ means "pertaining to the soul." Yoga, practice of yoga, does not mean to gain some material profit. Actually, those who have attained to perfection to some extent in the yoga process... The yoga process which is very much advertised in your country, that is more or less bodily exercise. Yoga process is very difficult for the modern age. I have several times discussed this point. The preliminary process-yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma, dhyāna, dhāraṇā, samādhi-the eight processes... To control the senses, to control the mind, to practice sitting postures... Under certain physical posture the mind become concentrated. So there are different āsanas. Then meditation, then contemplation, then absorption. These things are preliminary process. But actually, the yoga means to attain ultimate benediction, niḥśreyasāya. What is that niḥśreyasāya? Now, spiritual realization. That is niḥśreyasāya.

Spiritual realization..., there are different stages of spiritual realization.

First spiritual realization is to understand oneself that "I am not matter; I am spirit." This is the first stage of spiritual realization-when one firmly convinced. How? By knowledge. By knowledge. Just we are conscious, "I am Indian." You are conscious that you are American. One is conscious, "I am Hindu." One is conscious, "I am Christian." So similarly, when one is fully conscious that "I am spirit. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi, I am Brahman," that is the first spiritual realization, that knowledge. Knowledge means consciousness. So this consciousness has also a development of consciousness. There are different stages. And when one comes to the ultimate stages, niḥśreyasāya, that is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or God consciousness. And how that consciousness acts? That "I am a servant of God. I am servant of Kṛṣṇa." When this consciousness is firmly fixed up, this is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He presented Himself, nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patiḥ, no vanastho yatir vā. He presented Himself... Because He was Hindu and Vedic, followers of Vedic... But actually, He was not Hindu, because He's describing Himself, nāham. Nāham means "I am not, I am not." He's declining. What He's declining? "I am not brāhmaṇa, I am not kṣatriya, I am not vaiśya, I am not śūdra, I am not brahmacārī, I am not gṛhastha, I am not vānaprastha, I am not sannyāsī." The Vedic system of human life is divided into eight departmental activities, and that is going on under the name of Hinduism. It is now broken and degraded and so many things have happened. But actually, what is called Vedic system, that Vedic system is not meant for a particular class of men, but it is meant for the human society. Actually, human activities actually begins when they observe these eight principles of social divisions. More or less, they observe in any human society. What is that? Brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa means the most intelligent class of men of the society. Philosophers, scientists, astronomers, so many, intelligent class. So in every society there is a class of men who are very intelligent than ordinary men. Then kṣatriya. Kṣatriya means... Kṣat means harm. One who protects others from being harmed. Suppose I am trying to harm you. And the person who protects you, he's kṣatriya. And who protects you? The king or the government. Therefore, those who are engaged in governmental affairs or takes the administrative charge, they are called kṣatriyas. So the kṣatriyas, they are in every human society, the administrator class, politicians, diplomats. Next vaiśya, mercantile class. That is not to be explained. In your country there are so many mercantile class. And śūdras. Śūdra means neither intelligent nor administrator nor merchant. General laborer. Give them something, they'll work. They have no intelligence. So they are called śūdras.

So these four divisions there are. And... This is... So far our material necessities are concerned, there is need of intelligent class of men to guide, there is need of administrators or martial class of men, there is need of mercantile class of men, and there is need of laborer class of men. So these four divisions... And next, culture. Culture means brahmacārī. First, student life. He's educated in the value of life. They are called brahmacārī. They're not allowed to mix with women. Just like nowadays, the schools and colleges, the boys and girls freely mix. The brahmacārī is not allowed to mix with girls and boys. That is restriction, brahmacārī. Only gṛhasthas, householders, they are allowed to mix freely with woman married. So brahmacārī is not allowed, that is spiritual training. In this way there are four department of spiritual training, namely brahmacārī; gṛhastha, or householder; vānaprastha, retired man; and sann... (end)



741113SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.13

-

Bombay, November 13, 1974



Prabhupāda: (Hindi)



Nitāi: Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. (etc.)



Prabhupāda: (Hindi)



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.) "The Personality of Godhead answered: The yoga system which relates to the Lord and the individual soul, which is meant for the ultimate benefit of the living entity, and which causes detachment from all happiness and distress in the material world, is the highest yoga system."



Prabhupāda:



yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ

mato niḥśreyasāya me

atyantoparatir yatra

duḥkhasya ca sukhasya ca

[SB 3.25.13]



Everyone in this material world trying to mitigate or trying to become free from the distress. Duḥkhasya. Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. Ātyantika means supreme. The struggle for existence in this material world is everyone is trying to get some happiness and minimize the quantity of distress. This is called struggle for existence. Generally, yoga practice is executed for getting some material profit: aṇimā laghimā prāpti īśitā vaśitā mahimā. Aṇimā... The yogis, they have aṣṭa-siddhi-yoga, eight kinds of perfection. One can become smaller than the smallest or lighter than the lightest, bigger than the biggest, whatever he likes, he can get immediately, vaśita, he can control over, he can create a planet even. These are some of the yoga-siddhis. But here it is said that the supreme yoga system is not to aspire for material happiness, neither to become distressed by the material inconvenience.



This is perfection of yoga. Everyone is trying to get out of the material distress and get some happiness, but anything material-happiness, so-called happiness, or so-called distress... Just like here, the fireworks is going on. (loud sound of firecrackers, etc., occurring intermittently in background) It is happiness for somebody, but it is distress for us. Is it not? They are thinking they are enjoying, and we are thinking it is inconvenience. So that is material way, happiness, one side happiness, another side distress. So both the happiness and distress, they are illusion. Illusion. There are many examples. Just like water; in summer season it is happiness, and in winter season it is distress. But the same water. Some water, at one time, it is happiness, and the same water, at one time, it is distress. The same son, when he is born, it is happiness, and the same son, when he's dead, it is distress. But son is the same.

So this material world is duality. You cannot understand happiness without distress, and you cannot understand distress without happiness. Therefore it is called relative world. You cannot understand son without understanding a father, and you cannot understand a father without understanding the son. And spiritual happiness is above this duality. Spiritual happiness. So that is the perfection of yoga. Yoga ādhyātmikaḥ. Ādhyātmā, ātmika, ātmā, the soul, the happiness of the soul, that is real yoga. The happiness of the soul can be possible when the soul, individual soul, is with the Supersoul, or the Supreme Soul. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). There is the Supreme Soul, or Supreme Being. Amongst... There are many living beings. We are many. We living beings, or living entities, we are many. But the principal living being is Kṛṣṇa. The fire and the sparks: the sparks are illuminated when it is with the original fire. If the sparks fall down from the association of the original fire, it is extinguished, no more light. Similarly, our real happiness is when we enjoy with the Supreme Being. Supreme Being.

Just like Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is not alone. Kṛṣṇa is always with His friends, either gopīs or the cowherd boys, or with His father, with His mother. You'll never find Kṛṣṇa alone. Just like here is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is not alone. Kṛṣṇa is with His Rādhārāṇī and with His devotees. Just like a king. When we say that "The king is coming here," or "The president is coming here," so it means that president is not coming alone, but he's coming with his secretaries, with his ministers, with so many others. In England, the Queen has bodyguards. So similarly, when we... Yoga ādhyātmikaḥ. Yoga means connection, and ātmā, ātmā means this soul, actually, but sometimes ātmā means the mind, ātmā means the body also. So body has nothing to do with the Supreme Being, because Supreme Being is complete spirit. He has no material covering. One who thinks that Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Being, has got a material covering, covered by māyā, as we are, covered by māyā, this material energy... Kṛṣṇa is not like that. Kṛṣṇa says, sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā [Bg. 4.6]. Kṛṣṇa does not say that "I come here as ordinary living being." Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. One has to learn how Kṛṣṇa takes birth. It is not ordinary birth. Had it been ordinary birth, then why we should observe the Janmāṣṭamī ceremony? It is divyam, divine, transcendental. Everything of Kṛṣṇa is divine. And if we think Kṛṣṇa as like us, then according to the statement of the Bhagavad-gītā, immediately we become a mūḍha. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11].

So actually Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Being, original spirit soul. We are simply minute part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Exactly the same example: just like the fire and the small sparks. You can see. This fireworks is going on. The fire is there, and there are small sparks. So long the fire and the small sparks are together, they are illumination. Similarly, if we connect with Kṛṣṇa, then we are illuminated. As Kṛṣṇa is illuminated, we are also illuminated, although we are small. But if we fall down from Kṛṣṇa, the original fire, we become extinguished. Our spiritual power, our spiritual illumination, becomes extinguished. Therefore yoga system means again connecting the link. That is called yoga. Yoga, the Sanskrit word, means connect, and viyoga means disconnect.

So here it is... Kapiladeva... Kapiladeva is Bhagavān. Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhagavān has no mistake. Bhagavān... Nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ avyaktāt. Even Śaṅkarācārya says that Bhagavān, Nārāyaṇa, He does not belong to this material world. Nārāyaṇaḥ avyaktāt paraḥ. So when we speak of Bhagavān, or the śāstra says Bhagavān, Bhagavān means above material understanding, divyam, above material understanding, paraḥ, above material understanding. So here it is said bhagavān uvāca. Even he does not say, Vyāsadeva, that kapiladeva uvāca. No. Similarly, in the Bhagavad-gītā also, Vyāsadeva says... Kṛṣṇa says actually. But Vyāsadeva says, bhagavān uvāca. Bhagavān means above the defects of this material world. That is Bhagavān. Bhagavān is not subjected to the deficiencies of this material world. There are four deficiencies in the material world. Just like we are concerned, in the material world, we are not perfect because we commit mistake, bhrama. We are illusioned. Bhrama pramada. And vipralipsa, we try to cheat others. I have no knowledge; still, I become teacher or preacher. That is cheating. We have no perfect knowledge. Therefore our principle is to teach what Bhagavān says. We don't manufacture teaching. This is not our business. As they manufacture... They say, the ordinary, I mean to say, so-called scholars and learned men, they give their opinion... Especially in the Western world, there are so many philosophical speculations, each one giving his own mental gymnastics. That philosophy is not perfect. We have to take ideas from Bhagavān. That is perfect.

Therefore here it is said, bhagavān uvāca. If we take instruction from Bhaga... Why we are reading Bhagavad-gītā? That is very common practice. Because it is perfect. There is no mistake, there is no illusion, there is no cheating, there is no imperfection of the senses. Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, vedāhaṁ samatītāni: [Bg. 7.26] "I know everything-past, present and future." Māṁ ca veda na kaścana: "But nobody understands Me." That is our position. God knows everything. Kṛṣṇa knows everything. But we do not know what is God. That is our position. We do not know. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Īśvara, God, Kṛṣṇa, is situated in everyone's heart. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: [Bg. 15.15] "I am entered in everyone's heart." Everyone's heart-not only the human being, but also animals or anything. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi [Bs. 5.35] **. He is within the atom. Therefore because He is within me, within you, and within everything, He knows everything. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, vedāhaṁ samatītāni [Bg. 7.26]. He knows everything. So because He knows everything, therefore we have to take lesson from Bhagavān. What Bhagavān says, if we take, that is perfect knowledge.

There is a paramparā system, as it is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, Fourth Chapter: evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. So our business, Kṛṣṇa conscious people, our business is very easy. Because we don't manufacture ideas. We take the idea and the words delivered by the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa, or His incarnation, or His representative. His representative does not say anything which the master does not say. Representative is very easy. You can become representative of Kṛṣṇa if you do not interpret Kṛṣṇa's words in your whimsical way. Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more superior authority than Me." And if you take it as it is, and if you speak to the people that "There is no more superior authority than Kṛṣṇa," then you become guru. You become guru. You don't change. Then you become guru. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed this. Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. His, He was preaching. So He was preaching everyone, from country to country. Of course, He did not go outside India. Within India. And He was instructing that "You learn from Me and teach your people within this village, within this country." Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Ei deśa means "this country, or this place where you are living." Then? Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā. You become guru. So one may think that "I am illiterate. I have no education. I am not born in very high family. How I can become guru?" So Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "It is not very difficult." Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Bas. You become guru. You simply speak whatever Kṛṣṇa speaks. Then you become guru.

So anyone who does not speak what Kṛṣṇa has spoken, he's not guru. He's a rascal. He cannot be guru. He is guru who speaks only what Kṛṣṇa has spoken. This is the shastric injunction.

ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ



This is the definition of guru, that one brāhmaṇa, born in brāhmaṇa family and very educated, mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ, very expert in reciting Vedic mantras... That is the duty of brāhmaṇa, veda-mantra. So mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ. But avaiṣṇava, if he's not Vaiṣṇava, or if he's not follower of the instruction of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa, avaiṣṇavo gurur na syāt, he cannot become guru. And vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-pacaḥ. Śva-pacaḥ means the dog-eater. That is considered the lowest of the mankind, dog-eaters, means caṇḍāla, bhaṅgis. He becomes gu..., he can become guru. How? If he's Vaiṣṇava, he is devotee of Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. So Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu... That is His mission.



yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



So if we simply take the words of Bhagavān and preach, then it is very easy for us to become, each and every one, to become guru. Not to exploit. No. But to give knowledge. And what is that knowledge? What Kṛṣṇa has spoken. That's all. So even one is not very learned scholar, Sanskrit scholar, everyone has got this ear. He can hear from Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's representative and assimilate what is spoken by Kṛṣṇa, and he can repeat the same. Then he becomes guru. That is the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He said,



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



To become guru means para-upakāra. People are in the darkness, so they have to be enlightened. That is the Vedic injunction. Uttiṣṭhata jāgrata prāpya varān nibodhata. Now, people, from animal kingdom we are getting this human body. So up to animal body we are sleeping, kota nidrā jāo māyā-piśācīra kole, in the lap of this material nature. Now this human form of body is meant for getting out. So the mission is to awaken people to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. To awaken people to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Jīv jāgo jīv jāgo, gauracānda bole. Gauracānda, means Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is speaking to everyone, "Oh, the living entity, get up! Get up!" Kota nidrā jāo māyā-piśācīra kole: "How long you shall sleep?"



So the, here is the same thing. Yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsām. This is the prime business, to connect yourself again, again, your soul, with the Supreme. Yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ mato niḥśreyasāya me. He is giving... He says that "This is My instruction, that one should be awakened to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and connect himself again with Kṛṣṇa." That is ādhyātmika-yoga. Not to show some gymnastic magic. No. This is the best yoga Kṛṣṇa has also said in the Bhagavad-gītā,

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



The first-class yogi is he... Who? Yoginām api sarve... There are many yogis. There are many different types of yoga system, and all the yoga systems are discussed in the Bhagavad-gītā, haṭha-yoga, karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, rāja-yoga, so many yoga systems. But the real yoga system, the first-class yoga system, is to revive your connection with Kṛṣṇa. That is first class. Here it is also said, yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsām. Ādhyātmika. We are living entities, soul. We are now... We are disconnected, but we have forgotten. Disconnection cannot be. That is not possible. But it is covered. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. There is yoga and there is a yogamāyā. Yogamāyā means forgetfulness. So Kapiladeva... Kapiladeva is Bhagavān. He is advising, Bhagavān, that "This is first-class yoga." Ādhyātmikaḥ. Ādhyātmikaḥ, about the soul.



Soul... First of all you have to understand what is soul. At the present moment, people are so much in darkness, they do not understand what is soul. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā teaches first to understand what is the soul. What is the soul? Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehī, that soul. Dehī means the proprietor of the body. We are thinking, "I am this... I am this body." No, I am not this body; I am the proprietor of this body. That is real understanding of myself: "I am not this body." We say also, "This is my finger," "This is my head," "This is my leg." Nobody says, "I head," or "I finger." Nobody says. Everyone says, "My head." So I am the proprietor of this body. And then I am under the influence of māyā. This body has been given by māyā, the material energy.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



And we have got different types of body. I have got this body, you have got another body, the dog has got another body, cat has got another body.



Why there are so many bodies? Why not one kind of body? That is also stated in the Bha...Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. Kāraṇam The reason is that the dehī within the body, the soul, he is associating with different types of the modes of material nature. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu. Therefore he is getting different types of body. It is naturally going on. You haven't got to aspire for your next body, different... But it must be different body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. You have to change this body, but Kṛṣṇa does not say what kind of body. That will depend on your qualification. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. Qualification. If you associate with sattva-guṇa, then ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18], then you are elevated to the higher planetary system. Madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ. If you are associating with the modes of passion, then you will remain here. And jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ: and if you associate with the tamo-guṇa, then you go lower and lower, abominable family, lower family, animal family, or trees, plants, like that. So the 8..., 8,400,000 forms of life is due to kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. And according to the body, there are distresses and happiness. You cannot expect in the dog's body the same happiness as a king or a very rich man is enjoying. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-sa... He has got the dog's body, he has got the king's body. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. So this happiness or that happiness, this distress or that distress, they are all due to this material body. Therefore yoga means one has to transcend this happiness of body, distress or happiness. That is here said, that atyanta-uparatiḥ yatra. If you connect yourself again with the supreme yoga-that is called real yoga-then you get rid of this so-called material happiness and distress, which is due to this body.

So that is wanted. That is ādhyātmika. That is called bhakti-yoga, to reconnect our connection with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa also comes to instruct that "You rascal, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Just revive your connection with Me, you rascal. Give up all these manufactured so-called types of yoga and religion." Sarva-dharmān paritya... That is Kṛṣṇa's instruction. That is the differ... That is the proof. Kṛṣṇa says the same thing, and Kṛṣṇa's representative or incarnation or guru says the same thing. That is the qualification of guru. Here Kapiladeva, although He is the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, He's acting as the representative of Kṛṣṇa, as guru. He's saying the same thing. He does not say another thing. Yoga ādhyātmikaḥ. Yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ mato niḥśreyasāya me. Niḥśreyasa means the ultimate benefit. Kṛṣṇa also says the same thing, that paraṁ guhyatamam: "I have instructed you so many things, but because you are My dear friend, I am just disclosing to you the most confidential thing." What is that? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. If you accept this principle, then you become actually transcendental to this so-called material happiness and distress. That is yoga.

We should not be captivated by the material distress, or we should not be very much aggrieved by the material distress, and we should not be very much happy for material happiness. These are bondage. Material happiness is not actually happiness. That is through distress. Just like we are trying to be happy, trying to be very rich, get some money. That is not very easily obtained. We have to undergo so much distresses. So actually, it is distress, but with the hope of getting some false happiness, we accept this distress. Actually, there is no happiness. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. So that atīndriya means spiritual senses. If we purify our senses, come to the spiritual platform, sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], if we become purified, then when that senses are engaged, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate, then that is real happiness. When we are engaged in the satisfying of the senses of Kṛṣṇa, not these material senses, then that is called ādhyātmika-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. So we have to learn bhakti-yoga from Kapiladeva. Gradually, He has begun the preliminary instructions.

Thank you very much. (end)



741114SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.14

-

Bombay, November 14, 1974



Prabhupāda:



tam imaṁ te pravakṣyāmi

yam avocaṁ purānaghe

ṛṣīṇāṁ śrotu-kāmānāṁ

yogaṁ sarvāṅga-naipuṇam

[SB 3.25.14]



So Kapiladeva, previous verse, He said that yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ mato niḥśreyasāya me. The supreme yoga system is ādhyātmikaḥ, or pertaining to the soul. Just like in your country a... (loud sound of fireworks, firecrackers, etc., going on in background) Nowadays... The haṭha-yoga is very popular. Sometimes the fat ladies go there to reduce their fat, and... (laughter) Some bodily... Here also they practice yoga to keep the digestive system regular. So people like this kind of yoga, gymnastics. But real yoga is ādhyātmika. Ādhyātmika means to awaken the soul to his proper position. That is real yoga. So that is not a manufactured, novel concoction. That is Purāṇa. As the soul is purāṇa, śāśvataḥ purāṇaḥ, similarly his business is also śāśvataḥ purāṇaḥ. That business is to reconnect his lost relationship with Kṛṣṇa.



So Kapiladeva says that "The same yoga system which I previously spoke to the great ṛṣis, who were very eager to hear..." Ṛṣīṇāṁ śrotu-kāmānām. This (is) one of the qualifications for spiritual advancement. One must be eager to hear. Because the spiritual life begins by hearing.

ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

[Cc. Madhya 17.136]



This is the statement of śāstra, that with our these blunt material senses it is not possible to appreciate or to understand śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi, Kṛṣṇa, His name, His form, His quality, His pastimes, His paraphernalia, His abode, so many things. Kṛṣṇa is not alone, but Kṛṣṇa begins from the name. Then there is form. Generally, for the beginners, neophytes, these two things are essential: to hear the name, to hear the qualities, and see the form of the Lord, to offer worship. That is the instruction of Kṛṣṇa personally. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65].



So here Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa is present. Even a child comes and offers his respect, it is taken into account, that "Here is a devotee." He does not know anything. Simply by seeing the chanting and dancing-you'll see practically-even a small child, he dances, he claps, he enjoys. He takes part. So the temple means to give chance to everyone, even to the child, to advance one step to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One step. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Even little is accepted and is done, it becomes into account. Just like if you deposit even two annas in the bank, it is kept on your account. It will increase with interest. Similarly, devotional service even done very little, it is not lost. In the śāstra it is said that even it is lost... Not lost. Suppose some reason a man comes and joins this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and in the middle he falls down, he does not make further progress because he falls down. But whatever he has done, that is permanent credit. That will never be lost. Even he stops, then from that point, again he will begin as soon as there will be chance. But whatever he has done, that is a permanent credit. That is the instruction of śāstra.

Therefore it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ. Bhraṣṭa means he was executing devotional service, but some way or other, being allured by māyā or some other causes, even if he falls down, so that credit is there. Therefore he has to begin next life... He is given chance next life. What is that? Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe. He takes birth in two families. What is that? Śucīnām. Śucīnām means brāhmaṇa, śuci. Śuci means brāhmaṇa: always clean and pure. Therefore they are called śuci. And muci. Muci means cobbler, just the end. That is the lowest, and this is the highest, śuci and muci. There is a Bengali poetry: śuci haya muci haya yadi kṛṣṇa tyaje, muci haya śuci haya yadi kṛṣṇa bhaje. If somebody takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even born in the family of cobbler, muci, he becomes śuci. He becomes more than a brāhmaṇa. And muci haya śuci haya. If one is born in the family of a brāhmaṇa, but he... (sounds of fireworks) ...but if he gives up Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he becomes a muci.

So a devotee, whoever he may be, everyone, for everyone, the path of devotion is open. Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. Kṛṣṇa says personally. It doesn't matter, pāpa-yoni, low-grade family, pāpa-yonayaḥ, if he takes shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. And Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ ye 'nye ca pāpā, ye anye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ śudhyanti [SB 2.4.18]. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. It is all-embracing. There are many... Tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ [SB 1.5.17], patet tato yadi, bhajann apakvo 'tha. Tyaktvā sva-dharmam. Sva-dharmam means everyone has got his occupational duty, sva-dharmam. Generally, we consider brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. They have got their sva-dharma. Brāhmaṇa has got his duties, kṣatriya has got his duty. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā-sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. So sva-dharma means... Suppose one gives up his occupational duty and takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ, and takes to the shelter of Kṛṣṇa, but bhajann apakvaḥ, could not mature his devotional service, bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi, and he falls down... This is Nārada's statement. So he says, "What is the loss even if he falls down? By sentiment he comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and even if he falls down, still, where is the loss? And contrary to this, a man who is performing very perfectly his sva-dharma, but has no Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then what is the gain?" There is no gain.

So that yoga system, ādhyātmika, is being explained by Kapiladeva, that you'll never fall down. Permanent, fixed-up position. Once begun, it will continue. Even if you fall down, then you are given chance again. What is that? Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Very nice family, brāhmaṇa family. Brāhmaṇa family means Vaiṣṇava family. Brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava, brāhmaṇa-paṇḍita. Brāhmaṇa means he must be learned and he must be a Vaiṣṇava. Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. Viṣṇu. Therefore in every brāhmaṇa house there is viṣṇu-pūjā, Viṣṇu-śālagrāma. Still. From descent, I mean to say, generation, it is coming down. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, they are supposed to worship Lord Viṣṇu. Not only brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra... Śūdra also. Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān viṣṇur ārādhyate [Cc. Madhya 8.58]. This is statement of Viṣṇu Purāṇa. Varṇāśrama, the execution of duty in the institution of varṇa and āśrama, four varṇas and four āśramas, what is the meaning? The meaning is viṣṇur ārādhyate, Viṣṇu becomes very pleased. That is varṇāśrama-dharma. If you execute as a pakka brāhmaṇa, that means Viṣṇu will be pleased. If you execute your duties as a perfect kṣatriya, then Viṣṇu will be pleased. If you execute your duty as a perfect vaiśya, then Viṣṇu will be pleased. And if you execute your duties as a perfect śūdra, Viṣṇu will be pleased. The purpose is to please Viṣṇu. Therefore na te viduḥ... The purpose they do not know. They have forgotten. Not now. This is the nature of this material world: na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi..., to please Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu means Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa means Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is expansion of Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa has millions of forms, as Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa and other also. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta-rūpam. Ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca. So viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam. There is no other alternative to please Him. Therefore varṇāśrama-dharma is very important. That is the beginning of perfect human civilization.

But we have lost everything. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu... He's also Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa Himself. Just to give relief to these rotten or forgotten conditioned souls of this age, Kali-yuga, He has given this one mantra, which is called mahā-mantra. What is that?

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



It is no longer possible to revive the perfect system, varṇāśrama. Although we are trying to revive, it is not possible. It is very difficult. People are so fallen. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. They are so disturbed, manda-bhāgyāḥ, unfortunate, and upadrutāḥ, always disturbed. Especially anāvṛṣṭi, durbhikṣa and kara-pīḍita. The people of the Kali-yuga will be very much, I mean to say, harassed by these three things. There will be no rainfall, and... There will be no rainfall, and there, food scarcity and taxation by government, income tax. Income tax is to plunder. If you have got some money, this is the means. So this is all stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. People will be so much harassed that ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā gacchanti giri-kānanam. They'll be disgusted so much, they will give up their family all of a sudden... Dāra-draviṇāḥ. Dāra means wife, children and bank balance, everything, "Let them go to..." Recently we have seen one big industrialist, he has committed suicide. So people will do that. They'll be so much harassed. This is Kali-yuga.



So in this position of harassment, how the peaceful varṇāśrama can be revived? It is very difficult. It is almost impossible. Therefore this system should be taken. What is this system? Saṅkīrtanair yajñair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ. Those who have got brain, they will worship Viṣṇu. Yajña means to satisfy Viṣṇu. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ. Viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā nānyat tat-toṣa... The whole aim is to satisfy Viṣṇu. Therefore Viṣṇu comes Himself, Kṛṣṇa. Viṣṇu comes Himself as Caitanya Mahāprabhu and teaches. There is no difference between Viṣṇu's teachings... Other bogus teachers, they can teach something else, but Viṣṇu's teachings... Just like Kṛṣṇa. Whatever Kṛṣṇa... Of course, Kṛṣṇa incarnation was after Kapila's incarnation. Before that, there were other Viṣṇu incarnations. So here it is said, tam imaṁ te pravakṣyāmi yam avocaṁ purā anaghe. Purā, "Formerly. I am not manufacturing." Nowadays it has become a fashion to manufacture a new system of religion. It is not that. It is not new. Old, purā. Kṛṣṇa also says that

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



evaṁ paramparā-prāptam

imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ

[Bg. 4.2]



"And I am speaking that very yoga system again to you." So this is real incarnation. They'll not say anything which is, which was not spoken before. The same thing. Yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa. "That yoga has been lost. Therefore, My dear Arjuna, I am repeating the same yoga system unto you." "Why to me? Why not to others?" Bhakto 'si: "Because you are My dear friend." Priyo 'si: [Bg. 4.3] "You are My dear friend." Because, without being bhakta, nobody will understand Bhagavad-gītā. It is not possible. Bhagavad-gītā means to understand Kṛṣṇa. So although everything is explained there, but it is on the bhakti line, not in any other line. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says at the end, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. If anyone wants to understand Kṛṣṇa and wants relationship with Kṛṣṇa, then one must take to this process of bhakti-yoga. That is sāṅkhya-yoga. That will be explained by Kapiladeva. Bhakti-yoga means sāṅkhya-yoga.



So here it is said, tam imaṁ te pravakṣyāmi yam avocaṁ purā anaghe. And He is addressing mother, anaghe. Anaghe means "one who has no sinful reaction in life." That is called anagha. Agha means pāpa, sin; an, an means without. Therefore nobody can understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness unless he is free from all sinful life.

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



One can stick to Kṛṣṇa consciousness when one is completely free from all sinful reaction of life. So you may say that "It will take some time. If I have to get free from sinful reaction, then I'll have to take some time." Kṛṣṇa says, "No, no time. Immediately."



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



"I will immediately do that. You just do this business. Surrender unto Me, and I take guarantee." Then your life begins. Sarva-pāpa-vinirmuktam, sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170].



Upādhi means pāpa. Upādhi... If we get different bodies, that is due to our sinful actions. If I am given the chance to execute as a human being, this human form of body... Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. We have got this body after many, many evolutionary process. So this is a chance given to we. Hari hari biphale. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura is singing, hari hari biphale janama goṅāinu: "My dear Lord, Kṛṣṇa, I have wasted my time for nothing, uselessly." Why? Manuṣya-janama pāiyā, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā, jāniyā śuniyā viṣa khāinu: "Because I got this opportunity, the human form of life... It was meant for understanding Kṛṣṇa." Or add Kṛṣṇa with Rādhārāṇī. That is perfect Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa alone is Vāsudeva, and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is perfect, with all potencies. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. The Absolute Truth with potencies. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the source of all potencies. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktiḥ. The Rādhārāṇī is the manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's pleasure potency. Kṛṣṇa, when He wants to enjoy, He does not enjoy anything material. He expands His energy, potency. That is Rādhārāṇī. Hlādinī śaktir asmād ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau. So these are the... So if we want... That is the... Human life is meant for that. As Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, manuṣya-janama pāiyā rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā jāniyā śuniyā viṣa khāinu: "My dear Lord, I have simply wasted my time, although I got the opportunity of this human form of life." Why you have wasted? "Now, I have done everything without worshiping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa." That's all.

So what is this...? Now... Jāniyā śuniyā viṣa khāinu. It is just like taking poison knowingly. Somebody takes poison unknowingly and somebody takes poison to commit suicide, knowingly. So it is something like that. If we do not understand Kṛṣṇa in this life, then we are taking poison knowingly. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yadā yadā hi... Because they are taking poison... They got the chance of eternal life, but they are taking poison. Viṣaya-viṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale. This material life is just like blazing fire of poison. Viṣaya-viṣānale. Viṣaya means material. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. Eating, sleeping and sex life and defense-these are the material activities. So we are engaged with these things. So viṣaya-viṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale. And if we become engaged with these four things, viṣaya, it is like poison. Then our heart will be always burning. Gastric ulcer. So it has to be cured. How it can be cured? Now, golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmilo kene tāy: "My dear Lord, You have given the medicine, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but I have no attraction for this." So this is the realization of the Vaiṣṇava. Brajendra-nandana jei, śaci-suta hailo sei: "Vrajendra-nandana, Kṛṣṇa, He has now come as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śacī-suta, the son of mother Śacī." Balarāma hailo nitāi: "And Balarāma has become Nitāi." So what is their business now? Now, pāpī tāpī jata chilo, hari-nāme uddhārilo: "All kinds of varieties of sinful men, simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, they are delivered." Tāra sākṣī jagāi mādhāi. What is the evidence? Evidence is Jagāi-Mādhāi.

So at the present moment, not only one Jagāi-Mādhāi, but thousands of Jagāi-Mādhāis, by the grace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, are being delivered. It is so active medicine, this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Therefore the perfect yoga system... Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. So He'll speak that. Tam imaṁ te pravakṣyāmi. So it is not newly manufactured. We don't concoct anything. That is not our business. Our business is very simple. Our business is very simple because we take the words of Kṛṣṇa as it is. That's all. Kṛṣṇa says, satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. So we are simply... We don't want to be very learned. We simply want blessings of you all, that let us become so much learned that we can follow the instruction of Kṛṣṇa. That's all. We don't want anything more. We don't want. Therefore we're sticking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement on the basis of Bhagavad-gītā. And a little farther advanced, by reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. These are kṛṣṇa-kathā. And as I have told you, the Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "Every one of you, especially Indians..." Indians? They are imitating this material civilization. Horrible. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us open way:

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



This is Indian's business, para-upakāra. The whole world is in darkness without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Every Indian should first of all make his life successful by understanding Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Bhagavad-gītā, and preach it all over the world. That is the Indian business.



Thank you very much. (end)



741115SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.15

-

Bombay, November 15, 1974



Nitāi: "The stage in which the consciousness of the living entity is attracted by the three modes of material nature is called conditioned life. But when that same consciousness is attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is situated in the consciousness of liberation."



Prabhupāda:



cetaḥ khalv asya bandhāya

muktaye cātmano matam

guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya

rataṁ vā puṁsi muktaye

[SB 3.25.15]



Two words, bandhana, bondage, and mukti, liberation. So people in ignorance, dull-headed, mūḍha, they do not know what is mukti and what is bandhana, what is liberation and what is bondage. They do not to know. Just like animals. The animal, he does not know, the dog, that "I am bound up in this dog's body. This is bondage. This is not my life." He does not know. Similarly, a human being, if he does not know what is bondage and liberation, then he's animal. From animal life, this human life is evolved for understanding this: what is mukti and what is liberation.



So mukti and liberation, if you keep your consciousness materially affected... Guṇeṣu saktam. Material world means the three qualities, tri-guṇa, guṇamayī. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, guṇamayī, mama māyā. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Tribhir guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ. We are being conducted in this material world by three guṇas: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Out of these three guṇas, the sattva-guṇa is the best. Knowledge, the qualification of brāhmaṇa. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. One who has developed sattva-guṇa, then the following qualifications will be found in him: he'll be truthful and controlled of the mind, of the senses, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā, tolerant; ārjava, simplicity; jñānam, jñānam, full knowledge; vijñānam, practical application of knowledge in life; āstikyam, āstikyam, to have full faith in the authority of the Vedas. That is called āstikyam. Āstikyam and nāstikyam.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu has explained what is nāstikyam and what is āstikyam. According to Vedic understanding, anyone who does not believe in the Vedas, he's called nāstika. Just like Buddha philosophy. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, veda nā māniyā bauddha haila nāstika. Veda... Lord Buddha, he defied Vedic authority. His mission was different. He wanted to stop animal killing. Sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam. The Supreme Lord became so much afflicted by terribly people being attached to killing animals... As they are now doing also. So He was compassionate to stop animal killing in the so-called sacrifice. But in the Vedic sacrifices, in some cases, there is recommendation of animal killing. That animal killing does not mean killing the animal and eat. No. It was a test. An old animal was put into the sacrificial fire and the animal would come in new body, young. That is animal... But to give, to test the Vedic mantra, whether it is properly chanted. Then the result will be that if you put one old body it will come new body. So such kind of brāhmaṇa is not available in this age, Kali-yuga, yājñika-brāhmaṇa. They, by mantras, they could, they would ignite fire. Fire was not required matches. By mantra. Simply by mantra, the old body of an animal will turn to be young.

But because the yājñika-brāhmaṇas cannot do that... There is no yajña. Not possible. Therefore this kind of yajñas are prohibited in this Kali-yuga. In the Kali-yuga the only one yajña is this saṅkīrtanam. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Those who are intelligent persons, they know this kind of yajña will not be successful. Because people do not know, they cannot chant the mantras rightly, neither there is facility. So many things. Therefore in this age, dull age, the only concession is to perform saṅkīrtana-yajña. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīr... And yajña means to worship the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu. Yajñaiḥ. Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān viṣṇur ārādhyate [Cc. Madhya 8.58]. Ārādhyate... The real purpose is to worship the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu. Nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam. So therefore performances of yajña is required.

So this yajña, in this age, Kali-yuga, is chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana, congregationally, as we chant: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma... This is performance of yajña. So by performances of this yajña, the result will be that ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātmā-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

[Cc. Antya 20.12]



By chanting Lord Kṛṣṇa's name... That is also confirmed in the śāstras: kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said by Śukadeva Gosvāmī... There are so many faults in this age. Some of them are described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. As I was describing yesterday that durbhikṣa, anāvṛṣṭyā durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ, ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā gacchanti giri-kānanam [SB 12.2.9]. The Kali-yuga will be so much disturbing that people will be harassed especially by three things. Anāvṛṣṭi: there will be practically no rainfall. It is stated that there will be cloud in the sky. When there is no rainfall, people will be hankering after. Just like sometimes we hanker after rain in summer season, looking after, "When rainfall will come?" The people will be disappointed. There will be cloud, there will be thundering bolt, but there will be no rain. This time will be like that. Anāvṛṣṭi. Anāvṛṣṭi and durbhikṣa. And if there is anāvṛṣṭi, scarcity of rain, certainly there will be no food grain production, as it is now, we are feeling. Food grain production-eight rupees kilo, rice. So why? The food grain is shortage. So anāvṛṣṭi durbhikṣa and taxation, kara-pīḍitāḥ. Government will... Dasyu-dharmabhiḥ. It is said, "The government means a gang of rogues and thieves." That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. They'll plunder. The rogues and thieves, they seek opportunity secretly, and government, by law, they will plunder. And still, they will go on as big minister. This is all stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



So people will be so harassed in this age that out of disgust they will give up their family life. Ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā gacchanti giri-kānanam. Svīkāra eva codvāhe. There will be no marriage. This is also Vedic culture, to get married. But there will be no marriage. One woman, one man will live together by agreement. And as soon as the agreement is finished, they'll be separated. That is now very prominent in Western countries. Svīkāra eva codvāhe. There is no such thing... Just like the father of the girl, they'll find out a suitable boy, and the father of the girl, they will also find out... In this way... The horoscope... Formerly, these things were very current. Without there is, I mean to say, coincidence of the horoscope, that "This boy and this girl would live very happily," by horoscopic calculation, then marriage would not take place. Then the family consideration, whether the boy is coming from suitable family or the girl is coming from su... So many things were there. Then the marriage would ta... But that kind of marriage is practically already stopped. Here, at the present moment, means simply agreement. "I like you. You like me. That's all right. Let us live together." Svīkāra eva codvāhe. Dāmpatye ratim eva hi. Husband and wife relationship means sex. There is no other purpose. As soon as there is some difficulty in sex enjoyment, they will be separated. These are all mentioned. Lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. Now, in the Western countries, here also, they're keeping long hair. So that will be beauty. Lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. Lāvaṇyam means luster of the body. The people will think, "If I keep long hair, then I have become very beautiful." The hippies, you see, long beard, long hairs. They are thinking, "We have become very beautiful." So these are all stated. Sūtram eva hi vipratve. A brāhmaṇa means having a two-paisa worth of thread. That's all. Thread. Simply to possess one thread, one becomes brāhmaṇa. Simply by changing the dress from white to saffron color, one becomes sannyāsī. No. There are duties of sannyāsīs or the brāhmaṇa or the gṛhastha, vānaprastha. There are duties.

So in this way Kali-yuga is polluted. Everything is contaminated, polluted. So it is called the ocean of faults. Because the life is meant for liberation. If one is not interested in liberation, simply for sense gratification, that is conditional life. They do not know it. But here it is stated that cetaḥ khalu asya bandhāya muktaye cātmano matam. The consciousness is the main principle, either for conditional life or for liberation. Consciousness. We are proposing Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means liberation. Liberation. What liberation? Liberation means to stop repetition of birth and death. They do not have idea even that birth and death can be stopped. They think it cannot be stopped. Mo... Big, big scientists, they cannot stop. Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that you should keep in your front four different types of miserable conditions. What is that? Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. You may be very advanced in scientific knowledge, but what is, where is the possibility of stopping these four principles of miserable condition of life? Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam. They are not interested. But when we can stop these four principles of miserable condition, namely, no more birth, no more death, no more disease, no more old age, that is called liberation. You can have it. Simply you have to clear your consciousness. How to clear? Now, guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya. If you become conscious of these three material modes of nature, then it is for bondage. Rataṁ vā puṁsi muktaye. And when your consciousness is Kṛṣṇized, simply think of Kṛṣṇa, then it is liberation. Clear idea.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to keep the mind and consciousness always in Kṛṣṇa, puṁsi. Puṁsi. Puṁsi. Puṁsi means the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He's a person. He's a male, not female. Puṁsi. Puruṣaḥ. Puruṣaḥ, not strī. When Kṛṣṇa was realized by Arjuna, he addressed Him, puruṣaṁ śāśvatam. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, puruṣam [Bg. 10.12]. God is brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, puruṣam. God is puruṣa, not female. Puruṣa means enjoyer, and prakṛti means enjoyed. Everything is enjoyed by the Supreme Puruṣa. We are also prakṛti. That is also stated. We are not puruṣa. This dress may be... That is māyā, illusion. Actually, we are puruṣa, and prakṛti means... Here the so-called woman is also puruṣa. Puruṣa means enjoyer. The women, they are also thinking how to enjoy. And man is also thinking how to enjoy. Therefore imitation puruṣa. But actually, they're prakṛti. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. The living entities, they are prakṛti. And they are trying to be puruṣa, enjoyer. This is material world. Therefore they are attached to the three guṇas because they want to enjoy this material world, artificially trying to become puruṣa. Puruṣa means enjoyer. As such, they are attached to this material world. And material world means guṇa, tri-guṇa. And according to attachment, they're getting different types of bodies.

That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu. Why there are different types of bodies? Why one living entity is dog and why one living entity is first-class brāhmaṇa? Because kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. The one who has got a learned brāhmaṇas' body, that means he has associated with the modes of nature-goodness. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā. This is elevation. If one is in the modes of goodness, then he can understand gradually what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, in the modes of passion and ignorance, nobody can understand what is God. Not only that. Even from material prosperity, if one is situated in the modes of goodness, then he can be elevated to the higher planetary systems-Svargaloka, Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka, Brahmaloka, Satyaloka. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. So these are needed. So anyway, even if you go to the Brahmaloka, that is not also perfection. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. There is no benefit. Because there also the four principles of miserable condition, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9], they are there, even in the Brahmaloka. Brahmā also dies. Brahmā also takes birth. You know it. Brahmā, he also took birth from the lotus flower generated from the navel of Viṣṇu. So there was birth. And when Brahmā will die, whole material cosmic manifestation will be finished. So he has also birth and death and old age and disease. And the small ant or insect, it has also the same disease, old age, birth and death. So one has to become free from this bondage, because we are eternal. Na jāyate na mriyate. Bhagavad-gītā says. The living entity never takes birth, never dies. Then why even Brahmā dies? Brahmā is also dying. That is material life. That is bondage, bandhana. Guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya.

So one should not think that "I have got millions of millions of years' duration of life. Therefore I am liberated." No. Brahmā, he has got millions and millions of years as one day, twelve hours, our twelve hours. Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. So he is also subjected to birth and death. That is conditional life. So we have forgotten this. We Indians, bhāratīya, we have got these advantages, the perfect knowledge given by the Vedic literature, by great ṛṣis, and Bhagavān Svayaṁ Kapiladeva, Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa. And we are neglecting. We have become so unfortunate. There is a poet has said that ātman dhana vilaye diye bhikṣa mage porer kache:(?) "We have lost our own culture. Now we are beggar. We are going to foreign countries to beg something." Of course, I have gone to foreign countries not to beg, but to give. Others go there to beg: "Give me grain. Give me money. Give me soldier." But we have not gone. We have gone to give them. Therefore these Europeans and Americans are attracted. Because I am giving them, not taking from them. That is the difference. They have seen many, big, big persons go to the foreign countries only to beg, but nobody goes there to give.

So the Indian culture is so rich that you can give to the whole world, whole world. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission.

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



They are getting life. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness means getting life. They are exhausted with this materialistic way of life. They are getting some new life. That is wanted. Because muktaye. We living entities, we are, by nature, liberated. There is no question of birth and death, old age and disease. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. So how there can be birth and death and old age and disease? Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha.



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ...

[Bs. 5.1]



Anādi. There is no question of birth and death. So we, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, we are also of the same nature, equal in quality, not in quantity. So why should we suffer this birth and death? Therefore in the beginning of Kapiladeva's instruction he said, yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ mato niḥśreyasāya me. That is yoga. What is that? That is explained that ādhyātmika, to save the soul. The soul is entrapped in this body, material body, and to save it. No more death, no more birth, no more old age. That is wanted. That is perfect yoga.



So how this perfect yoga can be achieved? That is explained in this verse. Puṁsi, rataṁ vā puṁsi muktaye. If you, your consciousness is become, is attached to Kṛṣṇa, only thinking of Kṛṣṇa, that will give you liberation. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: "Always chanting about Me." Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma... And yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ, and endeavoring with great determination. Just like you see in this temple. They rise early in the morning, at four o'clock. Immediately after taking bath and being prepared, they offer the maṅgala-ārātrika at five o'clock, kīrtana, then study. There are rules and regulations. That is called bhajana-kriyā. "A bhajana... In the mind, I am thinking of..." No. You cannot do so. You must go through the process. Bhajana-kriyā.

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā

tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

[Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]



If you want to awaken your dormant love for Kṛṣṇa... There is, because we are part and parcel. Just like father and son. There is natural love. But somehow or other, son is out of home and forgotten. Father, of course, thinks, "My such-and-such son has gone out. If he comes back..." So Kṛṣṇa thinks like that. Because we are sons of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is more anxious to get us back to home, back to Godhead. Therefore He comes and says, "You rascal, give up all these engagements." Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. "You have manufactured so many dharmas: deva-dharma, samāja-dharma, deśa-dharma, this dharma, that dharma, Hindu dharma, Muslim dharma, this... No! Simply surrender unto Me." That is dharma. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ek... [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa comes to teach us. Kṛṣṇa is very, very anxious.



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



Kṛṣṇa comes Himself, Kṛṣṇa leaves behind Him His word. Vapu and vāṇī. Vāṇī means the words. That is also Kṛṣṇa. That is also... Just like we do not see Kṛṣṇa now. We can see Kṛṣṇa if we actually advance. Here is Kṛṣṇa. But they will say, "Oh, this is an idol. This is an idol. This is not Kṛṣṇa." But Kṛṣṇa, if you think that you have not seen Kṛṣṇa, so Kṛṣṇa is present by His word also, Bhagavad-gītā. That is vāṇī, kṛṣṇa-vāṇī.



So this, this stage can be achieved when one is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that Kṛṣṇa is present as the Deity, Kṛṣṇa is present by His words in Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa is present as the taste in the water, Kṛṣṇa is present as sunshine, Kṛṣṇa is present as moonshine, Kṛṣṇa is present in the sound. This potaka, He is also present there. Śabdaḥ khe. The śabda, or the sound, Kṛṣṇa says, that "I am the sound." So Kṛṣṇa is present everywhere. One has to gain the knowledge how to see Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is mukti. If you remain always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that means you are on the liberated stage. And that is called bhakti-yoga.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyam...

[SB 7.5.23]



This Deity worship is arcanam. Chanting is vandanam. Dāsyam, to work for Kṛṣṇa, go and see people, preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, distribute books. In so many ways Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be... So everything is being done. People may take advantage of it. Then immediately he becomes muktaye. The consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is mukti.



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



If we are engaged in devotional service, bhakti-yoga, then we are liberated. Māṁ ca... Kṛṣṇa says. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa [Bg. 14.26]. Without any stoppage, continuously, something in Kṛṣṇa. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena.



There are so many ways of bhakti-yoga.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyam...

[SB 7.5.23]



Any of them you take, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The main is śravaṇam. Just you are hearing. This is the beginning. Ādau śraddhā. This is śraddhā, that "Here people are talking about Kṛṣṇa. Why not hear us? Let me hear." That is śraddhā, little faith. You have come here with a little faith. That increasing of that faith here with a little faith. That increasing of that faith is advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is required. Ādau śraddhā. First of all little faith: "Let us see." Then sādhu-saṅga. Sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. They are, the sādhus, the devotees, who are living in the temple, if you associate with them, talk with them about Kṛṣṇa, then you'll be benefited. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Then gradually bhajana-kriyā. Bhajana-kriyā. Actually engaged in service, officially being initiated to take service of the Lord, that is called bhajana-kriyā. And bhajana-kriyā means anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Then anartha, all these rascal habits, namely illicit sex, and intoxication, meat-eating, and gambling-nivṛtti, no more.



That is the test that whether you are actually initiated. If you are still attached to these... Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktiḥ... If you are not detestful to all these nonsense habits, then you must know that you are not making any progress. You are not making any progress. Because this is the result. Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. If you are actually making advance in bhajana-kriyā, then this attachment will be finished. No more. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. Not by force, but appreciating something, better condition of life, one rejects all this nonsense. That is advancement. Bhajana-kriyā. By bhajana-kriyā, by being initiated and executing the bhajana, now, one just be detestful. Then niṣṭhā. Tato niṣṭhā, firm faith. Tato ruciḥ. Ruci means taste. You cannot do without it. Just like the drunkard, he cannot remain without drinking. Similarly, a devotee is also drunkard. He cannot remain without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is called ruci, taste. Tato ruciḥ athāsaktiḥ. Then attachment. That is required.

Here... Sakta, sakta or āsakti, same thing. If our attachment is for this material enjoyment, that is bondage. That means we have to accept another body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. You cannot avoid. Because if you infect some disease, then you must suffer from it. If you infect. That is a practical knowledge. If you infect some disease... So kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ. As soon as you infect this tamo-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, you have to, what is called, immune from infection. That immunity is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And if you are not immune, you are subjected to the infection, then you must get another body of the same quality. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. So to remain free from the infection of these guṇas, then we have to engage ourselves in the bhakti-yoga. That is stated.

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Then he is immune to the infection of these guṇas.



So this is the process, and we have to learn it by sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ athāsaktiḥ... [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. In this way, there will be āsakti and bhāva. Then you attain the perfectional stage. That is called ecstatic stage of love of Godhead. And then you cannot remain with Kṛṣṇa. And then that bhāva increases. Just like mahābhāva. That mahābhāva is not possible in the ordinary human being, but it is possible for the gopīs, for Rādhārāṇī. They cannot live without Kṛṣṇa. That is the highest stage of perfection or liberation.

Thank you very much. (end)



741116SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.16

-

Bombay, November 16, 1974



Nitāi: "When one is completely cleansed of the impurities of lust and greed produced from false identification of the body as 'I' and bodily possessions as 'mine,' one's mind becomes purified. In that pure state he transcends the stage of so-called material happiness and distress."



Prabhupāda:



ahaṁ mamābhimānotthaiḥ

kāma-lobhādibhir malaiḥ

vītaṁ yadā manaḥ śuddham

aduḥkham asukhaṁ samam

[SB 3.25.16]



In the previous verse it has been advised, guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya rataṁ vā puṁsi muktaye. The process is that... (loud sound of firecrackers in background) The process is the mind has to be cleansed of all dirty things. Mind is the friend; mind is the enemy of everyone. If it is cleansed, then it is friends, and if it is dirty... Just like if you keep yourself unclean, then you contaminate some disease. And if you keep yourself clean, then you don't contaminate. If you take action, remaining... Therefore according to Vedic civilization, one has to cleanse himself three times a day, tri-sandhyā. Morning, early in the morning, again at noon, again in the evening. Those who are strictly following the brahminical rules and regulations... Vaiṣṇava also. Vaiṣṇava means he's already brāhmaṇa. So he must follow the rules and... Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyam... [Bg. 18.42].



So cleanliness is next to godliness. So the... Actually, our material conditioned life means the mind is covered with dirt, all unclean, dirty things. That is the disease. When we are in the lower stage of tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa, these dirty things are very much prominent. Therefore one has to raise himself from the position of tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa to sattva-guṇa. The process is recommended, how to cleanse the mind: śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. One has to hear the kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kṛṣṇa is within everyone's heart, and when He sees that a conditioned soul... Because the individual soul is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa wants that "This individual soul, rascal, he is so much attached for material enjoyment, which is the cause of his bondage, birth and death, old age and disease, and he's so fool that he does not take into consideration that 'Why I should be subjected to repetition of birth, death, old age and disease?' "He has become so fool. Mūḍha. Therefore they have been described: mūḍha, ass. Ass... Just like ass does not know why he is loading so much, so many cloths of the washerman. What for? He has no profit. None of the cloth belongs to him. The washerman gives a little morsel of grass, which is available everywhere. If the... But the ass thinks that "This morsel of grass is given by the washerman. Therefore I must carry the heavy load, although not a single cloth belongs to me."

This is called karmīs. The karmīs, all these big, big karmīs, big, big multimillionaires, they are just like ass, because they are working so hard. Not only these big-small also. Day and night. But eating two cāpāṭis or three cāpāṭis or utmost, four cāpāṭis. But he's working hard, so hard. These three-four cāpāṭis can be had easily even by the poorest man, but why he's working so hard? Because he's thinking, "I am responsible for maintaining such a big family." Similarly, a leader also, public leader, a politician, he's also thinking like that, that "Without me, all the members of my nation will die. So let me work day and night. Up to the point of my death or up to the point until I am killed by somebody, I have to work so hard." These are called dirty things. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Ahaṁ mameti. Ahaṁ mamābhimānotthaiḥ. These dirty things that... Take individual, social, political, communal, or national. Any way. These two things, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], is very prominent. "I belong to such and such community. I have got such and such duty." But he does not know these are all false designations. That is called ignorance. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore begins His instruction that jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. The actual position is that eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is the actual position. But he's thinking, "I am servant of this family. I am servant of this nation. I am servant of this community, servant..." So many. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This is due to ignorance, the mode of tamo-guṇa. Tamo-guṇa.

Therefore in the previous verse it is said, guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya. So long you'll be attached with these guṇeṣu, even you be attached to the sattva-guṇa, that is also bandhāya. Suppose... Sattva-guṇa means execute... The symbolic presentation is perfect brāhmaṇa. So even if we are very perfect brāhmaṇa, so I think that "I am so..., such a learned person. I understand the Vedic principles. So I..." The same, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. The same principle, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. But if you are raised in the sattva-guṇa, then there is chance of understanding your position. In the tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa you cannot. Tamo-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, you remain like animal, like cats and dogs. But when you come to the platform of sattva-guṇa... That you can come by following the principles, and then the attachment... Guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya. Then your conditioned life on account of being attached to the material qualities will be finished. How? Simple thing. Everyone can attain to the platform of sattva-guṇa if he follows the instruction. In the Bhagavad-gītā the same thing is said in different way, these languages and Vedic scriptures.

satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ

yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā

nitya-yuktā upāsate

[Bg. 9.14]



This is the process. And in another place it is said,



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



The process is that you try to hear about kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kṛṣṇa-kathā is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa is speaking. That is kṛṣṇa-kathā. And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. About Kṛṣṇa. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, janmādy asya yataḥ... [SB 1.1.1]. Speaking about Kṛṣṇa, the original person.



So we have to hear the kṛṣṇa-kathā. This temple, or this center, is open to give chance to the people in general, "Come and hear kṛṣṇa-kathā." The sat-saṅga. This is called sat-saṅga. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. If you hear, gradually... Because we do not hear kṛṣṇa-kathā on account of dirty things in the heart. So we have to cleanse the dirt. That process is ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam, paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. If we chant and dance, then the dirty things become cleansed. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Cetaḥ khalu asya bandhāya muktaye cātmano matam. Cetaḥ, this heart, is the cause of our bondage, and the heart is the cause of our liberation. When it is dirty, then it is cause of bondage, conditioned life. Conditional life means that janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. I take one birth, one body, and I stay for sometimes, enjoy or suffer. There is no question of enjoyment, only suffering. And then again I die. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. And I get another body and again begin another life. Maybe very good life, or maybe cats' and dogs' life, a tree's life. That we do not know. But dehāntara-prāptiḥ. But there is change of body. As soon as I die, give up this body-another body. Immediately. Immediately I'll have to enter the womb of certain mother through the grace of the father, and I'll have to develop another body, and when it is fit for working I come out, and again another chapter of my life begins. This is conditioned life.

So the human life is meant for understanding that how we are undergoing this tribulation of birth and death, old age and disease. The cats and dogs, they cannot understand. That is not possible. Therefore for human life so many Vedic literatures are there, not for the cats and dogs. If you don't take advantage of this Vedic literature,... There is no need of education. It is not needed that one has to become very learned scholar. No. Sat-saṅga. Hear. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You remain in your position, but go to a person who is speaking kṛṣṇa-kathā. Hear him. That's all. Everyone can do that. Where is the difficulty? So our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that. We give chance to the people to hear about Kṛṣṇa. That is our men... Therefore we have specifically mentioned: Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We don't talk any other nonsense things. We don't talk. We have no other business. Simply we talk of Kṛṣṇa. That will purify. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If you, even if you do not understand a single word, if you simply hear, then you become pious. It is so nice. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Śravaṇa means when there is talks of Kṛṣṇa, somebody is hearing and somebody is talking. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam.

Just like here in this meeting, I am talking, you are hearing. Both of us are being benefited. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. Kṛṣṇa wants this, that "These rascals may begin to hear and chant about Me." That's all. Satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. Mām, Kṛṣṇa. Not others. You don't talk politics, or don't talk sociology, or this or that, nonsense. This is all dirty things. Don't waste your time. There is no need of reading so many rascal novels. They are called tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ, na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśaḥ [SB 1.5.10]. Any literature which does not glorify the Supreme Lord Hari, that is vāyasa-tīrtham. Vāyasa-tīrtham means the place where the crows enjoy. Vāyasa-tīrtha.

So this is, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving chance people to become pious. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. "How? I have no money. How can I become pious? I cannot give in charity. I cannot go to take bath in the Ganges, and..." So many, there are pious activities. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa tyāgena yamena niyamena [SB 6.1.13]. There are so many processes to become pious. In the śāstra there are recommendations, "You do this to become pious." So in this Kali-yuga people have lost all stamina, how to become pious. They are so sinful. But here is the only means: you simply come here and hear about Kṛṣṇa. You have got ears, Kṛṣṇa has given you ears. And Kṛṣṇa has given you tongue also. You can speak. Just like we are reciting the verses. So the tongue is there, the ear is here, there, and you can hear from realized soul and make your life perfect simply by hearing. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Because one cannot be devotee unless he is purified. A sinful man cannot become a devotee. Duṣkṛtinaḥ. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. One class of men, duṣkṛtinaḥ, always committing sinful life. Such rascals, such foolish men... Duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. Narādhama means lowest of the mankind. Why lowest of the mankind? Because the human life is meant for purifying your existence. You are under condition of birth, death, old age, and here is the chance to purify yourself. If you don't do that, then you are mūḍha, duṣkṛtina, narādhama. You don't take chance. Mūḍha, narādhama.

So this class of men, they are not interested. They will suffer this material existence continually, one after another, one of chapter, one of chapter... Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19], one life. And if he gets one life very opulent, that is, then he doesn't care for what is next life. "Let me drink and enjoy. Eat, drink, and be merry and en..." This is going on all over the world. But śāstra says, "No, no, no, no. It is not good. You are doing mistake. You are doing mistake." Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. You have become mad and you are engaged in doing all forbidden things which you should not do. You are doing that. And why you are doing that? Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Why? Yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti. Simply for sense gratification. Simply for sense gratification. I have seen one hotel man in Calcutta. He cut the throat of a chicken, and the chicken, half-cut, it was flapping and jumping. The child of the hotel man, he was crying, and the hotel man was laughing. He was taking pleasure, "Oh, how this chicken, half-cut throat, and how he is jumping... Why you are crying? Why you are crying?" And in Western countries I think students are sometimes taken to slaughterhouse to see. Is it a fact? Yes. You see. They take pleasure. Doing something sinful, they take pleasure. For pleasure's sake they do that. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaye [SB 5.5.4]. Simply for the matter of sense gratification.

So śāstra says, "No, no, this is not good. This is not good." Na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ [SB 5.5.4]. But they have no brain. This body is temporary, but it is full of suffering, although it is temporary. One can say, "This body is temporary. So what do I care for...?" But it is painful. We have to suffer.

nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti

na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

[SB 5.5.4]



They have no brain that this material body is kleśada, is simply miserable. So dull brain. That is tamo-guṇa. Tamo-guṇa means completely darkness. Just like animals. You take one animal, you cut its throat. Another animal is standing and eating grass. He does not know "The next time, next term is mine." This is animal life.



So people have become... Especially in this Kali-yuga. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to give these rascals little sense, that "Don't remain animal. Become human being." This is the propaganda. The Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that,

kṛṣṇa bhuli' sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

[Cc. Madhya 20.117]



Kṛṣṇa-bhuliyā, forgetting his relationship with Kṛṣṇa, one is simply acting foolishly, and the māyā is giving him miseries one after another, one after another, one after another. Another place it is said that,



anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gela

ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa kailā



We have forgotten Kṛṣṇa. Therefore there are Vedas and Purāṇas and Vedic literature. It is for human being. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. If we study this Vedic literature,... Vedic literature means four Vedas, eighteen Purāṇas, and Vedānta and Upaniṣads, Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata, and any literature which is connected with this Vedic literature. That is also Vedic literature. So Veda-Purāṇa, this Vedic literature, should be utilized. They have got time to read so many nonsense literatures, rubbish literature, and waste time, but if you invite them that "Come here, we shall discuss Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Vedānta-sūtra, similar literature," nobody will come. But simply by hearing... If we want... Vītaṁ yadā manaḥ śuddham. If we become free from this contamination of tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa, that is the highest stage of perfection.



That can be done simply by hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā. No education required. Simply come and hear. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Because you will be purified. As you hear and repeat, chant, you become purified.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi...

[SB 1.2.17]



These dirty things, mala... Here it is said, kāma-lobhādibhir malaiḥ. Mala, mala means dirty things. And what are these? Kāma and lobha, lusty desires, lobha, greediness and lusty desires. These are mala. So one has to become free from these two things, kāma and lobha. The whole world is going on kāma and lobha. One is getting money. When he has got one thousand, he wants one lakh. If he gets one lakh, he wants more and more and more. This is called kāma. And why? Lobha. They are making profit. They have got enough money, still, they will hold stock, will not sell, so that people may not get stock and they will be hankering, they will pay any price demanded. These are going on, kāma and lobha. Kāma-lobhādibhiḥ.



So we have to cleanse this heart, the ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. They are doing all these things. These are not good things. Asādhu ayam. Na sādhu manye. These, this is not good for human being. Why it is not good? Because according to your karma you'll get another next life, another next body, and you'll have to suffer. Again you have to suffer. You are already suffering. You may be very rich man, but does it mean that you'll not be diseased, because you are rich man? No. This is suffering. You may be very rich man, very, I mean to say, influential man, prime minister... Even Jawaharlal Nehru-last time he became paralyzed. So you cannot avoid these things. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. You should not be puffed-up because you have got some bank balance, you are happy. No. Your real unhappiness-these four things: janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi. That any intelligent man should always keep in front, that "These are my distresses." These temporary distresses and to relieve it, that is not very good. You must make ultimate finishing of all distresses. That is bhakti-yoga. That is bhakti-yoga. And that bhakti-yoga begins this, by hearing and chanting.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi...

[SB 1.2.17]



If you continually hear, then gradually all the dirty things, kāma-lobhādibhiḥ, these things will be finished and you will be purified, and then that is the way of your liberation. Muktaye. Guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya rataṁ vā puṁsi muktaye. The process is also given that you hear about Kṛṣṇa. Then you will be purified. Because this life is meant for sattva-śuddhi. Śuddha-sattva. Our existence is not uncontaminated. It is con... The human form of life is meant for to make this existence uncontaminated: no more birth, no more death. They do not know. Where is the university, where is the school, college, to teach this science how one can become uncontaminated? There is no such institution except this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



So vītaṁ yadā manaḥ... So how it is possible? That is also said, that nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. Abhadra, the dirty things... Because you hear, go on, go on hearing, chanting, then the dirty things will be diminished. Kṛṣṇa says that hṛdy antaḥ-sthaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is also within the heart, and the dirty things are also there. So..., but Kṛṣṇa helps you cleansing. So it is not completely cleansed, but even it is fifty percent or sixty percent cleansed, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu... How? Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Regularly hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. These two processes recommended by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Chant your rounds regularly. Make a fixed-up... We have fixed up only minimum. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was chanting 300,000 times, and we have made sixteen times. And still, etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nā... "I could not perform even sixteen rounds. Such unfortunate I am." You see? Etādṛśī tava kṛpā... We have mini..., minimized, the lowest number, the easiest process... Caitanya Mahāprabhu says read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Don't talk nonsense; don't waste your time. Then you become purified. Vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhā man-mayā mām upāśritāḥ [Bg. 4.10]. Kṛṣṇa says...

In this way... Here it is, vītaṁ yadā manaḥ. When the mind is cleansed. This can be done, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam. Not Bhāgavata-saptāha. The Bhāgavata-saptāha, that is a business. Real business is nityam. We don't find in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by so many big, big commentators, Śrīdhara Svāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, and Vīrarāghava Ācārya, many, many... They never recommend Bhāgavata-saptāha. I do not know wherefrom it has come. Bhāgavata says, nityaṁ bhāgavata... Why week? Every day. If it is possible, twenty-four hours. Therefore one has to retire from these family, social, political responsibilities, and whole time devote for chanting and Bhāgavata reading. That is required. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. At least, as much as possible. Don't waste time. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has says that āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi na labhyaḥ svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ. Āyuḥ, the duration of life... Suppose I shall live for hundred years. Even one moment of this hundred years, if..., it cannot be returned back, even if you are prepared to thousands and millions of dollars. No. One moment passed out of a hundred, that is minus. That's all. You cannot add again. Āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi. Even, even moment. Sa cen nirarthakaṁ nītaḥ... If you cannot get returned back even a moment of your life by payment of millions of dollars, if that moment is wasted, just how much you have lost money, you consider. How much you have lost! Therefore not a single moment should be lost, human life. It should be utilized. Simply by chanting, simply by reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. We are publishing so many books. We have to read; we have to chant. Then life will successful. Vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodha [Bg. 4.10]. Then we shall be free from this attachment, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye.

So the process is that nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Daily we should devote our time for understanding Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And bhāgavata-sevayā means to serve the person bhāgavata, whose life is simply Bhāgavata, to serve him. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā.

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]



By this process then you attain the stage of bhagavad-bhakti, naiṣṭhikī, fixed up, not tiltering, fixed up. Bhagavati naiṣṭhikī. Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā. This naiṣṭhikī, or niṣṭhā, firm faith, is achieved when anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Anartha. This anartha means ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], kāma-lobhādibhiḥ. This is anartha. We don't require all these things. Why I shall think, "This is my country, my family, my body..."? Nothing is mine. It is false. But people are wasting time in this way. "My country, my nation, my body, my family." Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. They are wasting time. So nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. We can vanquish all these false conceptions of life. Then sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. These are the... Kāma-lobha... But even if it is not completely finished, these dirty things, but even if you come to the platform of sattva-guṇa, then you'll not be disturbed. But these tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa always disturb. Then if you are not disturbed by these kāma and lobha, then sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. Then you will be pleased, you'll feel happiness, when you are on the sattva-guṇa. And then you have to surpass the sattva-guṇa. Śuddha-sattva. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam. The vasudeva platform. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Then you will understand your relationship with Kṛṣṇa and then you'll be happy.



Thank you very much. (end)



741117SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.17

-

Bombay, November 17, 1974



Nitāi: "At that time the soul can see himself to be transcendental to the material existence and always self-effulgent, never fragmented, although very minute in size."



Prabhupāda:



tadā puruṣa ātmānaṁ

kevalaṁ prakṛteḥ param

nirantaraṁ svayaṁ-jyotir

aṇimānam akhaṇḍitam

[SB 3.25.17]



This is self-realization. Self-realization means to see one's proper identity. At the present moment we are not finding out our proper identity. We are seeing to the body. I see you, your body, and you see me, my body. We have no vision of the real person, which is, who is occupying this body. This is the first lesson we get from Bhagavad-gītā: dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehi... This body is called deha, and the owner of the body is called dehī. So



dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ...

[Bg. 2.13]



So when we can see that we are not this body, "I am not this body," that is beginning of self-realization. That is called brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi: "I am not this material body." Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. This is self-realization.



So what is the identification of the jīva, of the soul? Very minute. Aṇimānam. Very, very minute, infinitesimal. God is infinite, and we are infinitesimal, very small particle. Just like sun. Sun is very big, but the sunshine, it is a combination of very minute, bright articles, atoms. Everyone knows. It is a combination of, I mean to say, dazzling, bright... Similarly, we are also a small, bright particle, the same quality. Svayaṁ-jyoti. Just like God, or Brahman, is jyoti, we are also jyoti. But Brahman is all-pervading, infinite; we are aṇimānam. So Māyāvādī theory is that "At the present moment... I am the same." They, their theory is ghaṭākāśa-poṭākāśa. Just like a ghaṭa, or in a pot, there is, within the pot there is sky, and outside the pot there is sky. So the separation is due to the wall of the pot. If the... When the wall is broken, then the inside sky and the outside sky become one. This is Māyāvāda theory.

Therefore here it is said, akhaṇḍitam. Akhaṇḍitam means not that the sky within the pot is fragmented from the whole sky. That cannot be. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said, acchedyo 'yam. Acchedyaḥ, it cannot be cut into pieces. Akhaṇḍita. That means it is minute perpetually, eternally. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūto jīva-loke sanātanaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. Sanātanaḥ means eternally we are small. Aṇu, aṇimānam. And God, or Kṛṣṇa, is Vibhu. "God is great" means He, nobody is equal to Him, nobody is greater than Him. That is greatness. God is great. But we say, "God is great," but we do not know how great He is. He is so great that millions of universes are coming from the holes of His body.

yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



The millions of universes are coming from the breathing of Mahā-Viṣṇu. So that is a little idea of the greatness of God, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



"This great, this material world, is situated on the strength of one part of Me."



So this is self-realization. We must understand our position. In the Purāṇas also, our minute particle identification... What is that? One ten-thousandth part of the top of the hair. We cannot see even the top of the hair. That you divide, keśāgra, keśa agra, the front portion of the hair. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya [Cc. Madhya 19.140]. You divide into one hundred parts. Śatadhā kalpitasya ca. Again take one part and divide into hundreds parts. That is the dimension of the jīva. That small particle is there within the ant, the microbic germ, and he, that part is within the elephant. q. That is the dimension. So self-realization... Self-realization means one must know his identity. That identity, that small particle is there, within me, within you. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehī is within the idea. But because it is so small, with our material eyes it is not possible to see. There is no such instrument that you can find out. Therefore on account of our inability to find it out, we say, "It is nirākāra," because we cannot calculate what is the ākāra, or what is the dimension. But the ākāra is there. The living entity has got full ākāra. If you have studied the small microbes... Sometimes I see at night when I work a small insect just like a full stop. It is walking. That means the whole physiological combination, anatomy, physiology, is there. But you cannot... You see just a like a full stop. So within that there is the soul. And within the elephant or big animal there is also the soul. The soul is there. Asmin dehe, dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. That is there.

So when we actually realize what we are, brahmānubhūti, then our life is successful. Now we are identifying with this body. So long we are identifying with this body, we are no better than the cats and dogs. Whatever knowledge you may have scientific knowledge, if you do not know yourself, then you are nothing but the animal. The animal does not know. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. If somebody considers that "This body, I am self," identifies... "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya," "I am man," "I am woman," "I am elephant," and so on... So this kind of identification, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke... Kuṇape means this is a bag made of kapha-pitta-vāyu, tri-dhātu. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ [SB 10.84.13]. And thinking that, in bodily relationship, I am thinking, "He's my own man, or relative..." Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu. Kalatra means because we have intimate relation with woman and offspring, children born of her, so kalatrādiṣu. And bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. And the land as ijya. Ijya means worshipable. Nowadays it is very prominent. I heard that for land there was a fight in somewhere near. So that is going on, nation to nation, community to community. So bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. They are thinking, "This land is mine. The land of my birth is mine." We have seen. There was fight between Hindu and Muslim during partition days: "This is my Pakistan," "This is my Hindustan." So bhauma ijya-dhīḥ.

Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ [SB 10.84.13], yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile... Now, we go to tīrtha-sthāna, we go to Hardwar and Vṛndāvana and other nice holy places... And the Christians go to Jordan. So... Jerusalem. They take birth in the Jordan. So yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile. Salile means water. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij janeṣv abhijñeṣu. But have no interest to understand his identification, spiritual identification, from the ācārya. Janeṣv abhijñeṣu. Abhijña means one who knows, ācārya. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. This is the Vedic instruction. To understand your spiritual identity, you must find out a proper guru. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet. So he has no such knowledge. Ācāryavān puruṣo veda. So he has no knowledge. The superficial. So sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13], such person is no better than the cows and the asses-means animal.

So this is self-realization, when one understands that "I am not this body. I am minute particle of the Supreme." Kṛṣṇa says... Everything is said there. We have to realize it. Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśa. Although aṁśa... Aṁśa and aṁśī, the whole and the part. Part is never equal to the whole-that is axiomatic truth-but it is equal in quality. Just like little particle of gold is also gold. It is nothing but else. Similarly, although we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, very minute, infinitesimal, aṇimānam, perpetually, eternally, still, we are not as big as Kṛṣṇa. Just like small particle of this sea water. The chemically composition is the same; you'll find the same taste. And if you analyze, you'll find all the same ingredients, chemicals, within the small particle. But the small particle is never equal to the sea, small particle of the water. This is said... If I think, "Because I am qualitatively one with God, therefore I have become God," that is mistake. That is aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. They have been described in the śāstras as aviśuddha, unclean intelligence. Unclean intelligence. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. The, some Māyāvādī philosophers, they think that "I am the same, so 'ham." So 'ham does not mean that I am equal to God. Nobody can be equal to God or greater than God. That is not God. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad..., mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7].

So nobody can be greater than God or equal to God. That is... That means greatness of God. Asamordhva. Asama. Asama means nobody is equal to Him. And nobody is greater than Him. That is God. If somebody claims to be God, then he has to prove that nobody is equal to him and nobody is greater than him. Then he's God. This is the simple definition of God, that nobody equal to Him and nobody greater than Him. That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says that mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "My dear Dhanañjaya, Arjuna, there is no more superior authority than Me." And in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Īśvara. Īśvara means controller. So we small living entities, very minute, still, we are controller. We control. At least, we control our family members, my wife, my children. Or if I am bigger, I control my office, or I control my factory, I control the country, I become president. In this way, controller, controller, bigger controller, bigger controller, you go to the Brahmā, the controller of the universe. But he is also not Supreme Controller. It is said, tene... Brahmā is meditating. Although he is the greatest creature, living creature, within this universe, he's also meditating to learn controlling. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ. He learned first of all how to control over the universe. Then he became Brahmā. Of course, he was born Brahmā, but still, he was to be educated. Just like we require to be educated. So Brahmā was educated. So who educated him? Kṛṣṇa. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. Kṛṣṇa says. Aham ādir hi devānām. Deva, the original deva, is Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. So Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa is Viṣṇu, but He is the instructor of Brahmā and Śiva also. This is the shastric conclusion. That is greatness. That is greatness.

So we should not falsely claim that "I am as great as the Supreme God." No. We should understand this, aṇimānam. Svayaṁ-jyo... Etad jyotiḥ, I am as effulgent... Just like spark. Spark is jyoti, but not as brilliant, effulgent, as the original fire. The original fire-phat! phat!-there are some sparks. You have got experience. The spark is also jyoti. If a spark falls on your cloth, it will immediately burn. The burning capacity is there. But it is not as good as the original fire. Svayaṁ-jyotiḥ. Here it is said, nirantaram. So nirantaram means there is, so far jyoti is concerned, there is no difference, but the small, very small. Aṇimānam akhaṇḍitam. This is self-realization. Don't falsely claim that "Because I am qualitatively one with God, therefore I am God." No. You may be god. God means controller. But you are not the Supreme God. The Supreme God is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ. Parama means Supreme. We are īśvara, we may be īśvara. I may be īśvara for few persons, another may be for a big nation, another may be for the... You can go on increasing. But you cannot reach the, I mean to say, position of God. That is aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ.

Therefore śāstra says, ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. One who has advanced very much in spiritual knowledge, but he is thinking himself, "Now I have become liberated..." Sometimes they claim, "I have become Nārāyaṇa." Therefore Māyāvādīs, they address one another, "Namo nārāyaṇāya." Everyone has become Nārāyaṇa. So how everyone can become Nārāyaṇa? So many Nārāyaṇas? No. Nārāyaṇa is one. God is one, Nārāyaṇa. Therefore śāstra warns,

yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vīkṣeta

sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam

[Cc. Madhya 18.116]



He's pāṣaṇḍī. If one compares Nārāyaṇa with other demigods... Now, unfortunately, it has come to so downtrodden position, the intelligence, that they are talking of "daridra-nārāyaṇa." What is this? This is farce. Nārāyaṇa is the exalted Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even Śaṅkarācārya, he says, nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ avyaktāt: "Nārāyaṇa is beyond this universe." Paraḥ avyaktāt. Avyaktāt anya-sambhavaḥ. And the whole universe is product of this avyakta. So we should not compare Nārāyaṇa with anyone else, what to speak of darid ra. That is a foolishness. Nārāyaṇa is Lakṣmī-pati, the husband, the controller of the goddess of fortune, and how He can be daridra? This is misunderstanding. Therefore śāstra warns,



yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vīkṣeta

sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam

[Cc. Madhya 18.116]



If anyone thinks that Nārāyaṇa is..., or other demigods are equal to Nārāyaṇa, sa pāṣaṇḍī. He is pāṣaṇḍī, atheist.



So we should not think like that. You may think that you have become liberated, you have got the position of Nārāyaṇa... That is all false thinking, aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. They have been addressed as aviśuddha, nonpurified, buddhayaḥ, intelligence. Not intelligent. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas tvayy asta-bhāvāt [SB 10.2.32]. This is... Why these things happen, one compares Nārāyaṇa with ordinary demigod or ordinary man? Because aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ, their intelligence is not purified. So āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Such persons, by severe austerities and penances, may elevate oneself to the position of Brahman. Still, āruhya kṛcchreṇa param... Paraṁ padam means brahma-pada. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Again he falls down. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ: "Because they neglected to worship Your lotus feet." So unless one becomes devotee, there is no secure position in the spiritual world. One may... Just like a very crude example. You may have very powerful sputnik. Just like these people are trying to go the moon with powerful... What is called, the machine?

Devotees: Rocket.



Prabhupāda: Rocket, yes. But then, going with great force, but āruhya kṛcchreṇa... Similarly, one can rise up to the Brahman effulgence, but if there is no shelter. Just like these people are going, but they don't get any shelter. But they come down again. Similarly, one, by severe austerities and penances, may go up to the Brahmaloka, but he has no position. He has no position. Because in the Brahmaloka, or Vaikuṇṭhaloka, in the Paravyoma, the spiritual sky, there are spiritual planets. They are called Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Hundreds and millions there are. Very, very big, big planets than these material planets. So unless you get a shelter in one of the planets, then you again fall down.



So that is... Because we are after ānanda, sac-cid-ānanda... Simply to rise to the platform of Brahman, that is sat, partial realization of the Absolute Truth, sat. Then cit. Cit means knowledge. That is also partial. Ānanda. Sac-cid-ānanda. When there... Ānanda you cannot get. Just like if you, simply in the sky you fly, you don't get ānanda. Therefore you have come to down, come down again to the airplane, airport. Without that, there is no ānanda. Similarly, simply rising up to the Brahman effulgence, there is no ānanda. Ānanda means you have to enter into the spiritual planet, where Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, is there. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. You have entered to that eternal planet. You must get some residence. The impersonalists, they do not get that. They remain... Just like you remain in the sky. You cannot be happy. You want some planet, but if you cannot get planet, then again you come back in this planet. So āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Again in this material world. Therefore we have to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is real self-realization. And what is that? Very simple thing. Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ. If you simply try to understand what is Kṛṣṇa, why does He come, what is His business, what is His form...

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti...

[Bg. 4.9]



Simple process. You try to understand Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are simply teaching how to understand Kṛṣṇa. And if anyone is fortunate to understand, then his life is successful. Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānā...



So tadā puruṣa ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ prakṛteḥ param. Prakṛteḥ param. Now we are thinking, "I am the product of this material world. I am Indian." What I am Indian? Because my body is Indian, I am Indian? No. I am the spirit soul, hṛdayānanda. That is self-realization. The whole world is fighting: "I am Indian," "American," "I am Pakistani," "I am Hindustani," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am brāhmaṇa." Dehātma-buddhiḥ. So one has to realize that "I am not this body." Kevalaṁ prakṛteḥ param. "I am beyond this body, far, transcendental to this material world." How it is possible? Tadā kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. We have discussed this verse yesterday. Ahaṁ mamābhimāna utthaiḥ kāma-lobhādi, kāma-lobhādibhir malaiḥ. So long we have got the desire, lusty desire and greediness, for enjoying this material world, then it is not possible. We have to free, we have to become free from these lusty desires.

So this is bhakti-yoga process. Bhakti-yoga. If we adopt the bhakti-yoga process, then you become free from the kāma-lobha. Kāma-loba means the influence of tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa. So as soon as we become free from... We have to become free from all the guṇas. Because ceto guṇaiḥ, cetaḥ khalv asya bandhāya. So to become free from the guṇas, that is simply explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. You engage yourself in devotional service; you become immediately fee from the influence of the guṇas. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate [Bg. 14.26]. Anyone who is engaged in rendering service to the Lord, bhakti-yoga... Bhakti-yoga, according to the... Because we are not expert in approaching the Supreme Lord, therefore we have to follow the principles of bhakti-yoga as enunciated by the ācāryas. Just like when a boy goes to the school, he has to follow the rules and regulations, but after some time, when he becomes accustomed, then he hasn't got to be taught. He learns automatically. He comes exactly in time to the school, he takes his seat, he studies nicely.

Therefore abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena cetasā nānya-gāminā [Bg. 8.8]. We have to practice abhyāsa-yoga. You must chant sixteen rounds. That must be done. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma... You must rise early in the morning, perform maṅgala-ārātrika. Sādhu-śāstra. By the order of spiritual master, by the order of the śāstras, you have to execute this function of bhakti-yoga, and as soon as you become attached to it, you become practiced to it, immediately you become self-realized.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741118SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.18

-

Bombay, November 18, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.) Translation: "In that position of self-realization, by practice of knowledge and renunciation in devotional service, one sees everything in the right perspective; he becomes indifferent to material existence, and the material influence acts less powerfully upon him."



Prabhupāda:



jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena

bhakti-yuktena cātmanā

paripaśyaty udāsīnaṁ

prakṛtiṁ ca hataujasam

[SB 3.25.18]



The conditioned state of life means influence of material nature. When we are very much influenced by the material nature... We have already discussed: guṇa. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. Material nature means the three guṇas, three material qualities: ignorance, passion and goodness. Goodness is better than the other two qualities, ignorance and passion. But mostly, especially in this age, they are conducted or influenced by the modes of ignorance and passion. People do not know what is the aim of life. Just like they are called śūdras. Śūdras means they do not know what is the aim of life. Just like animal. Animal does not know what is the aim of life. That is ignorance. And passion is power, creative power, or working for sense gratification. That is called passion. And goodness means knowledge. One can see what is what.



So we have discussed in the last verse how one becomes liberated.

tadā puruṣa ātmānaṁ

kevalaṁ prakṛteḥ param

nirantaraṁ svayaṁ-jyotir

aṇimānam akhaṇḍitam



Aṇimānam, aṇu. We are minute particle of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. We are not Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa's part, minute part. That minute part also we have discussed-one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca [Cc. Madhya 19.140]. So when we realize this, that "I am not God, but I am godly. I have got the quality of God..." I have given the example also: just like the sea and the drop of water of the sea. So chemically, the drop of water of the sea is the same quality. There is no change of taste or other chemical composition. Similarly, we should understand fully that we are simply qualitatively one with God, but quantitatively, God is great and we are very minute particle. This is self-realization. Therefore part and parcel. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. The all living entities, Kṛṣṇa says, "They are My part and parcel."



Part and parcel, we have several times explained. Just like in my body there are different parts, but the business of the part is to satisfy the central point, stomach. The leg is working, the hand is working, the eyes, the ears, everyone is working. Why working? To satisfy the stomach. The Hindi, there is a pe kaste, sat.(?) So similarly, we should work for Kṛṣṇa. Because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, therefore we should work for Kṛṣṇa. I can repeat the same story again: udarendriyāṇām. The indriyas, the different parts of the body, because they were working hard, and the stomach within the abdomen, he's simply eating, so they went on strike: "We shall no more work. This part is only simply..., this man is simply eating, and we are working. We shall not work." They stopped work. The indriyas, they stopped work. So gradually they became weak. So when next meeting, they saw that "We have become weak," therefore again decided that "Let us supply food to the stomach."This is sense.

So this godless society, the rascal society, who is, which has forgotten that we have to serve Kṛṣṇa, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ. When the society forgets Kṛṣṇa and stops Kṛṣṇa's service, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ. Real dharma means the characteristic. Dharma does not mean some rules and regulations. So just like sugar. Sugar, the characteristic of sugar is to become sweet. The characteristic of chili means to become hot. If sugar becomes hot and chili becomes sweet, then nobody cares for it. Similarly, our characteristic is to serve Kṛṣṇa. And when we serve anything other than Kṛṣṇa, that is our diseased condition of life. Just like this hand is meant for picking up something eatable and put it into the mouth. If it is unable to do it, then it is diseased. If the fingers and hands cannot pick up nice foodstuff and put into the mouth, then it is diseased condition. Similarly, when we are unable to serve Kṛṣṇa, or we do not serve Kṛṣṇa, we serve... Serving we are. That is a fact. We cannot become master. Nobody... Can anyone say that he is master? He's not serving anyone? Everyone is serving. That's a fact. Either you are serving your family or society or country or office or so many service. If anyone hasn't got to serve anything, then he picks up a master, a cat and dog, and serves him. Because service is my nature. But we are missing where to put the service. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is, that is Kṛṣṇa.

So when we understand that we are missing... We are serving, but we are having no pleasure. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. We are serving... Instead of serving Kṛṣṇa, I am serving my lusty desires. Kāma-lobhādi. If I go to serve any office, I am not going to serve that particular person, proprietor of the office, but I require some money. Therefore I am serving. So I am serving the money, not the person. Therefore it is said, kāma-lobha. Lobha. We serve the... Service must be... Kṛṣṇa is the master. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Only master is Kṛṣṇa, and anyone-all demigods or man or animal or trees or-anything, they are all servants. This is the position. And when one realizes this position, that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, particle, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. My duty is to serve Kṛṣṇa," then it is called self-realization. Not that ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "I become Bhagavān." How you become Bhagavān? If you are Bhagavān, if you are actually the supreme powerful, then why you are in miserable condition under māyā? Does Bhagavān come under māyā? No. Kṛṣṇa says, mama māyā. Māyā is the maidservant of Kṛṣṇa. And we are servant of māyā. So how we can become māyā, uh, Bhagavān? This is common sense. Had I been Bhagavān, then why I have become servant of māyā?

Therefore we are engaged in the service of māyā in so many phases and different names. Somebody's serving country, somebody's serving society, somebody's serving family, office, this, that, so many. This is māyā's service. Now, when we come to our senses, that "I am..., so long I was engaged in māyā's service. Now I have to engage myself in Kṛṣṇa's service," that is self-realization. That is described here that jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena. [SB 3.25.18] Jñāna-vairāgya. This is knowledge, that "I am servant of Kṛṣṇa. I am nobody's servant." This is jñāna. Because I am in illusion, I am, for nothing, without any benefit, I am serving so many... Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. Kāma-lobha. I am serving this kāma, lobha, moha, mātsarya, but without any benefit, without any pleasure. So when we come to this stage, to know, that is called jñānam. And as soon as you become jñānī, actually in knowledge, then what is the next step? Vairāgya. "No more I am serving anyone. I shall serve only Kṛṣṇa. That's all." This is called vairāgya. Jñāna-vairāgya.

Therefore in the Bhāgavata it is said,

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



If one is engaged in the service of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, this knowledge also comes. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births, if one is actually jñānī, seeking after knowledge, then he comes to this conclusion. What is this? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. This is mahātmā, not anyone who is defying Kṛṣṇa and he's trying to become Kṛṣṇa. He's not mahātmā; he's durātmā. Mahātmā means, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. And knowing this, māṁ prapadyate. That is mahātmā. Don't mistake mahātmā, who is mahātmā. What is the symptom of mahātmā?



mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

[Bg. 9.13]



He's mahātmā. You cannot manufacture mahātmā. This is the qualification of mahātmā: vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19], who knows that Kṛṣṇa is everything. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. He is mahātmā. And his business is mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīm... [Bg. 9.13]. He is under the daivī-prakṛti. There are two kinds of prakṛtis: parā-prakṛti and aparā-prakṛti. Aparā-prakṛti means this material world, and daivī-prakṛti is the spiritual world. So immediately, as soon as he understands this philosophy of life, that "I am uselessly serving this material world or the society, friendship, country and so on, so on, without serving Kṛṣṇa," that is called jñāna, knowledge. And as soon as one comes to this knowledge, that knowledge is, that position is called brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage. Brahman realization.



That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. As soon as one comes to this platform of knowledge, then he becomes prasannātmā. "Oh, why I am serving these nonsense? I forgot that I am a spirit soul, minute particle of Kṛṣṇa. My business is to serve Kṛṣṇa." Just like... I have already explained. Part and parcel means serving the whole. That is called part and parcel. Any example you can take. In office there are so many workers, but they are working for satisfaction of the whole. Similarly, the whole is Kṛṣṇa. Anything, we individually or anything, they are meant for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Upaniṣads. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam. Anyone who has understood that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, Īśa... Īśa means Kṛṣṇa. Īśa or īśvara. There are so many īśvaras or īśa, but Īśvara, real Īśvara, is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. And Kṛṣṇa also says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. There are many īśvaras, or īśas. That is all right, but "Nobody is greater than Me." That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. So this is jñāna. So as soon as one comes to this conclusion, that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel. I have got the same quality as Kṛṣṇa has got, but He is Prabhu, I am servant. He is master, and I am servant," this is perfect knowledge. Then jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena bhakti-yuktena [SB 3.25.18].

So bhakti means when one has attained real jñānam. Without real jñānam, nobody can become bhakta. The foolish person says that bhakti's meant for ajñānī, or less intelligent. No. Bhakti is meant for the most intelligent person. Because bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. You become experienced, very, very experienced, after many, many years. So it is not many, many years, but many, many births, one actually becomes jñānī. And what is that jñāna? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. That is jñānam. So long you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, or Vāsudeva, you should understand yourself that you are still fool. You may advertise yourself as very jñānī, but you are fool. That is the shastric conclusion. Because if you are actually jñānī, then you should have surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. That is also stated in another place in the Bhagavad... Māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ.

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



Who does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa? These classes of men. What is that? Duṣkṛtinaḥ, always acting sinful activities. Because those who are sinful, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. Or yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. One who is completely free from pāpa, he can surrender to Kṛṣṇa. He can be engaged in devotional service.



So to become free from pāpa, sinful life, one may say that "It will take many years..." Because yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Unless we act piously, it is not possible to become free from impious, or sinful, life. But there is very simple process. What is that process? Kṛṣṇa says that process:

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. If you simply surrender to Kṛṣṇa, sarva-dharmān... Sarva... There are many dharmas, or many activities or function. Some of them are pious; some of them are impious. There are two kinds. So Kṛṣṇa says, "You give up, pious and impious, both." That is sarva-dharmān. Because we are acting piously and impiously. So you can give up both pious activities and impious activities. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was thinking that "Fighting with my brother, it is impious." So Kṛṣṇa was insisting that "You must fight." So how Arjuna could take impious activities? Because Kṛṣṇa's service is above these pious and impious activities. That is called sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. Just like the gopīs. The gopīs went to Kṛṣṇa at mid..., midnight, by simply hearing the flute of Kṛṣṇa. So young girl, going to Kṛṣṇa at midnight, this is impious activities. According to śāstra, according to moral, it is impious activities. But because it was done for Kṛṣṇa, it is understood as the most pious. Recommends. Who recommends? Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He was sannyāsī. He was very, very strict. And no woman could come near Him to offer respects. He was very strict about woman. And now, He's saying, ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā: "What can be more wonderful process of worship than as it was conceived by the gopīs?" The six Gosvāmīs also: gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau. So, so although it looks apparently that gopīs went to Kṛṣṇa to dance with Him, that is not very moral, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends that is the highest method of worshiping Kṛṣṇa.



So this requires jñānam. Therefore this is called transcendental knowledge, how serving Kṛṣṇa, one becomes transcendental to all these pious and impious activities. That requires knowledge.

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Pious and impious... Piety or impiety, they are within these material guṇas, qualities, good and bad. And Kṛṣṇa's service is transcendental, above good and bad. So that is called real knowledge, and if one is fortunate enough to understand this knowledge, then immediately he becomes detached to these material pious and impious activities. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. That is called vairāgya. Jñāna-vairāgya. Bhakti-yuktena. Without bhakti, there cannot be jñāna and vairāgya. Actually, the human life is meant for jñāna and vairāgya, for two things. Otherwise, we remain animal. The animal cannot attain any jñāna, neither animal can attain any vairāgya. That is animal qualification. But a human being, he has the opportunity to come to the stage of jñāna and vairāgya.



Jñāna means to understand that "I am not this material body. I do not belong to this material body. I am a spirit soul. I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Spirit, and I belong to the spiritual world. Therefore my business is to finish this material world business and go back to home, back to Godhead." This is jñāna, knowledge. Therefore we have to understand Kṛṣṇa. If we have to go somewhere, we must know where we are going. Because we are serving here. Now, another program has to be made to serve Kṛṣṇa and live there in the spiritual world. So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa very nicely. That... And if you can understand Kṛṣṇa... Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. To understand Kṛṣṇa in truth, that is not very easy task. That is very, very difficult task. Even the muktas cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Siddhi means mukti, liberation. Kaścid yatati. Who is trying for liberation? Nobody's trying. But still, there are somebodies who are trying for liberation. So Kṛṣṇa says, yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3]. After being liberated, those who are trying to understand Kṛṣṇa, some of them can understand Kṛṣṇa in truth, tattvataḥ. Therefore you have to understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ, what is Kṛṣṇa.

So if you can understand Kṛṣṇa... Janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says that "If you can understand Me, how I come here, how I come, I play the part of a human being and teach the whole world, Bhagavad-gītā, what is My mission, why I come, everything, where is My residence, what is My father's name..." People are searching after God, but God is canvassing, "Please understand Me. Here I am." But people will not understand. So what God will help you? How can He help you? He says everything. Now, "I come from My Vaikuṇṭha, or spiritual world." Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. "At that time I come. And I teach. And what do I teach? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]." This is dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means the law given by God. That is dharma. You cannot make Hindu dharma, just like you cannot make any law. This is... Suppose the government is there. Now, you cannot say that "We Hindus, we have made this law," "We Muslim, we have made this law," "We Parsees, we have made this law." No. What all law is given by the government you have to accept, either you are Hindu, Muslim, or Christian and Hin... It doesn't matter. Therefore dharma means to accept the law of God. Not that you manufacture something. Therefore in the Bhāgavata it is said, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. All cheating type of dharma is rejected, kicked out. Because real dharma is what is given by God. And what God says? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam... [Bg. 18.66]. This is real dharma. This is real dharma.

So we have to learn this, what Kṛṣṇa says. We have to understand Kṛṣṇa by tattva, by truth. Then we become liberated. That is called jñāna-vairāgya. And as soon as you become learned scholar about Kṛṣṇa, then you become immediately detached to this material world, and... Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena bhakti-yuktena [SB 3.25.18]. Then real bhakti begins. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



Bhakti begins there, where jñāna-vairāgya is complete. Not that foolish person... But one can say that "In our society there are not many very learned scholars." No, there are learned scholars. But even there are fool... Just like the children. A child, he also chants and dances, so he will attain this jñāna and vairāgya. The other day I was asking the boy. He's not very learned scholar. So I asked him, "What is Kṛṣṇa?" He immediately said, "The Supreme Personality of Godhead." That is jñāna-vairāgya result. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. He was already got the knowledge. What you have to learn it, after many, many births, a child, a boy, has already learned it. Here is the boy. He said, "The Supreme Personality of Godhead." Then what is that? Similarly, instead of endeavoring jñāna and vairāgya artificially, you accept what Kṛṣṇa says. Immediately you become jñānī and vairāgī. Immediately.



So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice that even a child can be on the highest position of jñāna and vairāgya-if he takes the word of Kṛṣṇa by association, good association. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for giving chance to people to take the advantage of association of jñānī and vairāgī. Not fools and rascals, but jñānī and vairāgī. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12] Bhakti-yuktena ca ātmanā [SB 3.25.18]. Then, what is the result? Paripaśyaty udāsīnaṁ prakṛtim, prakṛtiṁ ca hataujasam. Now prakṛti has no more any influence. No more attraction for cinema. No. No more attraction for cigarette. You see practically. These are young men from Europe and America. Because they have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they have no more any attraction for meat-eating, cigarette or cinema. No. This is called vairāgya. How they attained this vairāgya? Only for this bhakti. Bhakti-yuktena.

So the real purpose of life is to attain jñāna and vairāgya. This is the meant for human life. Because we are suffering in this material condition on account of ignorance, no jñāna. I am not this body, but I am thinking "I am this body," "I am American." I am not actually so. I am thinking "American," "I am Engli...," "Pakistani," "I am Hindustani." And fighting. This whole world is going on on this ajñāna. Because I am not this body. But the whole world is being conducted this ajñāna. And there is no vairāgya. Very much attached. The so-called family, society, love and... Everything will be finished as soon as this body is finished. No more love, no more family, no more attraction. So this is going on-ajñāna and attachment. Moha, illusion. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8].

So this ahaṁ mameti, this is ajñāna. So when one is jñānī, then this influence of material nature, ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], will be reduced to nil. That is, it is said, prakṛtiṁ ca hataujasam. "Now no more prakṛti can disillusion me that I am this body, and in bodily relation everything is mine." This ajñāna, ignorance, is immediately mitigated, and he becomes free. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. "Then I do not belong to all these things. Why I am falsely inclined to all these things? So it will come, how?" This bhakti-yuktena. If you take to bhakti-yoga, these things automatically...

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



How he became so powerful jñānī? It is very difficult to understand, how a small boy, and he's saying Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personalty of Godhead? Not only he-even a small child. There is another small child, only five years old. He goes to preach, "You know what is Kṛṣṇa?" And somebody says, "No, I do not know." "The Supreme Personality of Godhead." Anyway she has learned, that is jñāna. But that is a fact. I may not know to analyze what is fire, but my father has said, "This is fire. Don't touch it. It will burn." So that's all right. He may be child, but he has got the real knowledge. Similarly, by hearing process, śruta-paramparā... Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. If you go through the process of disciplic succession, hearing from the authorities, you may be fool, I may be fool, but because I am hearing from the authority, my knowledge is perfect. My knowledge is perfect. Just like I may be imperfect. I don't say that I am perfect. But I am speaking to the whole world, "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." The same thing. As the child says, as the boys says, I am also saying the same thing. But it is becoming effective because this is the fact. This is the fact. I don't make any miracles or create any gold or this or that. No. These boys and girls, they are captivated to me not by miracles, but by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Because this is the fact.



So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not very difficult thing. You try to understand Kṛṣṇa.

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti...

[Bg. 4.9]



This will be the effect. If you simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement,... You can understand by chanting only Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but if you think yourself that you are very learned scholar, scientist and philosopher, we have got dozens of books like this. You can read. And try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, you'll be successful in your life.



Thank you very much. (end)



741119SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.19

-

Bombay, November 19, 1974



Nitāi: "Perfection in self-realization cannot be attained by any kind of yogi unless he engages in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because that is the only auspicious path."



Prabhupāda:



na yujyamānayā bhaktyā

bhagavaty akhilātmani

sadṛśo 'sti śivaḥ panthā

yogināṁ brahma-siddhaye

[SB 3.25.19]



Yogi... Yogi means connecting, and brahma-siddhaye... Brahma-siddhaye means self-realization, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. Simply to know that "I am spirit soul" is not sufficient. It must be further advanced. Then it will be siddha, perfection, brahma-siddhaye. To realize "I am Brahman, ahaṁ brahmāsmi," that is not sufficient. You have to make further progress. Just like to become feverless... Suppose one is suffering from fever. So medicine is given and the no more fever, fever stops. That is not sufficient. Not only fever should stop, but you should get strength, you should get appetite, you should have normal life. Then it is perfect cure of the disease. Similarly, brahma-siddhaye, to realize that "I am spirit soul," is not sufficient. You have to be engaged in the spiritual activities. That is bhakti.



Bhakti means spiritual activities. There is activity... It is not... The Māyāvādī philosophers, they think that "Stop material activities." Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. "Why you are engaged..." The Buddhist philosophy also, they say nirvāṇa, "Stop this material life." The Buddhist philosophers, they do not give more information. "We are suffering on account of this material combination." That is their philosophy. Because this body is nothing but combination of earth, water, fire, air, mind, intelligence and ego, so if you separate it, let the earth go to the earth, let water go to the water, let fire go to the fire, then you become zero. If you dismantle just like we dismantle some house, so there are so many things coming out. So let the doors be taken, somebody windows, somebody the bricks, somebody and..., rubbish somebody. Then there is no house, zero. This is called nirvāṇa theory. No more existence. We are suffering pains and pleasure... Pains. There is no pleasure. Pleasure means accepting another type of pain. I am suffering... Just like there is boil on your body. This is suffering. And to cure it, another suffering, surgical operation. So it is going on like that. Actually, there is no pleasure. There is only pain.

So the Buddhist theory is to dismantle this construction, and then there is no more sense of pains and... The Māyāvādī theory also like that, that "Activities, because they are material activities, therefore there are sufferings. So the material activities, they are false. You simply understand yourself, that you are Brahman, and no more activities, stop all activities, Brahman realization..." Their example is given that if you take an empty pitcher and you put into the water, so long it is not filled up, there will be some sound: "bud-bud-bud-bud-bud-bud." And as soon as the pitcher is fully filled up, there is no, no more sound. So all these Vedic mantras and other..., they're only means. So when one is completely Brahman realized, then there is no more chanting, hearing or Vedic hymns. Everything stop. The same theory. Buddhist theory and Māyāvāda theory is almost practically the same. They are saying, "Make it zero," and they are saying, "It is mithyā, false. Stop it." Brahma satyam, brahma satyaṁ jagan... Brahma satya means Brahman realization, "I am Brahman. I am the same Supreme... So 'ham." But that will not help you. That is simply theoretical. Practical is bhaktyā bhagavaty akhilātmani.

Bhaktyā bhagavaty akhilātmani. Bhagavān is everywhere. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1].

eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.35]



Akhilātmā. Hari, Īśvara, Bhagavān akhilātmani. Akhilātmani bhakti. Bhakti, this word, is applicable only to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore it is said here, bhagavaty akhilātmani. Bhagavān is not alone. He's not only localized; He is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is called akhilātmā-although He has got a particular place. Just like Kṛṣṇa. He is here; He is in many other temples also. That is Kṛṣṇa. It is not that Kṛṣṇa, because He is in one place, He cannot be in other place. Just like we are. We are conditioned. We are here. I am sitting here; you are sitting here. But you are not at your home, in your apartment. Kṛṣṇa is not like that. Kṛṣṇa... Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. He's always in the Goloka Vṛndāvana. Still, He is aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Aṇḍāntara-stha means He is within this universe. This universe, the whole universe, is going on because there is the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭim [Bs. 5.35]. There are not only one universe; there are koṭi, millions. And ekāṁśena sthito jagat [Bg. 10.42]. One aṁśa of Kṛṣṇa, that Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, is there. Just like this body is working nicely because the soul, the spirit soul, is within this body, similarly, the whole universe, its activities are going the, going nicely, regularly, everything, because the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is there. It is not difficult. Matter cannot work so nicely. Don't think that the so many planets, they are floating in the air without any arrangement. There is arrangement. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Viṣṭabhya aham idaṁ sarvam ekāṁśena sthito jagat. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is there, akhilātmā, Kṛṣṇa as Supersoul. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Kṛṣṇa, although localized, although He's always in His Goloka Vṛndāvana dhāma, still, He is everywhere. Therefore His name is akhilātmā. Hari, Īśvara, Bhagavān, Akhilātmā, Parameśvara, Paramātmā... There are so many names.



So here it is said, na yujyamānayā bhaktyā bhagavaty akhilātmani. If you engage yourself in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is Supersoul or expanded everywhere, even within the atom, then your yoga system for brahma-siddhaye, for self-realization will be complete. Siddhaye. Yatatām api siddhānām. Therefore it is said, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. This siddhaye. Siddhaye means brahma-siddhaye. Out of many millions and millions of persons, one is interested in brahma-siddhi. Nobody's interested. We are crying everywhere, "Please come. We have made this center. Please come and realize yourself and make your life perfect." But nobody's interested. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "Out of millions and millions of persons, one may be interested." Similarly, there is statement in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



Kona bhāgyavān jīva. To come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not very easy. It is meant for the most fortunate persons. Kona bhāgyavān jīva. Bhakti-yoga, to accept Kṛṣṇa consciousness or bhakti-yoga, is not so easy. Therefore general people, they are not interested. General people, they are not interested.



bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ

tayāpahṛta-cetasām

vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ

samādhau na vidhīyate

[Bg. 2.44]



Those who are too much materially interested, sense gratification, they are not very much interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They are not very much interested. So don't be disappointed that many people are not coming. It is a, it is a subject matter which is not for many people. Only selected. Just like if you enquire how many fools are there, you will find only, you will find practically everyone is fool, but if you want to see how many M.A.'s are there, it will be very difficult to find out.



So it is by Kṛṣṇa's, mean, Lord Caitanya's mercy that we are preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world, and the fortunate, those who are very, very fortunate, they are coming to it. Otherwise, it is not very easy thing that people are interested in brahma-siddhaye. And brahma-siddhaye means complete self-realization, or perfect self-realization. That is called brahma-siddhi. To understand first of all Brahman... Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena. That is also bhakti-yuktena. In previous verse we have discussed that,

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena

bhakti-yuktena cātmanā

paripaśyaty udāsīnaṁ

prakṛtiṁ ca hataujasam

[SB 3.25.18]



To be less influenced by the material modes of life, one has to come to this platform of jñāna, vairāgya and bhakti. Otherwise it is not possible. And that, the same process is being stressed again: na yujyamānayā bhaktyā bhagavati... Bhakti, where it is to be applied? Somebody says, "I have got bhakti." Where you have got bhakti? "Now, I have got very much bhakti to my wife. I love her very much. I take care of her. If I do not see her, I become mad." So this kind of bhakti is not explained here. "I have got bhakti for my family. I have got bhakti my, for country. I have got bhakti for Goddess Durgā. I have got bhakti for the so many demigods..." No. That kind of bhakti will not do. Therefore it is particularly said, bhaktyā bhagavati. Bhagavati, "unto the Supreme..." What kind of Bhagavān? Now, nowadays there are so many Bhagavāns. No, not that kind of imitation Bhagavān, but what kind of? Akhilātmani. You ask this so-called imitation Bhagavān that "Are you akhilātman? Are you present in everyone's heart? Can you say what I am thinking now?"



So Bhagavān means He must be akhilātmā. Don't be misled by so-called Bhagavān. Everything is there. Bhagavān means akhilātmani. He knows. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe [Bg. 18.61]. If you are Īśvara, then you must be present in everyone's heart. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Īśvara... Kṛṣṇa is Īśvara. Therefore He said, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: "I am staying in everyone's heart." So if you are Īśvaraḥ, if you are Bhagavān, are you staying in my heart? Do you know what I am thinking now? So akhilātmani. Everything should be very scrutinizingly studied. Bhakti is only for Bhagavān. Not that "My bhakti for this or that, for this demigod, for that demigod, for my family, for my country, for my society, for my wife, for my cat, for my dog." This is not bhakti. They are imitation only. That is lust. That is desire. That is not bhakti. Bhakti means bhagavati. Bhagavati means akhilātmani.

So if we can develop that Kṛṣṇa consciousness, bhakti, then our life, successful life, brahma-siddhaye, complete self-realization, will be possible. Therefore it is said, sadṛśaḥ asti śivaḥ panthā: "No. There is no other alternative." If you... Brahma-siddhaye. Brahman, Parabrahman is Kṛṣṇa. Brahma-siddhaye means to understand what is the relationship... "I am Brahman." That's all right. Pratijāne. But what is your relation with the Parabrahman? That is brahma-siddhi. Brahman and Parabrahman, there are two Brahmans. Why there is...? Ātmā and paramātmā, īśvara and parameśvara. So living being and the Supreme Being. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). These are the Vedic information. There are two, always two. Ātmā, paramātmā, brahman, parabrahman. So... And brahma-siddhaye means not only to understand that "I am Brahman," but I must understand what is my relationship with Parabrahman. That is brahma-siddhi.

That means we must know what is Parabrahman. That Parabrahman is Kṛṣṇa. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam [Bg. 10.12]. We must know, "What is my relationship." That relationship is already explained, that "I am qualitatively one..." Brahman and Parabrahman means both of them one in the platform of being Brahman. But Parabrahman is very, very great, and I am simply Brahman, small. The Vedic instruction is not ahaṁ parabrahma. Never says it is. Ahaṁ brahma, that is all right. But you cannot say, "I am Parabrahman." Nobody says. There is no such maxim in the Vedic literature. Parabrahman is one, kaivalya. Kaivalya means there is no alternative. There is no duplicate. There is no equal. There is no greater than. That is kaivalya. So nobody can be equal to Parabrahman, and nobody can be greater than Parabrahman. That is Parabrahman. So brahma-siddhaye means simply one should not understand that "I am Brahman," but he must understand what his relationship with the Parabrahman. That is brahma-siddhi.

So for brahma-siddhi, for self-realization, people are trying in so many ways. First of all, the business of human life is only meant for this purpose, brahma-siddhaye. So long we are... athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the Vedānta-sūtra. Brahman... Because, unless you become inquisitive, then how there can be brahma-siddhi? Therefore, this human life is meant for brahma-jijñāsā. Not that simply whole day work... They are also inquiring. They go to the market: "What is the price? What is the rate?" The whole day. In Ser Market you go, "Ke aba baye?" (Hindi) Everyone is asking. Not for that kind of question. That everyone is questioning, from the morning. "What is today's news?" Immediately newspaper. "What is the news?" Then it is no more... Then you go the market, "What is the price of rice? What is the price of this? What is the price of that?" You purchase. Then you eat. Then you go the office or market. Then again, "What is the price? What is the..." Not that kind of inquiry. That is going on. That is also going on by the cats and dogs. They are also inquiring, "Where is food? Where is remnants of foods? Where they are thrown out so that I can go, I can take?" The crows are also doing that, that kind of question. But you should not waste your time like the cats and dogs and crows by inquiring, "Where is food? Where is food? Where is food?" Food is there for you, fixed up. Don't bother. The Bhāgavata says there..., tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Now, not only in cats' and dogs' life, even in heavenly life and other life, we are simply inquiring, "Where is my sense gratification? Where is my sense gratification?" That kind of inquiry will not help you. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta. You should inquire for something which you never did before. That is brahma-jijñāsā. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. "What I am?" I am thinking, "I am this body," and I am engaged, but actually I do not get any pleasure, any happiness. But when I get information that "When you'll be realized, self-realized, brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā... [Bg. 18.54]. When you'll be self-realized, Brahman realized, then you'll be prasannātmā..." Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. These are the shastric injunctions.

So this life is meant for brahma-jijñāsā. This life, this human life, is meant for brahma-jijñāsā. Other jijñāsā, inquiries, that is in the cats and dogs and hogs and crows and everywhere. So don't be bothering. "If I don't bother, then how shall I eat?" No, that people generally says, that "Everyone becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, how we shall eat? How things will go on?" Now, we are Kṛṣṇa conscious, practical example. Are we not eating? Are we not sleeping? What business is stopped? We have no business; we simply beg. There is no certainty that "Tomorrow I shall go there. I'll get this money." There is no certainty. We do not know. We are eating in the morning. We do not know whether there will be food in the evening. If Kṛṣṇa gives, then we can eat. You know it very well. We have no business. We are not professional men. We are not going to the market for what is bao.(?) Ke bao haya?(?) So are you not eating? We are eating. Not only eating, we have got hundred and two branches, and every branch there are at least one hundred men. They're all eating. Why? Because we know, "Kṛṣṇa will give us. Kṛṣṇa giving food to the ants, to the elephant. Why not to His servant? We have no..." If you have got this confidence, then... The śāstra says, tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. You should simply try for perfection of life, brahma-jijñāsā. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. This is the only... Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. This is the only business. "What I am?" The answer is ahaṁ brahmāsmi, so 'ham, "I am same, Brahman." "So then, what is my relation with the Parabrahman?" Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam.

Now, when there is question of jijñāsā, brahma-jijñāsā, then we inquire from a person who knows. Therefore it is said that tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] "If you are actually interested in inquiring about Brahman, then you must go to guru who knows Brahman." Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta. You cannot understand Brahman realization alone. Therefore, according to Vaiṣṇava philosophy, ādau gurvāśrayam. The first business is to take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master. If you want... Not only brahma-jijñāsā-any. You must go to the perfect person who knows things. If you wandering on some street you do not know, you ask somebody, "Where shall I go? In this way or that way?" So this is natural. So about Brahman, jijñāsuḥ... Brahma-jijñāsā means... That is not ordinary jijñāsā. It is called uttamam. Uttamam means transcendental to this material world, which is full of darkness, ignorance. That is called ut. Ud-gata tama yasmād iti uttama. There is no more darkness, simply light. If you, at night, you inquire about something, then it is very difficult. But if you go in the daytime... And at night if you got up on your roof and want to see where is Bombay or where is Santa Cruz, it is very difficult. But daytime, you can see. Similarly, uttamam. You must go out of this darkness, come to the light, and then you will see.

So that light is given by guru. Ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā. That light is given not by bringing one torchlight, but jñānāñjana-śalākayā, the light of knowledge. The light of... Jñānāñjana-śalākayā. Cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ. Guru's business is to give you light by knowledge. Then you understand. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. How the jñāna, knowledge, light is given? Śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam. This is the guru's system, guru's symptom, what is guru. Śābde pare ca niṣṇātam. He has completely assimilated the Vedic essence of life. That is called guru. And what is śabda? Śāstra, or Vedas. Śruti-śāstra. Śruti means Veda, knowledge. Veda means knowledge. Or knowledge is received through ear, by hearing. That is real knowledge. Not by experimental knowledge. You cannot understand which is beyond your sense perception by experiment. Just like you cannot understand who is your father by experimental knowledge: "Let me make experiment and find out who is my father." That is not possible. Because it is beyond your experience. Your father was existing when you were not existing. Then how you can understand by experimental knowledge? The authority is mother. Therefore Vedic knowledge is the mother; the Purāṇas are the sisters. They are explained like that. You should understand from the Vedas what is the ultimate knowledge. And Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: [Bg. 15.15] the ultimate knowable objective is Kṛṣṇa.

So simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa... Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. If you can simply understand Kṛṣṇa, then you understand everything. You haven't got to understand separately Kṛṣṇa's enlightenment. Teṣām aham... What is that verse? Samuddhartā. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,

teṣām evānukampārtham

aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ

nāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho

jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā

[Bg. 10.11]



If you actually come in contact with Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is within your heart... Kṛṣṇa is not far away. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. But He's still nearer. He is within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva... So if you become attached to Kṛṣṇa... When Kṛṣṇa sees now you are attached to Kṛṣṇa, then hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti suhṛt satām. He is friend of the devotees. He's friend of everyone, but a special friend of the devotees. Suhṛt satām. Therefore you have to become a devotee. Therefore it is said, na yujyamānayā bhaktyā. Bhaktyā means devotee. Who performs devotional service unless he's a devotee? Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. So if we become devotee, if we take to devotional service, then Kṛṣṇa says, teṣām evānukampārtham [Bg. 10.11], for special favor. Special favor. What is that? Teṣām evānukampārtham aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ nāśayāmi. Kṛṣṇa says, "I kill all kinds of ignorance."



So simply this qualification required, that you become perfect devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Then you perfectly become jñānī. Jñāna is there. Simply it is covered by the curtain of ignorance. Just like in darkness. Everything is there. The light is there, everything is there. But as soon as it is dark, we cannot see where the things are there. So Kṛṣṇa says that anyone can understand Himself, anyone can understand Kṛṣṇa and the relationship, provided the darkness of ignorance is taken away. That is required. That is done by Kṛṣṇa personally. For whom? Teṣām evānukampārtham [Bg. 10.11]. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam. Those who are engaged twenty-four hours with love and faith in devotional service. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ tam. The buddhi-yogam. He directs, "Do like this, do like that." Then... What for buddhi? Yena mām upayānti te. Then, gradually, you come to Kṛṣṇa, back to home, back to Godhead. Therefore it is recommended here, na yujyamānayā bhaktyā bhagavaty akhilātmani, sadṛśo 'sti śivaḥ panthā. Śiva means auspicious. Śiva means auspiciousness. So if you actually interested for self-realization, if you want to become perfect in this life, śivaḥ panthā, the most auspicious, most perfect panthā is... What is that? Now, bhaktyā bhagavati. You just become a devotee and engage yourself in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not the so-called rascal Bhagavān, but bhagavaty akhilātman. One, the..., that Bhagavān who is present everywhere. That Bhagavān. Not this false bhagavān. Akhilātmani. These are the shastric injunction. So that Bhagavān... "I don't find that Bhagavān." No. That Bhagavān is within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61]. That is real Bhagavān. So as soon... Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. That Bhagavān is always acting. He instructed Brahmā. Brahmā, the lord of the universe, he got instruction from Kṛṣṇa, and he created the whole universe, and what to speak of you? He'll also give instruction to you, provided you take to the devotional service, bhaktyā. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55].

Thank you very much. (end)



741120SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.20

-

Bombay, November 20, 1974



Nitāi: "Every learned man knows very well that attachment for the material is the greatest entanglement of the spirit soul. But that same attachment, when applied to the self-realized devotees, opens the door of liberation."



Prabhupāda:



prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam

ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto

mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam

[SB 3.25.20]



This is the definition of our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Consciousness is there. Living being means there must be consciousness. The consciousness... (sound of baby in background) (pause)



Devotee: Take away the girl.



Prabhupāda: Consciousness, when it is muddy or contaminated on account of intermingling with these modes of nature, we become more and more entangled. There is a verse in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta spoken by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.54]



Sādhu-saṅga. Here it is also recommended: sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. Association, prasaṅga... Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. In the... (pause, sound of baby continuing) No... Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. As you associate with... Man is social animal, it is said. So according to your association, you can mold your character. If you associate with businessmen, then... They actually form so many associations to develop their business capacity. Practical. There is stock exchange association, this market association, that market association. There is club, association of the drunkards. So there are many association, and this association, different types of association, is the cause of bondage in that particular thing. Everyone knows it. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. Similarly, if you transfer the association to the sādhu, then mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam, the door for liberation is open. If you associate with materialistic persons, then your bondage becomes more and more tightened, and if you associate with sādhu, or spiritualist, then your bondage becomes slackened, or the door of liberation becomes open. Mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam.



Yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. Tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. Sādhu... Sādhu-saṅga and yoṣit-saṅga. Yoṣit means woman, or things which are meant for sense gratification. Woman is symbolical representation of sense gratification, but anything meant for sense gratification is called yoṣit. Tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. Yoṣitām. So this material world is full of yoṣit-saṅga. Everyone is interested for sense gratification. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that,

bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ

tayāpahṛta-cetasām

vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ

samādhau na vidhīyate

[Bg. 2.44]



Those who are attached for sense gratification... Bhoga means sense gratification. Bhogaiśvarya. Aiśvarya, opulence and sense gratification, those who are too much attached... Now, why people are so much slow in the matter of understanding spiritual value of life? At the present moment, why people are not...? Manda. Manda means very slow. They do not take seriously that... Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the most important movement for the upliftment of the human society, but they do not take it very seriously. Why? Bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānām. They have been taught... The modern civilization is simply teaching people how to enjoy life by sense gratification. Especially in the Western countries, so many things. Even for shaving there is machine. Means they do not want to ply the razor even. Formerly, safety razor, formerly, there was Halogram(?) razor. Now simply you take the machine. Not to move the hand even. You see? This is advancement of civilization. The more you enjoy your senses...



But actually, the human life is meant for not enjoying the senses. That is called tapasya. To deny. That is human life. That is Vedic civilization. First of all, the brahmacārī system, how to deny sense gratification. That is the first training. Even the, even Kṛṣṇa, He had to go to the forest to collect dry wood for the spiritual master. The, that is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Kṛṣṇa was talking with Sudāmā Vipra, how both of them went to collect dry wood, and there was storm and rain. They became stranded in the forest. Then next day their teacher and other students rescued them. So the brahmacārī was trained up, tapasya, not to enjoy. They would have to go beg door to door, brahmacārī: "Mother, give us some alms for our āśrama." So they were trained from the very beginning to address any woman as "Mother." So... And there were so many other things: to rise early in the morning... Tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. We have become so foolish that we do not know what is the actual condition of life. I am repeating this again and again. Our actual position is not to die, but we are dying. But we are so foolish, we do not take care of it. "Let us die. Let us die." But śāstra says, Kṛṣṇa says, Bhagavad-gītā says, that "Why you should die?" But they are so dull brain, they say, "Let us die. What is that?" Kṛṣṇa says, janma-mṛtyu. Kṛṣṇa has picked up... Their whole life is miserable condition, tri-tāpa-yatana, adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika, but we are so foolish, we have accepted this miserable condition of life as customary. So they have become accustomed.

But the Bhagavad-gītā, Bhagavān, personally says that "Your real miserable condition of life are the four things: janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]." But who is taking seriously? There are so many advancements of education, scientific and... Who is making research work how to stop death? No. Nobody is there. No scientist's brain is working. But it is possible. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. These rascals, when they forget that death is not our business, it is artificially imposed upon us, so we must become deathless again... That is the human life perfection. But nobody is caring. We have become so dull. One can avoid birth, death, old age... Because Kṛṣṇa says the soul, the spirit soul, ātmā, na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit: "It does not die, it does not take birth." And actually, we are experiencing birth and death, old age and disease. Still, we are not alert. No intelligence. For this reason, Sanātana Gosvāmī, when he approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he, the first question was, "My dear Lord, some way or other, You have dragged me to Your lotus feet, but I am inquiring from You that ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya, 'What is my actual position? Why am I forced to suffer these three kinds of miserable life of material condition?' " Nobody's inquire, inquiring.

So therefore these discussions which are going on, that is only for how to get liberation from the four principles of material condition, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi. That is called mokṣa. Mokṣa, or liberation. So the... It is just like beating the dead horse. Nobody is interested about mokṣa. Or nobody can conceive even that there is something as mokṣa. Mokṣa means to get free from this condition of birth, death and old age. That is called mokṣa, liberation. So at the present moment modern educated persons, they do not know that there is something like mokṣa and it can be achieved and there is process and the whole Vedic śāstra is trying to educate us for getting mokṣa. They do not know it. So we have become so dull. Therefore, in this age, Kali-yuga especially, our conditions are described as manda, very, very bad, or very, very slow. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayaḥ. And if one little interested, they will take some path which is not approved, which is not approved. They will invent something, so many "isms."

Now, some people came, very prominent men of Bombay, some... They have also invented something to educate or to enlighten the residents of the forest and the mountains. No, no, what you are doing for here? But they are interested... Not interested. It is a hobby. Nobody can be... There is mountain, and suppose, suppose in Africa, there are so many Africans, they are living in the... There is nature's law, but there is a process. This process is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by which everyone can be elevated. Not by these material means. Material means, you cannot do that. We are... Just like in the Śukadeva Gosvāmī's statement it is said,

kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ

[SB 2.4.18]



You can make everyone happy, even the kirāta. Kirāta means the Africans. They are called niṣāda. Niṣāda was born as the son of the king... I forget just now name. Mahārāja Pṛthu's brother.



Devotee: Veṇa?



Prabhupāda: Veṇa, yes. Out of the body of Veṇa. Niṣāda. So they became thieves. They were, professionally, they became thieves, and they were asked to live in the jungle. So we have got practical experience. So these junglese, they are very much accustomed, however you keep them nicely, they will steal. Niṣāda. Is it not? (laughs) We have got very practical experience. We are pushing on this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and we have got experiences, different types of men. So they can also be delivered. How? Yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ, if they associate with sādhu. Yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ means if they are given the chance of associating with devotees, they can be delivered.



Anyone can be delivered. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. Low-born, pāpa-yoni. Puṇya-yoni and pāpa-yoni. Puṇya-yoni... Yoni means the source of birth. So there are two kinds of yonis, pious and impious. Those who are pious, they are getting chance of birth, in very aristocratic, high family, educated, learned brāhmaṇa family. Jñāna. Then aiśvarya, opulence, riches; education, śruta; śrī, beauty. These are the symptoms of pious life. And just the opposite, ugly-looking, born in very low-grade family, almost animal, then no education, no character, these are impious life. So... But the sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], even by, one is born in low-grade family, pāpa-yoni, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya, if one takes shelter of Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa says, "If one takes shelter of Me..." Kṛṣṇa never denies anyone. Socially, we may deny a caṇḍāla to enter into my house, but Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's devotee does not deny. That is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They never, they'll never deny. "Yes, you are welcome. You take also education in the spiritual life. You also become devotee of Kṛṣṇa." Sometimes we are criticized. But Kṛṣṇa says, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32]. He is giving, offering shelter. "Come on. Never mind you are born in low family or impious family. It doesn't matter." Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. Kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā [Bg. 9.33].

So Kṛṣṇa says, "Those who are very, very low-born, even they can come and take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and become elevated for liberation. And what to speak of pious persons who have taken birth in the brāhmaṇa family." Kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyāḥ. To take birth in brāhmaṇa family requires puṇya. To take birth in rich family requires puṇya. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe [Bg. 6.41]. Śucīnām means very, mean, elevated, first-class, exalted brāhmaṇa, śuci. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe. So these are, those who have taken birth in high-grade brāhmaṇa family or rich family, they are not ordinary men. The best thing: one who has taken birth in brāhmaṇa family. But who cares for it? They misuse this chance. Kṛṣṇa says, kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyāḥ. "You have taken birth in brāhmaṇa family. Why don't you take shelter of Me?" So because the..., why? The sādhu. Brāhmaṇa means sādhu. Brāh..., Vaiṣṇava means sādhu. Sannyāsī means sādhu. Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ..., ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ [SB 3.25.21]. This is a sādhu. So sādhu, they are very titikṣavaḥ, ārjavam. Similarly, brāhmaṇa qualification is also... Satyaṁ śaucaṁ samo damas titikṣā. Titikṣā, tolerant, ārjava, simplicity, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. So similarly, sādhu. There must be a class of men in the society, first-class sādhu. Then the society will improve. If everyone is debauch and śūdra, then how the society will be peaceful? There is... Therefore, to organize the society, Kṛṣṇa recommends, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. There must be ideal brāhmaṇa. There must be ideal kṣatriya, ideal vaiśya. And balance, all śūdras. But nobody's caring that.

So sādhu means devotee, Kṛṣṇa's devotee. That is called sādhu. Here it is stated, sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. The same association, sādhu-saṅga. [Cc. Madhya 22.83]So who is sādhu? Sādhu means devotee. It is defined by Kṛṣṇa Himself: sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. He's sādhu. Who? Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. He's sādhu. Anyone who is, without any reservation, has begun serving Kṛṣṇa and engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the definition of sādhu. Titikṣava. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed how to become sādhu:

tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



Sādhu's business is to become very tolerant. Because everyone becomes enemy. If you become a devotee, everyone will become enemy, because they're asuras. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Even the father. Hiraṇyakaśipu is the father of Prahlāda Mahārāja. The boy, five-years-old boy. What is his fault? He's chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. And his father became enemy. Up to which, what strength? Now, he was prepared to kill. He was insisting the boy that "Why you are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa? Why you are speaking of a separate God? I am God." That is the asuri. Those rascals who claim to become God Himself, they are demons, Hiraṇyakaśipu. So Prahlāda Mahārāja will not accept. Prahlāda Mahārāja, even the father insisting that "I am God. Why you are talking of any other God? I am God," and Prahlāda Mahārāja will not accept that. He will accept the father as asura. Sometimes it was quarrel between father and son. Sometimes the father would call, "My dear Prahlāda, all right, let me know what you have learned, the best thing, from your teachers."



So he replied that sādhu manye 'sura-varya. Asura-varya. He did not address him as "Father"; he addressed him: "The best of the asuras," asura-varya. Tat sādhu manye. Sādhu, again. Tat sādhu manye asura-varya dehinām. "So far I have understood, that dehinām, those who are embodied..." Dehinām. Not "dehānām." Dehinām, he has said. Dehinām means we are dehī, we are proprietor of this body. I am not this body. So because we accepted this body, we are always in miserable condition. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. We accept this temporary body. That is the cause of all miseries. We cannot understand it. We are talking of so many miseries, but what is the cause of misery, that we do not know. Everyone knows, but he'll not know it. The cause is this body. Because the body is there, there is disease, there is old age, there is birth, there is death. And the whole struggle is against how to stop death, how to stop birth, how to stop disease, and how to stop old age. You just see. Why there are so many advancements in the chemical science? Why there are so many medical men? Why there are so many drug shop? To stop these things. This is a struggle. But why they are required? Because we have got this body. This material body.

So Prahlāda Mahārāja said, sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt. Because we have accepted this body... So we must not accept this body, that is called mokṣa-dvāram. That should be the mission of human life. So we are not interested. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. In this age they are slow and, and they have got their own manufactured ideas. Why? Now, manda-bhāgyāḥ, all unfortunate. And upadrutāḥ, always disturbed. So all these are on account of this body. The śāstra always says that "Don't work in such a way that you have to accept again body after death." That is, that is your business. Not that to accumulate crores and rupees and make a very good bank balance and skyscraper house and three or dozens of motorcars. They are struggling, forgetting this. But foolish people, they do not know that Kṛṣṇa will take away all these assets at the time of death. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ mṛtyuḥ: "I am death, and I will take away everything, what you have possessed." The foolish persons, they do not understand it. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He possessed. So much so powerful that even the demigods were afraid of him. And Kṛṣṇa took away everything in a second by..., simply by the nails. Tava nakha kara-kamala nakha... Eh? What is? What is that?

Devotee: Tava kara-kamala-...



Prabhupāda: Tava kara-kamala-...?



Devotee: ...nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgam.



Prabhupāda: Nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgam. Wonderful nails. He wanted to be secure: "I'll not die this way. I'll not die that way." But he forgot to say that "I'll not die by the nails." He did not think that one can be killed by the nails. So all his formula that he would not be killed by this way, this way, this way... But he forgot this. (laughs)



So our intelligence is like... Even mother Yaśodā. She was trying to bind Kṛṣṇa, and at the end, at the time of knotting, there was two fingers small, I mean to say, there was scarcity. So our intelligence is like that. However I may be intelligent, however I may to cheat Kṛṣṇa, at least, little difference. Little difference. The little difference, that he never thought that "I'll be killed by the nails, not by any atomic bomb." He thought simply atom bomb can kill. He never thought that Kṛṣṇa can kill even by nails. Aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti paśyanti pānti kalayanti ciraṁ jaganti [Bs. 5.32]. He can do everything. But he wanted to be cheap God, to surpass... But it could not be done. This is the asura. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. And the asuras... Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They may think themselves as very advanced in knowledge, but they are rascal number one because their so-called knowledge, the effect of knowledge, is taken away by māyā. They are called Māyāvādīs. They are very much proud of their knowledge. But Kṛṣṇa says, "These rascals, these atheist class demons, their actual knowledge is taken away." Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He devised means that "Indirectly I shall be immortal. I shall not die in daytime. I shall not die in night. I shall not die in water. I shall not die in land. I shall not die in the sky. No animal can kill me. No demigod can kill me. No weapon can kill me." So on, so many... Brahmā says, "All right." But he never agreed to give him immortality. But he wanted to cheat Brahmā that "Indirectly, by the negative way, I have taken everything. So I am immortal." This is called mūḍha. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. He does not know that Kṛṣṇa's intelligence is always, at least, one inch greater than him, anyone. (laughs)

So we should not be foolish like that, mūḍha. We should be intelligent that this life, this material life, is simply struggle for existence. We want to exist. We do not want to die. We do not want, do not want to be diseased. We do not want birth, therefore there are so many contraceptive methods. But we do not want... Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9], old age. Just like we are old men. So many difficulties there are. So we do not want all these things, but it is forced upon us. But we are not intelligent enough to, how to make a solution of these problems. Therefore our predecessor, Sanātana Gosvāmī, first of all put this question that ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. He was minister. He was intelligent and learned scholar, brāhmaṇa. So he inquired this. So we should be inquiring that "We are making so much struggle for existence, but existence is not allowed. Then what is the reason?" So we have become so foolish that we do not know. But here we are discussing mokṣa-dvāram, how to become free from the struggle for existence. This is life's mission.

So how it can be done? Now, as much we are attached to our property, to our family, to our country, to our money, to our business, so many things we have got attachments... Here it is said, prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam. These attachments means we are entangled, hands and legs tied up. The "tied up" means because our mind is full and absorbed in these material activities, so at the time of death we have to give up this body and accept another. So long our mind will be absorbed, the consciousness will be absorbed in materialistic way of life, we have to accept another body. Kṛṣṇa will give chance. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. We do not know that our real business is not to accept another material body. That we do not know. We are so fool. We are working in such a way that we must have to accept another body. Na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ [SB 5.5.4]. We are working, we are feeling that so many difficulties there on account of this body, but we are not working how to get rid of this body, how to become again free and remain in our spiritual body. This intelligence is not there.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving this intelligence. That is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness move... Unique movement, how to give the intelligence of becoming liberated. Mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam. Mahat... Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ [SB 5.5.2]. Mahat-sevā. Mahat-sevām... Mahat means... Who is mahat, mahātmā?

mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

[Bg. 9.13]



Those who are always engaged in bhajana-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare-they are mahātmās. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. This is bhajana-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma... There is mahātmā. So mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ [SB 5.5.2]. If you serve such mahātmā, just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura, who is always engaged in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, then your path of liberation is open. And tamo-dvāram āhur yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. And if you associate with the materialistic persons who are after sense gratification, then your tamo-dvāram... That is the way to the darkness. The life's business is not tamo-dvāram. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. Jyotir gama, go to the light. Don't remain in... This is Vedic instruction.



So if we actually want to be free from the bondage of material existence... Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]... A common sense. Because we have lost our common sense. Suppose we are sitting here. If somebody says, "Now get out! Sit down he... Sit down here." And again, a half an hour, if he says, "No, no, come here." So shall I like it? "No, I am not sitting here. I'll go." Similarly, here the life is, the materialistic way of life means bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. You accept one body, you'll not be allowed to remain in that body permanently. You must have to give it up. Again accept another body. Again you have to give it up. What is this business? But they are so rascal, they do not know that how much miserable condition we are in. We are simply accepting one body and again... Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. Tyaktvā deham. We are... We do not know that "I am not this body."

So we are in such darkness, and the whole world is in such darkness. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri... They are taking this body as themselves. There are so many things... So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement will give them enlightenment and give them liberation, and we therefore request everyone to take advantage. Now, Kṛṣṇa consciousness means... The simple thing is that you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. But if you think yourself as very learned, thoughtful man, and you want to understand through science and philosophy, all right, come on. We have got books. Learn it. Two ways. We have got three dozen books for you. You cannot finish it even in your whole life. Come on. Otherwise, if you are not so learned to read all these books, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Two things are there. Take advantage, any one of them, and be liberated.

Thank you very much. (end)



741121SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.21

-

Bombay, November 21, 1974



Nitāi: ("The symptoms of a sādhu) are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime."



Prabhupāda:



titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ

suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ

sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ

[SB 3.25.21]



In the previous verse Kapiladeva has recommended that sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. What is that?



prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam

ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto

mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam



There are two things: conditioned life and liberated life. Eight million, four hundred thousand forms of life there are. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. Nine lakhs forms of life in the water. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi. (aside:) The child may be... Sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. The trees and plants, they are two million. Sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati, kṛmayo rudra-saṅkhyakāḥ. And the germs and insects, reptiles, they are eleven hundred thousand, eleven lakhs. Pakṣiṇāṁ daśa-lakṣaṇam. Then birds, they are ten lakhs of forms. Then beasts, animals, so they are three millions forms. And then human beings, they are 400,000. Very small quantity. Of all the living entities, the human forms, they are very small number, 400,000. Aśītiṁ caturaś caiva. Aśītim means eighty, and catura means four. So 8,400,000 species of forms.



So prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam ātmanaḥ. Ātmā is the same, spirit soul. He has got the same form. But they are different dresses. They are having different dresses. Just like we are sitting so many. As human beings, we are the same, but we have got different dresses. Similarly, ātmā, the soul, the spirit soul, is the same. There is no difference. Therefore paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ. One who knows what is the form of ātmā, he sees... Vidyā-vinaya-sampanne brāhmaṇe gavi hastini... sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. He sees the animal, the cats and dogs, and a learned brāhmaṇa-sama-darśinaḥ. Samatā means not that brāhmaṇa is equal to the dog. No, not that. But he sees that brāhmaṇa is also a spirit soul, and the dog is also a spirit soul.

So this conditioned life... Dog has got a conditioned life, I have got a conditioned life, you have got a conditioned life. We are all conditioned, under different... And according to the condition, we have got different bodies. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. This conditioned life, different forms of life, we have got daiva-netreṇa, by superior, superior administration. Netreṇa means netṛtva, leadership. So superior leadership. Just like Yamarāja. Karmaṇā, according to my karma, he offers me some body. Daiva-netreṇa. Jantur deha upapatti. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu [Bg. 13.22]. Karma... Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Guṇa and karma... Just like here, in the practical world, you can work as an engineer, karma, if you have got the qualification. If you have got the qualification of a shopkeeper, you cannot act as engineer. That is not possible. If you have got the qualification of a teacher, educationist, then you can become a teacher.

So the whole world is going like that, guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. So guṇa means we are, according to our position or according to our mentality, we are infecting some guṇa, sattva-rajas-tamo-guṇa. So guṇa-karma, guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. Very scientific this is. You can become... If you acquire the qualities of a brāhmaṇa, then, and if you work as a brāhmaṇa, then guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ, you become a brāhmaṇa. If you have the qualities of a kṣatriya and if you work as a kṣatriya, then you are kṣatriya. If you have the qualification of a mercantile man, businessman, and if you work as a businessman or cultivator, then you become vaiśya. This is very scientific. Not that one is classified according to the birth. No. According to qualification. Just like there is medical association. Medical association does not mean all the medical men in the association, they are born of the same family. No. They are born in different families. But because they have got qualification and working as medical man, they are admitted as the member of medical association or member of bar association. This is practically. Similarly, if you acquire the qualification of a brāhmaṇa and if you work as a brāhmaṇa, then you are accepted as a brāhmaṇa. Similarly kṣatriya, similarly vaiśya.

This is... It is, it is the authoritative statement of Nārada. Yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ varṇābhivyañjakam. In the Bhagavad-gītā, varṇābhivyañjakam, how to decide to which class or which caste a certain man belongs to, so there are symptoms. Satyaṁ śaucaṁ śamo damaḥ kṣāntir ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. So Nārada Muni says, yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktam. These are the symptoms. So if such symptoms are visible in another place, then tat tenaiva vinirdiśet [SB 7.11.35]. And Śrīdhara Svāmī has given his note that birth is not everything. One has to acquire the quality. Then he'll be classified. So prasaṅgam ajaram. We are attached to some quality and some work. In this way we are getting different bodies, one after another. This body finished, we create another body. This life is creating another body. This is called prasaṅgam ajaram. Attachment to the material qualities, we are conditioned. And suppose we have got now human form of body or in a very rich family, that is all right, but it will not continue. You have to give it up. And any moment, by the superior authority, when it is ordered, "Immediately please leave this position," you have to do it. This is called conditioned life. You cannot stay in any status of life for all the days. If you think that "I am American. I am very happy," that... That's all right. You're American, you're happy, or Indian, you are very happy. You have chalked out your plan how to continue happiness. But nature will not allow you to stay. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. As soon as nature will call back, "Please give up this post. Now take the post of a dog,"... Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. "You have acted... You were given the most, I mean to say, exalted form of life, human being... You did not act as human being, you acted as a dog. Now you take the body of a dog." This is karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa.

Therefore we must be very careful in this human form of life. Our aim should be how to become a devotee. So to become a devotee, Kṛṣṇa conscious, because that is the path of liberation...

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti...

[Bg. 4.9]



If you want to stop punar janma... Great, great personalities in India, they used to go to the forest to stop this repetition of punar janma. Just like Viśvāmitra Muni. Viśvāmitra Muni, when he approached Mahārāja Daśaratha to take with him Rāmacandra and Lakṣmaṇa-They were boys-to kill the Tāḍakā Rākṣasī... There was some disturbance. So although Viśvāmitra Muni could kill, but no, that was not the brāhmaṇa's business. It was the, to kill, to..., was the, to punish, it was king's business. So therefore they approached. So at that time Mahārāja Daśaratha greeted Viśvāmitra Muni: aihiṣṭaṁ yat tat punar-janma-jayāya. Just like when we meet a friend, if he's a businessman... Suppose he comes to see me. I am a sannyāsī, and he's a businessman. I ask him, "How your business is going on?" Because he's engaged in that way. And the gentleman who comes to see me, he will ask me, "Swamiji, how your preaching is going on?" He'll not ask me, "How your business is going on?"



So the punar-janma-jayāya aihiṣṭam. The brāhmaṇas, the learned ṛṣis, sages, they're especially engaged for punar-janma-jayāya, to conquer over the process of repetition of birth and death. That is the highest occupational... So every man is meant for that, punar-janma-jayāya. Unless we conquer this process of punar janma, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19], and if we simply waste our time like animals-eating, sleeping, sex intercourse and defense-then it is animal life. So especially in this age they cannot distinguish that what is the animal life and what is human life. They think, "The dog, animal, he is sleeping on the street, and I am sleeping on the twentieth floor of a nice apartment. Therefore I am civilized." The śāstra says no. Either you sleep on the street or on the twenty-fourth story of apartment, you are sleeping. You are not doing any other thing. Simply the dog is eating without any plate, and suppose if you are eating in a golden plate. That does not mean the taste of the foodstuff has changed. No. The foodstuff given to the dog on the street, without any plate, and the foodstuff given to me in a golden plate, the taste is the same. And the value, food value, is the same. So we have to see in that way, that to improve the quality of eating, sleeping, mating... The dog is having sexual intercourse in the open street, and if we have sexual intercourse in a very secluded place and very nice bedstead, that does not change the quality. Therefore we should know it that simply by eating, sleeping, defending and sex life, that is animal life. Human life is meant for how to become free from this process of repetition of birth and death. That is liberation.

So here we have discussed last night that prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam ātmanaḥ. The bondage, conditioned life, more and more tightened. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. If you do not engage your life in activities of Kṛṣṇa consciousness... That is called yajña. Yajña-puruṣa. Yajña means to sacrifice for the satisfaction of the Supreme Person. That is called yajña. (aside:) Go on.

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



If you want perfection of your activities... Different men have got different activities. That's all right. But try to make it perfect, saṁsiddha. Siddhaye, brahma-siddhaye. We have discussed all these things. And how it can be done? Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. If you satisfy Kṛṣṇa, Hari, by your talent, by your activities, then you are successful. That should be the aim of human life. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. You don't try to engage yourself, entangle yourself for repetition of birth and death.



So how this can be achieved? That is suggested in the last verse: sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. The same attachment, as you are attached to these material activities, if you transfer that attachment to a sādhu, then your life is successful. We have got attachment for money, we have got attachment for woman, we have got attachment for nice house, we have attachment for our country, for our society, for our families, and so on, so on, so on. That attachment is called ajaraṁ pāśam. Pāśam means rope. If you are tied up with a rope, hands and legs, then you are helpless. So we are actually tied up. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī [Bg. 7.14]. Therefore it is called guṇa. Guṇa means rope. We are tied up. We are not free. Just like we are trying to go to the moon planet so many years, but because we are not free, still we have not been successful to go there. So there are so many planets within this material world, we can go. We have got now machine, very speedy machine, but why we cannot go? Because you are conditioned. You cannot go by your whims. You must be qualified to go to certain planets. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām

[Bg. 9.25]



So if you want to go, you must qualify yourself. Otherwise it is not so easy. Just like if you want to go to America, you must have qualification. You must have your visa, you must have your passport, you must have the... So many things-if you want to be immigration or if you want to go as a visitor. Similarly, the other conn... If there are so many processes you have to undergo from this country to that country, is it possible that you want to go to another planet without such qualification? This is futile attempt. It is not possible. Therefore you are conditioned. It is called conditioned. We cannot go, we cannot move freely, without being sanctioned by the superior authority. So we generally say, "Not a blade of grass moves without the sanction of God." Similarly, we cannot do anything. Daivī hy eṣā. God does not take as the supervision personally. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate-in the Vedas, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad. He hasn't got to do personally, but He has got so many agents to do. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate. He has got so ma... They will do. You are not free even to twinkle with your eyelids. That is also being controlled. That information... You are moving this hand very freely. It can be immediately paralyzed. I am claiming that "I... It is my hand." What is your hand? It can be stopped immediately. Your eyes, it can be stopped.



So we must know that we are conditioned. So this is conditioned life. How you can improve conditioned life? Therefore our business is how to become liberated from all this condition. And that can be done only by sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam. If you...You have got so many attachment for so many things. If you turn all this attachment to a sādhu... Sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga sarva-śāstre kaya. Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised, sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga sarva-śāstre kaya. In all the śāstras they advise that to associate with the sādhu. Tyaja durjana-saṁsargaṁ bhaja sādhu-samāgamam. Even Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, a great politician... Bhaja sādhu-samāgamam. Asat-saṅga-tyāga ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra [Cc. Madhya 22.87]. One gṛhastha Vaiṣṇava, householder Vaiṣṇava, he asked Caitanya Mahāprabhu that "What is the duty of a gṛhastha, householder Vaiṣṇava?" So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said in two lines: asat-saṅga-tyāga ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra. "Don't associate with nonsense asādhus." Asat-saṅga-tyāga ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra. One line. A Vaiṣṇava's behavior is to give up the association of demons, nondevotee. Because sādhu means devotee. Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30].

So it is very, I mean to say, sincere, to avoid the company of sādhu. But at the present moment it is very difficult to find out the association of sādhu. Therefore our teeny effort is, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, to create an association of the sādhus so people may take advantage of this association, and then his life becomes liberated. And that is the aim and object of this association. It has no other object. People may say so many nonsense things, but our only object is that, as... Therefore we have given the name "Association of Kṛṣṇa conscious persons." Kṛṣṇa conscious means sādhu. Because Kṛṣṇa says,

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



"He is first class yogi." Who is that? "Who is always thinking of Me." And Kṛṣṇa is advising, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Four things only. It is not very difficult thing. Always think of Kṛṣṇa, man-manāḥ. And without becoming devotee, how you can think of Kṛṣṇa? You can think of your business, you can think of your dog, or you can think of your family, or you can think of your lovable object, woman or man and so many. But Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ: "You think of Me."



Because we have to think something. Without thinking we cannot remain. This is the simple process. Instead of thinking so many things, you simply think of Kṛṣṇa. The sādhu will teach that. Sādhu's business... Why sādhu, to associate with sādhu, sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]? Now, sādhu will not teach anything else. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. This is the process of making spiritual advancement. If you have got any faith for making spiritual advancement, then you must associate with sādhus. Ādau śraddhā. Just like here people come. Here there is no other thing because here all the boys and girls and devotees, they are concerned with Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That's all. The whole business, whole day's business, whole night's business, is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. From early morning at three o'clock to night, ten o'clock, they have only business of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Therefore they are sādhu. Therefore they are sādhu. This is the symptom of sādhu. And so many people are criticizing. So many enemies we have got. We are not getting the sanction because there are so many enemies. We are creating "nuisance." We are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra-that is nuisance. This complaint is going to the police.

So that is very difficult. Therefore a sādhu is advised, titikṣavaḥ, tolerate! Tolerate all this nonsense! What can be done? We have no other alternative, to tolerate. Nobody's coming to help us. Our business is so thankless task. Because we are trying to create one temple, so many enemies, they are giving hindrance, "You cannot do it." Therefore titikṣava. You have to remain sādhu. You cannot become asādhu. You have to tolerate. What can be done? Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ [SB 3.25.21]. At the same time, you have to become merciful. You know what has happened in this place, Hare Krishna Land. So much attack by the police, by the Municipality, "Break this temple." So we could have gone, that "What is the use of taking so much botheration? We have got hundreds of temples outside India. If Bombay people are not liking, let us go away." No. Kāruṇikāḥ. We have come to distribute Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We must tolerate and give this message to the people. Kāruṇikāḥ. Very merciful, in spite of all trouble. What is the use of...? These boys, these American boys, they have come to help me-not that they are hungry, they have come here. No. My mission is that "You American, your, you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa so that India, people of India will see, 'Oh, Americans, they are also chanting. Why not ourselves? It is our property.' " But unfortunately, so much dull brain. But that is not coming. But still, we have to do it. We have to tolerate and we have to become kāruṇikāḥ.

Therefore it is said that para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Kāruṇikāḥ. Why kāruṇikāḥ? Why you should, one, you want to be merciful? Now, para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. A Vaiṣṇava's business is para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. A Vaiṣṇava understands that "These people, they are engaged like cats and dogs in sense gratification. They are misguided, and they'll be, next life they'll be punished for this misguidance. Let us do something for them." This is kāruṇikāḥ. Karuṇā. Karuṇā... Out of mercy. There is no question of getting something, money. No. Money we have got sufficient. Just to become merciful upon these fallen, conditioned souls, who are suffering on account of becoming animalistic, without any Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore the preacher, the sādhus... These are the sādhus. Titikṣavaḥ, tolerant. "Never mind. Whatever hindrances and tribulations they are offering to us, never mind. Tolerate." Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ [SB 3.25.21]. Suhṛdaḥ, means the heart is so nice. Su means nice, and hṛd means heart. They have no other desire. Suhṛdaḥ. Suhṛdaḥ means... Just like there are different words: mitra, suhṛdaḥ, bandhu... And Sanskrit is very perfect language. Suhṛdaḥ. Suhṛdaḥ means a person who is always thinking of welfare for others. He's called suhṛdaḥ. Otherwise kuhṛdaḥ. The ordinary persons, they are thinking how to make him subdued, how to make him defeated, in competition. That is the polluted heart. And the Vaiṣṇava, he's always thinking how a man can be saved from the clutches of māyā. He's called suhṛdaḥ. He has no other desire. Suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. Not "For my brother, or family," but sarva-dehinām, for all dehīs, all dehīs.

It is not that, that these human... Just like here-nationalism. What is this nationalism? Nationalism means to take care of the human beings and send the cows and goats to the slaughterhouse. This is going on, "nationalism." What do you mean by national? Nation... The definition is any living being born in that land, he is a national. So the cow is not born? The tree is not born in this land? But because they are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, they cannot be kind to all the dehīs. Sarva-dehinām. Dehī means anyone who has got this body. So somebody has got body human being, somebody has got the cow's body, somebody has a dog's body, somebody has tree's body. So the Vaiṣṇava is so kind that suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. He is kind not only to the human being: to the cats, dogs, to the trees, to the plants, to the insects. A Vaiṣṇava will hesitate to kill even one mosquito. Sarva-dehinām. Not that "I shall take care of my brother. I am good, and my brother is good." No. Suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. These are the Vaiṣṇava qualifications.

Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām, ajāta-śatravaḥ [SB 3.25.21]. Because he is living in that way, why others will be enemy? Or, he does not create enemy. They become enemy out of their own character. We do not create enemy, but due to the demonic qualification... How we can create enemy? Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. We are simply teaching, "My dear human being, my dear friend, you become a surrendered soul to Kṛṣṇa." So what is our fault? So we don't create enemy, but they become enemy. We don't create enemy. Why shall I create enemy? Suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. Why shall I create enemy? But they become, out of their own nature... Just like serpent. Nobody creates a serpent enemy, but he's already enemy. Sarpaḥ krūraḥ khalaḥ krūraḥ sarpāt krūrataraḥ khalaḥ. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "There are two crooked animals, or envious animals." What is that? One man, envious. Without any reason, he becomes envious. And there is one serpent, envious. Without any fault, it will bite, and your death. Sarpaḥ krūraḥ khalaḥ krūraḥ. Similarly, there are men-without any offense, they'll become enemy. Unnecessarily. So Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, sarpaḥ krūraḥ khalaḥ krūraḥ. There are two envious entities. Sarpāt krūrataraḥ khalaḥ. The crooked man is more dangerous than the serpent. Why? Mantrauṣadhi-vaśaḥ sarpaḥ: Sarpa, the serpent, can be subdued by mantra, by chanting, snake-chanting mantra, or by some herbs. Khalaḥ kena nivāryate: The man envious, it cannot be subdued. Therefore he's more dangerous than the serpent.

So we are in this society, human society. Because we are spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the krūraḥ, which is more dangerous than a snake, they are putting, putting so many impediments. But we have to tolerate. We have no other alternative. You see? Ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ. Be peaceful. What can be done? Depend on Kṛṣṇa. Sādhavaḥ. They are sādhu. They are sādhu. Sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ. These are the ornament of sādhu. What is that? Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām [SB 3.25.21]. Sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. But you must know what is sādhu. First, sādhu is that he must be devotee. And if he's devotee, then all the symptoms are there. All the symptoms are there. These are the symptoms. Now, don't go to a sādhu... Śāstra says that this is the sādhu. Now, you find out a sādhu and associate with him. Then your path of liberation will be open.

Thank you very much. Haribol. (end)



741122SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.22

-

Bombay, November 22, 1974



Nitāi: "Such a sādhu engages in staunch devotional service to the Lord without deviation. For the sake of the Lord he renounces all other connections, such as family relationships and friendly acquaintances within the world."



Prabhupāda:



mayy ananyena bhāvena

bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām

mat-kṛte tyakta-karmāṇas

tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ

[SB 3.25.22]



This is the explanation of the last version of Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. We have got so many obligations. As soon as we take birth-human being, not cats and dogs-we are immediately indebted to so many persons: devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41]. We are indebted to the demigods. The body, the material body, which we have got, it is running by the direction of the demigods. There are different demigods controlling different parts of the body. So that means as soon as we get a body, we become indebted to the demigods. Then, when we are educated, we take knowledge. Then we become indebted to the great sages, saintly persons, who have given us all the directions how to live comfortably, sinlessly. Then devarṣi-bhūta. Bhūta, ordinary, general living beings. Just like we are taking milk from the cows, service from the bull, from the horse, from the ass-even cats and dogs. So we are also indebted to them. Devarṣi-bhūta-āpta. Relatives. We get so many help from relatives. Bhūta-āpta. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇām. General public. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41]. And the forefathers. So a ṛṇī we are immediately. But if we renounce everything for the sake of Kṛṣṇa, then we are not ṛṇī, or indebted. That is the injunction of the śāstra.



devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

[SB 11.5.41]



So Kṛṣṇa also says, all śāstra says, that our only obligation is to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if we take to that process, then we are no more obliged to anyone. We are free. That is really freedom. How it is done? That is the almighty God's power. He can do that. Just like we have got practical experience. If a man is condemned to death, nobody can save him by law. But if the president or the king excuses him, then he is saved. That we have got practical experience, king's mercy or the president's mercy. So if you actually surrender your everything, your life... Prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā. We can sacrifice our life, our wealth... Prāṇa, artha... We can sacrifice the intelligence. Everyone is intelligent. If he sacrifices... This is called yajña. If you sacri... You have got some intelligence. Everyone is intelligent how to make his sense gratification very nice. Even an ant knows how to gratify his senses. So you have to sacrifice that. Don't gratify your senses, but try to gratify Kṛṣṇa's senses. Then you are perfect. Then you are perfect.



That you have to learn from the sādhu. Because it is recommended in the..., that sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. As much we are trying to gratify our senses and we have become attached to this material world-prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam. We are becoming more and more entangled. The same thing, if we do for a sādh u or Kṛṣṇa... Sādhu-guru-kṛṣṇa. Sādhu-śāstra-guru. So sādhu is representative of Kṛṣṇa. Or Kṛṣṇa directly... Sādhu will never say that "You serve me." Sādhu will say, "Serve Kṛṣṇa." Therefore we have to approach Kṛṣṇa through sādhu. Not directly. That is not... That is confirmed by Vaiṣṇava ācārya, Narottama dāsa: chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā. You cannot directly approach Kṛṣṇa. You have to go through the media, the transparent via media of his representative.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa Mahā... Sādh...

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



Caitanya Mahāprabhu says to Rūpa Gosvāmī that we are wandering in this way, brahmāṇḍa, whole universe. There are different types, or forms, of body, 8,400,000. And there are millions and trillions of planets, up and down. Oṁ bhūr... Bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ. Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka. Then Tala, Atala, Vitala, Pātāla, Rasātala... There are so many planetary systems. Caturdaśa-bhuvana. This universe is called fourteen different planetary systems, and we are wandering in these different planetary systems. If we are pious, then we are promoted to the higher planetary system, Svargaloka, Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka, Brahmaloka, Satyaloka. There are so many... Siddhaloka. And if we are impious, then we are downtrodden. We go down more and more. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. If you are situated in sattva-guṇa, then you are promoted to the higher planetary system: adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ. Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ. If you are infected with tamo-guṇa, then you go down, down, down, down. Madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ. And if we are infected by the modes of passion, then we keep ourselves in the middle. But Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Even if you go to the highest planetary system-it is called Brahmaloka-where the duration of life is very, very long... That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17].



So the... Sādhu. We are to take shelter of sādhu. Sādhu-guru. The same thing. Guru means sādhu. A sādhu... One... Sādhu means the devotee of the Lord. If one is not sādhu, then he cannot become guru. And sādhu means... This is the description given. What is that? Mayy ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām. He's sādhu. Not that anyone with a saffron cloth and having a long beard. That is not sādhu. Sādhu means the devotee of the Lord. That is his first qualification. Kṛṣṇa says, api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. The same thing. As it is, Kapiladeva says, mayy ananyena bhāvena. Kapiladeva is also Kṛṣṇa, incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. The same thing. The Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa svayam says, bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. Ananya, "not being deviated." Mām ekam, "only unto Me." This is ananya-bhāva. Not that sometimes take from here something, take from here something, whatever is available. Those who are after material concessions, they go different demigods: take something from Śiva, take something from Durgā, take something from Kālī, take this, that, that. So many, there are different demigods. Especially Goddess Durgā, Lord Śiva and Gaṇeśa and Sūrya, they are... And Viṣṇu. The Viṣṇu worship is the best. Ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param. That is said by Lord Śiva to Goddess Pārvatī. Pārvatī asked Lord Śiva, "What is the best type of worship?" There are so many. It is amongst the demigods. So Lord Śiva advised, ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param. "My dear Pārvatī, amongst all kinds of different types of worship, Viṣṇu worship is the best." And then again he said, tasmāt parataraṁ devi: "And there is still better worship." What is that? Tasmāt parataraṁ devi tadīyānāṁ samarcanam. Then... "Viṣṇu worship is the best. And more than that: to worship Vaiṣṇava." Tadīyānāṁ samarcanam.

So therefore... Here also the same thing: sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. Begin. The spiritual life begins from the association of sādhu, or devotee. You cannot progress a pinch only without the mercy of sādhu. Naiṣāṁ ma... Prahlāda Mahārāja said like that:

naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat

[SB 7.5.32]



His father, Prahlāda Mahārāja's father asked-after all, he's son-"My dear son, Prahlāda, how you became so much advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" Although he was demon, still, he was inquisitive. So Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "My dear father..." He used to address his father as asura-varya, "the best of the asuras." Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya. Asura-varya. Asura means demon, and varya means "the best," varīyān. So he... Because he asked that "How you have advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Prahlāda? What is the process?" After all, he was a learned scholar. He inquired out of joking or something like that. So Prahlāda Mahārāja plainly said, matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā: "My dear asura-varya father, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness..." Na matiḥ. Matir na kṛṣṇe. "One cannot get Kṛṣṇa consciousness," matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ, "by the instruction of others, or guru." Parataḥ. Svataḥ, "by speculating oneself," mitho 'bhipadyeta, "or by assembly, conference. For them..." Who? Who are they? Gṛha-vratānām. Gṛha... Matir na...



matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām

adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām

[SB 7.5.30]



"This class of men, punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām..." Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām means sense gratification. We can see in the Western countries how they are, everywhere, how they are attached to sense gratification. Punaḥ punaḥ... The same thing. Just like sex life. Everyone has sex life. Still, they are not satisfied. And... Our country it is not yet introduced, but they go to see naked dance. The same thing which he sees every night, he goes to see by paying some fees. This is called punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇa, "chewing the chewed." This class of men... Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30], matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām. And gṛha-vrata means those who have made their determination that "We shall remain in this material world, or in this family life, and we are not prepared to accept any other thing."



The Vedic principle is that you remain family life for some time, not for all the days. Pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. As soon as you're fifty years old, you must give up family life. Compulsory. Therefore we have got... Vedic religion means varṇāśrama-dharma: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa, and brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. So for brāhmaṇa, the four āśramas are compulsory. He must become a brahmacārī. Then from brahmacārī he becomes gṛhastha. Then from gṛhastha he must become vānaprastha. Then he must become a sannyāsī. But when he becomes a sannyāsī, that is the... Tyakta-karmāṇas tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ. Tyakta-karmāṇaḥ. So long we are in this material world we have to work. Karma. Karma means to gain some profit. Karma, akarma, vikarma. Vikarma means against the law. Just like ordinary laws. If you are working honestly, business or karma, that's all right. But if you do something wrong, then you are punishable. So karma and vikarma. Vikarma is punishable. Karma you can do. You ripe (reap) your own fruit by working. You become big man, you become rich man, and you become poor man also, by your karma. If you cannot handle your business nicely, then you become poor man. And if you can handle your business nicely, you become rich man. That is karma. Karma means you have to enjoy the result, fruitive result. That is called karma. And vikarma means punishable, pāpa. And akarma means you do something, but you are neither punishable nor rewardable. It is rewardable, practically. And that is bhakti, or satisfying Kṛṣṇa. There is no result. There is result; ultimate result is go back to home, back... But the material... Materially, if you expect some material profit by becoming a devotee, that is not possible. That is not possible. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate [Bg. 14.26]. Then you become above all the resultant action of karma.

So tyakta-karma. Sannyāsī means tyakta-karmāṇas tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ. You cannot give up karma if you live with your relatives, svajana, and bāndhavāḥ, society, friendship and love. If you live, then you cannot give up karma. You have to do, either karma or vikarma. But if you become sannyāsī, then you become akarma. Whatever you do, it is for Kṛṣṇa, and there is no reaction. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra karma-bandhanaḥ. Karma is bandhanaḥ. Vikarma is bandhanaḥ, but akarma is not bandhanaḥ. Bandhanaḥ means bondage. So we have to act for Kṛṣṇa. Yajñārthe. Yajña means Kṛṣṇa. Yajña means Viṣṇu. But people... Prahlāda Mahārāja said, na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum: [SB 7.5.31] "These ordinary men, they do not know that their ultimate destination of life is to go back to Viṣṇu, go back to home, back to Godhead." Na te viduḥ. Why they do not know? Durāśayā. Their hope is dur, very, I mean to say, what is called?

Nitāi: Hardy?



Prabhupāda: No. Durāśayā means which cannot be fulfilled. You can hope something, you can... But it is hoping against hope. It will never be fulfilled. That is called durāśā. Durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ. Persons who are trying to become happy by adjustment of this bahir-artha, external energy, or the material energy, they do not know that happiness cannot be achieved without approaching Viṣṇu, or God. They do not know it. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi... Everyone is thinking, "I must first of all see my own interest." That's all right. But what is your interest, that you do not know. First of all try to understand what is your interest. But that you do not know. Because you are thinking falsely that "By adjustment of this material atmosphere I shall be happy." Everyone is trying. Nationally, individually, collectively, everyone is trying. But it is not possible. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. It will be frustration. Therefore it is called bahir-artha-māninaḥ.



So why they are attempting this process, which will meet with frustration? That is also said: adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Because they cannot control their senses, adānta... Adānta-gobhiḥ. Go means indriya, senses, and adānta means uncontrolled. Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. So in this way we are being baffled in so many ways. The only rescue is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is said, ananya-bhāvena, mayy ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām. That is wanted. Dṛḍha-vrata. That is stated in Bhagavad-gītā. You'll find parallel passages, the same thing. Because Kṛṣṇa, or God, cannot say anything contradictory. Whatever He has said... Therefore Bhagavad-gītā is the preliminary study of spiritual life. If you can understand Bhagavad-gītā, then you can begin Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If you have not understood Bhagavad-gītā, it is useless. You cannot understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Just like Bhagavad-gītā ends with the assertion of the Lord: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Sarva-dharmān. We have created so many dharmas. But dharma cannot be so many. Dharma is one. Or religious system... What is that, religious system? The all religious system, the author of religion, author of religion... Just like author of law is government, similarly author of religion is God, Kṛṣṇa. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. You cannot manufacture dharma, just like you cannot manufacture law at your home. That will be not feasible. That will be not useful for anyone. You can make thousands of laws: "I think this should be done..." That is the fashion now. Everyone thinks in his own way. That is not philosophy. That is not law: "I think..." "We think..." No. You cannot think. What is your value? You are imperfect. Your senses are imperfect. How you can think perfect things? No, that is not possible. Therefore we have to...

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



You have to take knowledge from the tattva-darśī, one who has seen the truth. Otherwise, you'll be frustrated. Similarly religion. Religion you cannot manufacture: "This is our religion. This is this religion, that religion, that religion." So that is not religion. Religion is this: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Mayy ananyena bhāvena bhaktim. This is religion. Anything else, that is cheating. That is not religion.



Therefore if one can understand Bhagavad-gītā perfectly and he takes to this system of religion, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], then he can understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Because where Bhagavad-gītā is ended, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam begins from that point. Because in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the introductory verses, Vyāsadeva says, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsarāṇām [SB 1.1.2]. "This, this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is not ordinary type of religious system, because from this Bhāgavatam, kaitava, cheating type of religion, is completely swept away, kicked out, thrown away." Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. And upon this the great commentator Śrīdhara Svāmī, he says, atra mokṣa-vāñchā api nirasta. Because we know dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. So Śrīdhara Svāmī says that dharmaḥ projjhita... Because people are becoming religious for mokṣa, liberation. So Śrīdhara Svāmī says that up to the end of mokṣa-vāñchā, desire for liberation, that is also rejected. The... Because mokṣa is also not our ultimate goal of life. Mokṣa means to get relief from the material bondage. But if you do not get engagement of spiritual life, then mokṣa is also cheating because you'll fall down again.

I have repeatedly said that cure of disease is all right, but after curing, if you are not engaged in your healthy activities, then means, that means that your disease is again, will be relapsed. The śāstra says therefore, āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. One sometimes, after practicing much severe austerities and penances, he can approach the Brahman, paraṁ padam, that is Brahman realization, or Brahmaloka. Patanty adhaḥ. But from there also you will fall down. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. Because they did not care to worship the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore Māyāvādīs, the impersonalists, they fall down. Because they cannot stay. It is not possible. Simply impersonal effulgence, Brahman effulgence, you cannot stay. You can... That example I have given many times, that you can go very high in the sky by your very powerful sputnik and airship, but if you have no place to stay there, then you'll come back again. You'll come back again. Similarly, you can go to the Brahman effulgence, but within the Brahman effulgence, there are Vaikuṇṭha planets, or the spiritual world, there is Vaikuṇṭha planet. If you have no place to stay in the Vaikuṇṭha planets, then you'll come down again to this material world.

Therefore ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām. Dṛḍha-vratam.

ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

[Bg. 9.22]



Ananyāś cintayantaḥ. Simply thinking of Kṛṣṇa. That will help you. Ananya-bhāvena. This is sādhu. These are de... Sādhu. In the previous verse also, there were several descriptions:



titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ

suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ

sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ

[SB 3.25.21]



This is the beginning of sādhu. Because to come to this stage, ananya-bhāvena bhakti-yogena, you have to tolerate so many things. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Ananya-bhāvena yogena. He was simply thinking of Nārāyaṇa. How much trouble he had to undergo, even by, offered by his father. So we should be very much... Titikṣavaḥ. The matter... This material nature will not give you freedom so easily. It will not give so much freedom... Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama... mām eva ye prapadyante [Bg. 7.14]. If you become strong enough to capture the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, then mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etām... Then māyā will give you, "No, he's very strong. I cannot any more keep him under my clutches." So that is ananya-bhāvena. That is described. Ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām, mat-kṛte. For the sake of Kṛṣṇa, one can give up everything. That is ananya-bhāva. The first-class example is the gopīs. They gave up everything. Their family, their relatives, their husband, their sons, their father, their prestige, their honor-everything sacrificed, simply for Kṛṣṇa. That is the highest perfection. That is not possible for ordinary... But we can, if we follow the gopīs' way of loving Kṛṣṇa, then...



Just like the Gosvāmīs. They used to... Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau. It is possible if we follow the Gosvāmīs. The Gosvāmīs were minister, minister of Nawab Hussain Shah in the Bengal government in those days. Sanātana Gosvāmī and Rū..., very, mean, prime, finance minister, chief minister, very important ministers, and they gave up everything, everything. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. By their determination to worship Kṛṣṇa they gave up everything. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇī... Maṇḍala-pati means very big, big leaders. When one is minister, certainly he is connected with so many big, big men. So they were actually connected with them, but they gave up, sadā tuccha-vat, as most insignificant thing. And what was their next adoption? Now, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. Kaupīna, a, simply a loincloth and underwear, kaupīna-kanthāśritau, and one quilt. That's all. Minimum. Minimum necessities of the body. But how they lived? They were so big men. How they adopted such life and lived? Because if a man, rich man, adopts immediately renunciation, that affects his material condition of life. That we have seen. Just like in Bengal, C.R. Das, he had fifty thousand rupees' income in those days, and he gave up everything and joined Gandhi's movement. He died within one year, because he could not tolerate. So without spiritual engagement, one cannot give up this material engagement. That is the real fact. One must... Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati... They gave up this material enjoyment. That's all right. How they lived? Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhuḥ. They dipped into the ocean of the transcendental loving affairs of the gopīs with Kṛṣṇa. That was their asset. Therefore they lived very peacefully and very happily.

So we have to... We, we cannot simply give up. As it is said that tyakta-karmāṇaḥ, give up everyone, engagement, and tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ,... You'll become mad if you give up all these things, unless you have got staunch faith in Kṛṣṇa. Then you cannot give up. It is not possible. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. If you find Kṛṣṇa's association is so nice, then you can very easily give up your opulent position, svajana, bāndhavāḥ, family, business and everything. If you... That requires sādhu-saṅga, sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], to associate with sādhu, devotees. Then you can develop such thing when day will come you'll be able to give up everything and you become liberated person, quite fit for going back to home, back to Godhead. Unless you are completely free... If you have got a tinge of attachment for material enjoyment, Kṛṣṇa will give you chance: "All right, you enjoy. You enjoy, to the fullest extent." Because we have come to this material world for enjoying sense gratification. Kṛṣṇa bhuliyā jīva... That is called māyā, illusory. It is not enjoyment. It is simply struggle. But one who comes to the senses, that "This is simply struggle. Life after life, there is no enjoyment," then he can become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So that requires knowledge, association of sādhu, devotee. That is being explained by Kapiladeva.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741123SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.23

-

Bombay, November 23, 1974



Nitāi: "Engaged constantly in chanting and hearing about Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sādhus do not suffer from material miseries because they are always filled with thoughts of My pastimes and activities."



Prabhupāda:



mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ

śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca

tapanti vividhās tāpā

naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ

[SB 3.25.23]



Na etān. Generally, people, they are suffering. There is nobody in the world, those who are materially engaged, can say boldly that "I am not suffering." Is there anybody? I challenge anyone. Can anyone say that "I am not suffering"? So everyone must be suffering. Now, why these Anacin tablets are advertised, "pain-killer"? Because they are suffering. And not in this country, but in the Western countries, America, one takes at least one dozen tablet daily for mitigating suffering-tranquilizer, this, that, so many. They are advertised, and they take. At last, for sleeping. Because they are more advanced. We are less advanced; therefore we are satisfied only one tablet, Anacin. (laughter) But they are not satisfied with one tablet. They have dozens of tablet. I have seen it. It is advertised in the subway trains. So many tablets are advertised. Suffering must be there. Anyone who has got this material body has accepted suffering. That's a fact. But foolish people, they cannot understand. He thinks, "I am got very fatty and beautiful body." He is satisfied. The dog is also satisfied. He does not know that this dog's body is greater suffering than human body. The hog's body is greater suffering than the human body. But everyone is thinking, "I am happy." This is called māyā, illusion. You go to a hospital, a man is lying down on the bed, and if you ask, "How are you?" "Yes, I am well today." What is "well"?



So there cannot be anyone without suffering. That is not possible. There are three kinds of suffering: adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. Adhyātmika means pertaining to the body and mind. "I have got headache today. I have got some pain here in the back. My mind is not very much settled up today. I cannot talk with you." These kind of sufferings are called adhyātmika, pertaining to the body and the mind. And there are sufferings adhibhautika. Just like at night, unnecessarily, the dogs bark, and we cannot sleep. This is called adhibhautika, suffering imposed by other living entities-the mosquitos, the bugs. Then enemies. Suffering. Just like some of our enemies, they are hindering sanctioning this temple. So this is called adhibhautika. And besides that, big, big sufferings there are. Then adhidaivika, accident, which you have no control over. No sufferings you have control. That is not possible. There is famine; there is pestilence; there is no rain; there is excessive heat, excessive cold. They are called adhidaivika. Earthquake..., so many. So this is the reminder, that "You rascal, you are thinking you are very happy in this material world. What you have done about these sufferings?" Mūḍha. They think, "Oh, this is all right. It doesn't matter." Besides that, there is very grave sufferings. That is birth, death, old age, and disease. So where is your happiness? But because we are under the spell of māyā, we are thinking, "This position is very nice. Let us enjoy life." This is their enjoyment.

So one has to... Tapanti vividhās tāpāḥ. Vividhāḥ, multi. Vividhāḥ means many. Tapanti vividhās tāpā na etān mad-gata-cetasaḥ. Those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, they... We cannot say that they are not suffering. They are suffering, but no so acutely. They know. Therefore we have begun this sādhu's symptoms, titikṣavaḥ, tolerant. Everyone is tolerant. One has to tolerate. But a sādhu's toleration and ordinary man's toleration is different. Sādhu's toleration is not so acute because a sādhu knows that he is not this body. There is a Bengali Vaiṣṇava song, deha-smṛti nāhi yāra, saṁsāra-bandhana kāhāṅ tāra. If we understand properly that "I am not this body," then, although there is suffering, you will not feel very much, although we are now absorbed with this body, bodily sufferings are there. Just like the example that you have got a car, and there is some accident. So one who is too much absorbed with the thought that "This is my car" or "I am car," he suffers more. But if one knows that "I am not this car. All right, there is some accident. It can be repaired or it can be... That doesn't matter." It is a question of absorption of the thought. The materialistic person, because they are like animal, he suffers more. And for the devotees, as it is advised in the Bhagavad-gītā,

mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

[Bg. 2.14]



Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna that "These material sufferings are just like the sufferings of season, seasonal suffering." In summer season also, you suffer, and in winter season also, we suffer. Śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ. And the same thing, this fire, in summer season it is suffering. The heat is suffering. And in the winter season is suffering, but in the summer season it is pleasing. The same water, the same fire-sometimes it is suffering; sometimes it is pleasing. But the matter is the same. Why? Mātrā-sparśāḥ: it is due to the touch of the skin. Because we have got this skin disease, "I am this body," therefore you are suffering, because you have become so nonsense rascal that "I am this body." Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Tri-dhātuke: This is the bag of three elements: kapha, pitta, vāyu. Kapha, pitta, vāyu. According to Ayurvedic system, they are called tri-dhātu. So this body is made of material elements: kapha, pitta, vāyu. So,



yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



So the more we are in bodily concept of life, the suffering is more. Nowadays new things have developed: nationalism, communism, communalism, so many things. Sufferings are more. We have seen in 1947 in Calcutta Hindu-Muslim riot-more suffering because one is thinking, "I am Hindu," one is thinking, "I am Muslim." But if one is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then they will not suffer. They will not unnecessarily fight, "Because I am Hindi or because you are Muslim, therefore we have to fight." No. Because if both of them know that "I am not this body. Therefore I am neither Hindu nor Muslim. I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa," then where is the suffering of Hindu-Muslim riot? The understanding is missing. Because people are being educated to become more bodily conscious, therefore their sufferings are increasing. Sufferings are increasing. And if you reduce this bodily concept of life, then suffering also will be reduced.



So those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, Kṛṣṇa conscious means, here it is said, mad-gata-cetasaḥ. Naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ. Mad-gata. Bhagavān says, "Those who are always thinking of, in the mind, within the heart," mad-gata-cetasaḥ, "they are not suffering." They are not suffering in this way because they know that "Even if I am suffering, it is Kṛṣṇa's desire." So they welcome. Just like Kuntī. Queen Kuntī, when Kṛṣṇa was departing, taking farewell from Kuntī, so Kuntī said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, when we are in full of danger, at that time You are always present as our friend, as our advisor. Now we are well situated. We have got our kingdom. We are well established. So You are going away to Dvārakā? No, no, no, this is not good. Better we may again go to that suffering so that we can remember You always." So the devotee sometimes welcomes suffering because that is an opportunity of remembering Kṛṣṇa very constantly. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam [SB 10.14.8]. So when a devotee suffers, he thinks that "It is due to my past misdeeds. So I am suffering not very much, a very little, on account of Kṛṣṇa's grace. So it doesn't matter." So after all, it is, everything, in the mind, suffering and enjoying. So a devotee's mind is trained up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore he does not care for suffering. That is the difference between a devotee and nondevotee.

Therefore it is said that tapanti vividhās tāpā na etān mad-gata-cetasaḥ. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. So how much suffering he had to undergo, the five-years-old boy, and his father was putting in dangers, sometimes under the feet, leg of the elephant, sometimes throwing from the mountain, sometimes on burning oil, sometimes amongst the snakes, so many ways. But he was silent. Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was a Muhammadan by birth. So he became a very good devotee and always chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. That was his fault. So the Muslim Kazi called him, that "You are Muhammadan. You born in a such great family, Muhammadan family, and you are chanting Hindu's Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra? What is this?" So he mildly replied, "My dear sir, there are many Hindus, they also have become Muhammadan. So suppose I have become Hindu. So what is the wrong? What is the wrong there?" So Kazi became very angry, that "You are talking before me? All right." So he was punished to be caned in twenty-two bazaar, in front of twenty-two bazaar. That means he was to be killed by caning. So it is understood, when he was beaten by the cane, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was on his back. So he did not feel any suffering. So there are many instances. A devotee had to suffer many sufferings, but they did not take it very much severely. They tolerated. And a devotee is educated to tolerate.

Therefore, in the sādhu's symptoms, beginning, that titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ [SB 3.25.21], they, a devotee, suffers; at the same time, he is very kind to these conditioned soul, how to elevate them, how to make them Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is kāruṇikāḥ. These are the very primary features of a devotee's life. People put him into suffering in so many ways, but he does not give up his job. His job is to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that others may become happy. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "My Lord, I have no suffering. I have no suffering because I know the art, how to become happy." Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ [SB 7.9.43]. The same thing is described here: śṛṇvanti kathayanti. So Prahlāda Mahārāja said that "I know how to become happy." How to become happy? "Now, simply hearing about You and chanting about You, that's all." Śṛṇvanti kathayanti. Just like here two business is going on: you are hearing, and I am speaking. Bodhayantaḥ parasparam. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanti [Bg. 9.13]. This bhajana means śṛṇvanti kathayanti. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]-this is bhajana. You simply hear about the Lord, you talk about the Lord. That is bhajana. Śravaṇam means you can further make progress. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam is going on all over the world. Some is hearing about some politician, other is speaking about some politician or some other man, some important man in the society. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam is going on. But they are suffering. But when the śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam is pertaining to Viṣṇu, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, then you will not be suffering. This is the... It requires experience. It requires advancement.

Then... Prahlāda Mahārāja, as he says, that tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ: "Because my mind is always absorbed in talking about You and hearing about You, therefore I am not unhappy. I do not... I know how to become happy." "But you seem to be very unhappy." So he says, "Yes, I am unhappy because I see these..." Tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] "These foolish people, simply for temporary so-called happiness, they are engaged in material activities. I am thinking of them only. That is my unhappiness. Otherwise I have no unhappiness."

So this devotional service, this line of action, is so nice that if we practice, if we make advance, then even in this material world, staying, there will be no more suffering. That is called jīvan mukta. Jīvan mukta means although he is in this body, but he is not suffering the bodily miserable condition. It is a question of absorption of thought. I have read in some paper that Mr. Stalin, the communist leader, he had to undergo a surgical operation of operating on the belly. But doctor wanted to, what is called, chloroform, but he said, "No, there is no need. You can go on with your operation." So even in ordinary life it is possible. Because the mind is absorbed in a different way, even a surgical operation does not disturb a man. Similarly, what to speak of spiritual life, if your mind is always absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought, Kṛṣṇa consciousness... That is stated mad-gata-cetasaḥ, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa advises also. What is His advice? Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "You always think of Me."

There are many instances. If we believe, that is another... If you don't believe, that is another... But there is practical also, that these boys, European, American boys, from their childhood, from their birth, they are accustomed to so many bad habits. But for want of those bad habit, they think it is impossible to live. Not only ordinary man. I will tell you the story of one very big man, the Marquis of Zetland. The Marquis of Zetland was talking with one of my Godbrother. The Lord-they are called Lord-he asked, "Can you make me brāhmaṇa?" So the my Godbrother said, "Yes, it is not very difficult. If you give up these bad habits-intoxication, illicit sex life, meat-eating, and gambling-you can become a brāhmaṇa." So he said, "It is impossible." Yes. A very big man, he said, "It is impossible. This is our life." Actually, we have got experience in the Western countries, this is their life. Even very, very old men, they cannot give up this. For want of this, it is a great suffering. But here you see practically. These young boys, young girls, they have given up. There is no suffering. Take practical example. And an old man, a very respectable gentleman, he was requested to give up these four habits; he replied, "It is impossible." How it is becoming possible for these boys? If they would have suffered for want of this illicit sex, intoxication, the boys or girls, then how they could remain with me? I am not a very rich man. I cannot give them nice shelter. I cannot give them nice food. But why? Because they are not feeling... They have no furniture. They are lying down on the floor, no bedding, no proper cloth. Because they are not suffering actually. Otherwise they could not remain with me. This is a fact. If they would have suffered, then, like Lord Zetland, they would have also said, "It is impossible to remain with Prabhupāda." But they are not saying that. There is suffering from disease also; still, they are not leaving. They are not leaving.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. Mad-gata. They do not feel any suffering. It is practical. Others, they feel suffering. Therefore it is said, tapanti vividhās tāpā na etān mad-gata-cetasaḥ. Na etān. Therefore we should accept this. What is that? Mad-āśrayāḥ kathāḥ. Kathā, kṛṣṇa-kathā. There are so many literatures, especially Bhagavad-gītā. That is open to everyone. Everyone knows Bhagavad-gītā. So if we simply hear Bhagavad-gītā, we can attain this stage of perfection, no more suffering. That is a fact. So just like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. He made his life... Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. He was a very responsible king, emperor of this world, and he was administering his kingdom. At the same time, he was a great devotee. These are the examples in this country. There were many kings like that; they are called rājarṣi. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said,

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Rājarṣi. The kings were... Although they were king, rāja, still, they were as good as the great saintly person, ṛṣi. So Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, he was also a rājarṣi. He gave example: although he was busy in his administration work, still, he was talking only of Kṛṣṇa, only. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. Whenever he would talk, he will talk about Kṛṣṇa. This required practice. Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised all His devotees, grāmya-kathā nā kahibe. This requires... This is called advancement. Don't talk nonsense of these material talks. What is the use? What you will gain? Just like you open the newspaper. What do you find? The same thing. The same plane crash, the same politician condemn another politician, and something lost, something gained, something... It is punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. The same thing are being repeated in different way. So what is the use of talking such thing? Better, if you want to talk, talk on Kṛṣṇa, talk on Bhagavad-gītā, talk on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and enjoy life. That is required.



That is recommended here: mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca. If you simply talk about Kṛṣṇa and hear about Kṛṣṇa, then that stage will come when there will be no more suffering always. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). This is called ānandamaya in the Vedānta-sūtra. A living entity or Kṛṣṇa, they are ānandamaya. Prācurye maya-pratyaya. Simply ānanda. When you are in pleasure, transcendental bliss, there will be no more possibility of this material suffering. That is instructed here:

mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ

śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca

tapanti vividhās tāpā

naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ



There is also another statement in the Bhagavad-gītā: yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā [Bg. 6.47]. There are many yogis, but that yogi who is thinking of Kṛṣṇa always, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā, sa me yuktatamaḥ: "In My opinion that is... He is the first-class yogi." Not to show any magic. Magic, that is magic, that if he does not suffer from any suffering, that is the greatest magic. But that will be done by a devotee. And Kṛṣṇa also recommends.



So our life should be... This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is being spread only for this purpose. What is this? Śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca. Mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ. When we shall feel pleasure by hearing about Kṛṣṇa or talking about Kṛṣṇa, we must know that we are making progress on the path of perfection. And at that time any kind of this material suffering will not be felt. This is the practical effect of executing devotional service.

Thank you very much. (end)



741124SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.24

-

Bombay, November 24, 1974



Nitāi: "O My mother, O virtuous lady, these are the qualities of great devotees who are freed from all attachment. You must seek attachment unto such holy men, for this counteracts the pernicious effects of material attachment."



Prabhupāda:



ta ete sādhavaḥ sādhvi

sarva-saṅga-vivarjitāḥ

saṅgas teṣv atha te prārthyaḥ

saṅga-doṣa-harā hi te

[SB 3.25.24]



So at our present moment we are saṅga-doṣa-yukta, we are contaminated by the attachment of modes of material nature. Some of us contaminated by the sattva-guṇa, some of us are contaminated by the rajo-guṇa, and some of us is contaminated by the tamo-guṇa, and some of us is contaminated by the tamo-guṇa. So out of the three, the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa is very dangerous. Rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. Rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa means kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye, to be contaminated by lusty desires and greediness. So one has to overcome in the beginning, at least, the contamination by rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. At the present moment, especially in this age, the contamination of tamo-guṇa is very prominent, and little rajo-guṇa also, but sattva-guṇa is practically nil in this age, Kali-yuga. It is said in the śāstra that sattva-guṇa will be practically nil. Rajas-tamaḥ. And the aim of life is to become free from all the contaminations, even sattva-guṇa contamination. This has been explained in the Bhagavad-gītā very nicely in the Fourteenth Chapter, how to become not contaminated, disinfected.



So here Kapiladeva advises that "Mother, if you want to be disinfected, uncontaminated by this material nature, then you associate with sādhu." That was the beginning.

prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam

ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto

mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam



This was the beginning, how to become uncontaminated. We have got some attachment to the material modes of nature. That is the cause of our bondage. Now, if we want to be free from this bondage, uncontaminated, then the same attachment should be transferred to the sādhu. Sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ, the same attachment. Everyone has got attachment. Nobody is free of attachment. The Māyāvādī philosophy, they say that "Stop this attachment." The Buddha philosophy says that "Make this attachment zero." This is also a little advancement, but it is not possible to make our attachment zero. That is not possible. Therefore Bhagavān says in the Bhagavad..., paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. Just like a child has got attachment for playing, and gradually, his attachment should be transferred for reading, going to school, education. But if you stop his attachment, then he will become mad. You must give something. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate. Just like we are. To the Western devotees, we are advising them-at least, those who are accepted as our disciples, they must-no meat-eating. They are accustomed to meat-eating, but that how this meat-eating has been stopped? We have given them nice things, kacuris, śṛṅgāra, rasagullā. So they have given up meat-eating. So you must give something more palatable. Then detachment will be possible. First of all nullify the attachment, and then give him better attachment. Then he will forget. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate. You cannot force a living entity by force. Gradually... The same example: a child has got attachment, but by some system, its attachment is turned over.



So similarly, our consciousness is there. Somehow or other, it is now contaminated. So gradually, this contaminated consciousness has to be purified, and then Kṛṣṇa consciousness automatically will arise, will be awakened, because the Kṛṣṇa consciousness is original consciousness. Somehow or other, it is now covered by material attachment. So how to give up this material attachment and become attached to Kṛṣṇa, developing Kṛṣṇa attachment? The process is sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. That is... Sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam. We have got so many attachment for so many things in the material world, and if you simply... You cannot make it zero; that is not possible. You have to purify. Just like if there is some disease in the eyes, if you simply say, "Pluck it out," that is not treatment. Treatment is: you must remove the disease. If there is cataract, by some way or other, then your eyesight will be revived. Similarly, we have got desires, we have got kāma, krodha, lobha, moha, mātsarya. These are there. But you have to divert these things for Kṛṣṇa's service. Kāmaḥ kṛṣṇa-karmārpaṇe. Just like we have got very much attachment toward doing business, for earning money and become very happy. So Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes, you can do business. There is no harm. But you give Me the result." Yat karoṣi yaj juhoṣi yad aśnāsi yat tapasyasi, kuruṣva tad mad-arpaṇam [Bg. 9.27]. He does not say that you have to do something particular. Of course, bhakta, bhakti, but one who is not accepting bhakti cult immediately, to him Kṛṣṇa says, "All right, never mind. Whatever you do, that's all right." Yat karoṣi. He does not say that "Do this." Yat karoṣi yaj juhoṣi yad aśnāsi. "Try to give it to Me."

That is the beginning of bhakti-yoga. If you do business and you earn money and spend it for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is also bhakti. That is also bhakti. Just like vivid example is Arjuna. Arjuna is a fighter, and by fighting, he became a devotee; not by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, but by fighting. Kṛṣṇa advised him to fight. He was, rather, because he was a Vaiṣṇava, he was not willing to fight, to kill. Vaiṣṇava does not like to kill. But if there is necessity... Just like Arjuna had to kill. That is by the order of Kṛṣṇa, not by his own will. By his own will, Kṛṣṇa did..., Arjuna did not like to kill, to fight. That is Vaiṣṇava's natural instinct. He does not wish to do harm or to kill anybody. But when a Vaiṣṇava knows that Kṛṣṇa wants it, he doesn't care for his own consideration. "Never mind." That is practical example, Kṛṣṇa.

So similarly, sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya [Bg. 18.46]. Everyone has got his some particular duty, occupation. If, by executing your occupational duty, you worship Kṛṣṇa, then your life is perfect. That is the instruction given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Naimiṣāraṇya.

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Pumbhiḥ, by person. Everyone is engaged in some occupational duty. Formerly it was the varṇāśrama: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsī. Everyone has got some particular duty according to his position. Now, the different occupational duties have expanded. It doesn't matter. If you are engineer, if you are medical man, if you are something else, it doesn't matter. Sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya [Bg. 18.46]. But try to serve Kṛṣṇa by the result of your work. That is bhakti. That we have to learn. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement does not mean that we are going to stop all activities. No, this is not our mission. You be engaged in your activities, but don't forget Kṛṣṇa. This is our mission. Be always Kṛṣṇa conscious.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa says... How to become Kṛṣṇa conscious? Yat karoṣi: "Whatever you do," kuruṣva tad mad-arpaṇam: "the result you give Me." Then it will be Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You always think that you are doing for Kṛṣṇa. Of course, by the order of Kṛṣṇa or by His representative, not whimsically. If you do something nonsense and if you think that "I am doing for Kṛṣṇa," that will not be accepted. It must be verified by the acceptance of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's..., or Kṛṣṇa's representative. Arjuna did not fight without Kṛṣṇa's order. Therefore we must receive the order. If we say that "We do not find Kṛṣṇa. How shall I...?" then Kṛṣṇa's representative. That is sādhu. The Kṛṣṇa's representative is sādhu. Therefore Kapiladeva is advising herewith that "You, mother, you associate with sādhus." Ete sādhavaḥ.

He has described the symptoms of sādhu. By the last three, four ślokas, he has described what is the symptom. Everything should be accepted by the symptom, characteristic. Not that anyone will come: "I am a sādhu." No. We must know by the characteristic of sādhu. That has been described. Similarly, incarnation of God, not that anyone will come and say, "I am incarnation of God." That will not be accepted. We have to see the characteristics of God as they are stated in the śāstra, then we can accept somebody as God by uncommon quality.

So apart from God, now our present problem is that we are entangled by the infection of material qualities, rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19] especially. Kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye, ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. We have to conquer over the quality, the infection of quality of rajas-tamaḥ, and then we have to situate ourself in sattva-guṇa. Then we are in the safe position. And if we do not allow to be infected again by the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, if we keep ourself purely in sattva-guṇa, that is called śuddha-sattva, simply purified sattva-guṇa. Then we will be able to understand what is Kṛṣṇa, what is God. So not only we have to acquire the qualities of sattva-guṇa, satyaṁ śamaḥ śaucaḥ ārjavaṁ titikṣā, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam... [Bg. 18.42]. These are the characteristic of sattva-guṇa: truthful... So much so truthful that, as they are stated by the commentators, that even an enemy asks some secret from you, you can say. Suppose a thief has come: "Now, what you have got in your box?" So if you say, "I have got so many thousands of rupees" or "hundreds," truthfulness should be like that. Even to your enemy it should be disclosed. That is called truthfulness. Satyaṁ śamaḥ damaḥ śaucaḥ, cleanliness. Then controlling the mind, controlling the senses, and simplicity, very simple in behavior, ārjava; titikṣā, tolerance; and full knowledge; vijñānam, practical application of knowledge; āstikyam, full faith in Vedic literature and in God. These are the qualification of sattva-guṇa.

So everything can be attained very nicely and easily simply by this sādhu-saṅga. Sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Therefore we repeatedly say that we are trying to create some sādhu so that in different parts of the world they will preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and people will be able to associate with them, and they will become purified. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that sādhu-saṅga. It is very essential. People are suffering on account of being contaminated by the tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa, becoming entangled simply by lusty desires always, just like cats and dogs. So they are becoming more and more entangled. Unfortunately, they do not know that there is life after death, but they do not know what kind of life is going to happen next after death. They are blind, andha. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. The leaders are also blind.>>> ... tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Dehāntara-prāptiḥ there is. How you can deny it? The authority says. And we have got experience also. We are having dehāntara from boyhood to childhood, from childhood to boyhood, from boyhood to youthhood. In this way, we have changed so many bodies, dehāntara. This is called dehāntara. Similarly, after death, there will be dehāntara. It is very reasonable, but people do not believe it.

So this is our position, and the human life is the opportunity to stop this dehāntara. And to stop this dehāntara, that is the main business. And how it can be done? Simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa. And how you can understand Kṛṣṇa? Simply by association of the devotees. That's all. It is not very difficult. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Rūpa Gosvāmī says. If you get some faith, "Now I shall become free from this material attachment," then, as it is advised here, sa eva sādhuṣu kṛtaḥ. The attachment we have got for material enjoyment-similar attachment should be for the sādhu, that's all. Suppose I want to drink. As I become mad without getting any drinking, similarly, when you become mad without sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], then you are liberated. You have to simply divert the attachment. Not to speak of drinking, even those who are smoker, if he cannot smoke for one hour, his throat becomes dried up, "Give me biḍi. Give me biḍi." So as you have got attachment for the biḍi, similar attachment for sādhu will be our liberation. Tat kṛtaḥ sādhuṣu. That is to be learned. That you can learn with sādhu-saṅga, if you mix with the sādhus. Therefore our mission is if we can create some sādhu and they distribute themself all over the world... As Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma



He wants that in every village, every town of the whole world, there may be a center of Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that people will take advantage of it and they will also become sādhu. This is the mission of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So the sādhus have been described in different way:

titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ

suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ

sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ

[SB 3.25.21]



We have discussed these verses. A sādhu... Because everything you want to learn, you have to take some penance voluntarily, so we have to give up something in the beginning. Just like we advise, "No illicit sex, no intoxication, even up to smoking biḍi and taking tea." So one who is accustomed to these habits, for him to give up immediately these things, it becomes a little painful. Therefore one has to become tolerant, "Never mind. I will have to become free." Just like to become cured from some disease, we agree to undergo surgical operation although it is very painful, tolerate; similarly, we have to learn toleration although there will be some pain. That is called titikṣavaḥ.



At the same time we have to become kāruṇikāḥ, taking compassion on the fallen souls. We have to go from country to country, town to town, city to city, village to village, to enlighten them to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is sādhu's duty. Those who are preachers, they are better sādhu than those who have gone to Himalaya. The sādhus who have gone to Himalaya for his personal benefit, that is also good, but those sādhus who are preaching and facing so many difficulties, so many opposing elements, they are better sādhu. They are better sādhu. They are fighting for Kṛṣṇa's sake. So kāruṇikāḥ. Because they are more compassionate. One sādhu has gone to Himalaya, sitting there in a secluded place not to be bothered by any asādhu. That is also nice, but that is personal interest. But those sādhus are not gone to Himalaya but have left Vṛndāvana, easy life, and gone to fight to the world, they are better sādhu. That is the opinion of Kṛṣṇa. Ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati [Bg 18.68]. Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. Those who are preaching the message of Bhagavad-gītā, facing many opposing elements, many difficulties, Kṛṣṇa says, na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ: [Bg. 18.69] "Nobody is dearer than him."

So if you want to become very quickly under the recognition of Kṛṣṇa, then every one of you become a preacher of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the message of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



And in India everybody is conscious of Kṛṣṇa. Somebody... I am asked in foreign countries, "How many Kṛṣṇa conscious people are there in India?" That "India... In India the cent percent, they are Kṛṣṇa conscious. Unfortunately they have artificially covered that by the so-called blind leaders." Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. The leaders are advising them, "What is the use of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious? Now you become technical conscious." So no, that will not make us happy. We have to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, especially in India, because he has got his birth in India for developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we should not give up this opportunity. Not only that, we shall become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, and we shall go out, outside India, to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That is para-upakāra. That is the best welfare activities in the human society. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra [Cc. Ādi 9.41]. Of course, He expected from the human being, not from the cats and dogs.



So sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83] is so essential. And sādhu's symptoms are described. And suhṛdaḥ. Suhṛdaḥ. We have already explained. Suhṛdaḥ means well-wisher for everyone. His heart is full of well-wishing for everyone. "Everyone" means for Indians, nationals? No, sarva-dehinām. Sarva-dehinām, all bodies, even for the cats and dogs. A devotee wishes welfare even of the cats and dogs by giving him prasādam: "Take little prasādam." So the dog will be also... There is an instance during Caitanya Mahāprabhu's time. Devotees from Bengal were going to see Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and on the way a dog also began to follow them. So the leader of the party, Śivānanda Sena, he was also giving food, prasādam, to the dog, and they had to cross one river, and the boatman would not take the dog. Śivānanda Sena paid him some more money, that "You take the dog." This is Vaiṣṇava, that "This dog has taken our company. He is going with us. How I can leave him behind?" So he paid more money: "Please take this dog." This is called suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām [SB 3.25.21]. And the dog was emancipated. He went to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and he was sitting as dog, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was eating something and throwing it to the dog. In this way, the dog got Vaikuṇṭha. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that this consciousness, this sympathy for everyone, can dispatch even a dog to Vaikuṇṭha. Suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām.

Ajāta-śatravaḥ: A Vaiṣṇava is not enemy of anyone, ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ, always peaceful. Sādhavaḥ sādhu. This is the first, preliminary symptoms of a sādhu. The next? Mayy ananyena bhāvena: "simply attached to Kṛṣṇa," ananyena bhāvena. These are the external, and these are internal. Ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām. Simply as Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], so a devotee, a pure devotee, is simply attached to Kṛṣṇa. They are not dis... A devotee is not disrespectful to other demigods. That is a mistake, that "These Kṛṣṇa devotees, they do not care for other demigods." No. A Kṛṣṇa devotee cares for the other demigods very rightly because he knows what is the position of the other demigods in comparison to Kṛṣṇa. Just like Durgā, Goddess Durgā. In the Brahma-saṁhitā the goddess Durgā is worshiped. In which way? Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. Mother Durgā is the external energy, or potency, of Kṛṣṇa, and she is so powerful that sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana, she can create, she can maintain, and she can annihilate, or bring devastation. She is so powerful. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā [Bs. 5.44]. And mother Durgā is so powerful alone. Chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā: "But she is acting not independently, but like the shadow," chāyeva. Chāyeva yasya bibharti bhuvanāni: by the indication of Kṛṣṇa. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā also: mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10].

So don't think that this material energy is working independently. She is working under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. So a devotee knows this. Just like a policeman is working. A sane man knows that he is working not independently, but under the government order. This knowledge required, not that that because policeman has got some power, he becomes God. No. God is not so cheap. You can accept... Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. God has got multi-energies. One of the energies is Durgā, not that she is all in all, no. There are many millions of Durgās, many millions of Śivas, because there are many millions of universes. Just like many millions of police force, similarly, these demigods, there are many, many millions. But God is one. God is not million. Of course, He can expand in million forms; that is different thing. Svāṁśa, vibhinnāṁśa.

So this devotee offers respect to the demigods as the assistant or energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not as the supreme power. That is the difference. And one who does not know what is God, they take these demigods as supreme. They are less intelligent. So therefore a devotees offer respect to the demigods, but he knows that Supreme Lord is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Therefore, mayy ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām. Dṛḍha-vrata. Bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ, Bhagavad-gītā.

mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

[Bg. 9.13]



Ananya-bhāvena. They... It is not that they disrespect demigod; they give proper respect to everyone. What to the demigods? Even to the ant.



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



Amāninā. Everyone is given respect by Vaiṣṇava. Mat-kṛte tyakta-karmāṇas tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ. But they are ready to give up family, relatives, everything. Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. Mat-kṛte, only for Kṛṣṇa's sake, they can... This is sādhu. Then what is their business, activities? Mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ. They simply take pleasure in talking about Kṛṣṇa. They simply take pleasure, śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca, by hearing about Kṛṣṇa. We have got so many things to hear about Kṛṣṇa, how Kṛṣṇa is fighting, how Kṛṣṇa is killing the demons, how Kṛṣṇa is behaving with the gopīs, how Kṛṣṇa is playing as a cowherd boy, so many things we have got. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has given us so many literature. If you simply hear and talk about Kṛṣṇa... We are translating all these books about kṛṣṇa-kathā. Already there are about one and half a dozen books, big, big books. We have to publish sixty books like that, simply about Kṛṣṇa, simply about Kṛṣṇa, apart from Bhagavad-gītā. So we can read. Śṛṇvatāṁ kathayanti, śṛṇvanti kathayanti. So we have got enough to become sādhu if you simply hear about Kṛṣṇa and speak about Kṛṣṇa. Tapanti vividhās tāpā naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ. The immediate relief will be that we shall be saved from the sufferings of this material condition of life.



So these are the symptoms of sādhu, and Kapiladeva is summarizing, "Mother," ta ete sādhavaḥ sādhvi sarva-saṅga-vivarjitāḥ, "these symptoms are visible when one has no more any material attachment." Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. This is sādhu, no more designation, "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian," "I am American"-these devotees, they have got no such conception. They are... Every one of them is thinking, "I am servant of Kṛṣṇa." This is called sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam. These are upādhi. Even this varṇāśrama, that is also... "I am sannyāsī," "I am gṛhastha," "I am vānaprastha." Caitanya Mahāprabhu has rejected all these things. Nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patiḥ: "I am neither brāhmaṇa, nor kṣatriya, nor vaiśya, nor śūdra." Then what You are? Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ: [Cc. Madhya 13.80] "This is My position." This is called sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], no more designation.

So if we become no more designation, then immediately the whole world becomes Vaikuṇṭha. We are fighting-"I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian," "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am German." The whole disturbance is there. "This is my land. This is your land." The whole world is doing. As soon as they become Kṛṣṇa conscious, immediately this hellish world become Vaikuṇṭha, immediately, tat-kṣaṇāt. Simply one has to learn.

So such important movement we should take very seriously and try to spread it all world wide. That will be the best service to the human society.

Thank you very much. (end)



741125SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.25

-

Bombay, November 25, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.) "In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear and heart. By cultivating such knowledge one gradually becomes advanced on the path of liberation, and therefore he is freed, and his attraction becomes fixed. Then real devotion and devotional service begin."



Prabhupāda:



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

[SB 3.25.25]



So here it is recommended, satāṁ prasaṅgāt, talks between devotees. Satām means devotee, not ordinary person; those who are devotees, sat. Sat and asat. There are two things. Sat means which exists, and asat mean which does not exist-temporary. That is called asat. This material world is asat. Therefore Vedic injunction is asato mā sad gama: "Don't keep yourself within this material world." (aside:) That child... Asato mā.



So people who are interested in materialistic life, they are called asat. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was asked by a devotee that "What is the behavior of a Vaiṣṇava, of devotee?" Vaiṣṇava means devotee. (aside:) Who is this? Who is making noise? So Caitanya Mahāprabhu, being inquired, "What is the duty of a devotee?" (aside:) ...what is the sound?

Brahmānanda: They're doing it purposely.



Prabhupāda: Oh, that's all right. That's all right. Never mind. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, asat-saṅga-tyāga, ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra [Cc. Madhya 22.87]. Asat-saṅga-tyāga, ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra. He, in one line, He said that "First of all, Vaiṣṇava, his business is to avoid the company of asat." Asat means those who are materialistic interest. Asataḥ. Asato mā sad gama. This is very important thing. We have established this Kṛṣṇa consciousness society-means that to avoid the asat-saṅga, to avoid the... Of course, we are preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness amongst the people who are interested in material subject matter. But we are not associating with them. We are associating with Kṛṣṇa, because we don't talk anything except Kṛṣṇa. We are not interested with their business. Everyone is interested with his own business. Similarly, we are interested with our own business, Kṛṣṇa consciousness business. Even if we go to a materialistic person, we canvass, "Kindly become our member. Kindly read this book. Purchase this book," so we are not going to take their activities. We are trying to bring them in our activities.



So asat-saṅga-tyāga, vaiṣṇava-ācāra. The Vaiṣṇava, he should be always careful not to intermingle, means not to take up their ideas and thoughts. No. That is vaiṣṇava-ācāra. Asat-saṅga-tyāga, ei vaiṣṇava. And why they should be avoided? Asat eka strī-saṅgī, kṛṣṇa-abhakta. Who is asat? Asat means those who are very much attached to sense gratification. Sense... The culmination of sense gratification is sex life. So those who are too much attached to sex life, strī-saṅgī, and kṛṣṇa-abhakta, and not devotee of Kṛṣṇa, they are asat. So those who are actually serious to make advance in spiritual life, they should avoid the asat.

asat-saṅga-tyāga-ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra

'strī-saṅgī'-eka asādhu, 'kṛṣṇābhakta' āra



So if we discriminate like this, then we shall be advancing. Apavarga-vartmani. Taj-joṣaṇād āśu apavarga-vartmani śraddhā bhaktir anukramiṣyati. Just like if we are diseased, there is infectious disease, epidemic, so we should be careful not to be infected by the infectious disease. Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī said in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa... He has written one book, "The Behavior of the Vaiṣṇava," Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. So in that book he has recommended, avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam, śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. He has said that "One who is not Vaiṣṇava by his behavior, by his action, by his mode of life, if he speaks something from śāstra, especially hari-kathā..." Hari-kathā means Bhagavad-gītā, the Purāṇas, out of which the Bhāgavata, Mahāpurāṇa. So we should not hear from a professional reader, or avaiṣṇava, or Māyāvādī. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has warned, māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa [Cc. Madhya 6.169]. If we hear Bhagavad-gītā-that is kṛṣṇa-kathā, hari-kathā-we should not hear from the Māyāvādīs or avaiṣṇava. Then it will not be effective.



There are so many Māyāvādīs and avaiṣṇava, they practically do not accept Kṛṣṇa even the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they dare to speak on Bhagavad-gītā. Just see the fun. He does not accept Bhagavad-gītā as it is, and he wants to comment and give his ṭīkā. So you'll never derive any benefit. Therefore here it is said, satāṁ prasaṅgāt. You should hear Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the devotees, not from a third-class man, no. Third class means those who are materialistic. So therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has warned that māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa. If you happen to hear from a Māyāvādī, impersonalist, who does not accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or does not know what is Kṛṣṇa, if such person reads Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you will never derive any benefit. You can go on hearing them for hundreds of years; still, you will never understand what is Kṛṣṇa. That is forbidden. Sanātana Gosvāmī has forbidden, that avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam. Hari-kathā, talks, discussion on Hari, or Kṛṣṇa, that is amṛta. Amṛta means nectarine. If one hears, then he gets his amṛta. Amṛtatvam.

So amṛtatvāya kalpate. Amṛta means no more birth and death. Mṛta means birth and death, mṛtyu, but amṛta means to stop birth and death. The whole spiritual life means to stop this birth, death, old age and disease, to get amṛta, no more birth, no more death. That is the real aim of spiritual life. Of course, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, the spiritual life begins if one is pious, if one is pious. Ārto arthārthī jijñāsuḥ. Catur-vidhā bhajante mām. Kṛṣṇa said, "Four classes of men..." Catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtinaḥ arjuna. Sukṛti. Sukṛti means pious. One who has got background, pious life, not impious life, sinful life, such pious men, out of them, four classes of men, catur-vidhāḥ, they come to devotional life, begins. Who are they? Ārtaḥ, those who are distress; Ārtaḥ arthārthī, those who want some money; jijñāsuḥ, those who are inquisitive; and jñānī. So ārto arthārthī, they are in the lower grade. And jñānī and jijñāsuḥ, they are in the higher grade. But still, they are not pure devotee, because they want something. Ārtaḥ, the distressed, he comes to Kṛṣṇa in the temple or in the church to beg something, material profit. That is also good because he has come to Kṛṣṇa. "Kṛṣṇa, I am distressed. Kindly save me from this distressed condition." "Kṛṣṇa, I require some money. Kindly, if You give me some money, I can live very peacefully." Generally. So because they have come to Kṛṣṇa, therefore they are called sukṛtinaḥ. Sukṛtinaḥ means pious. And there are others, who are duṣkṛtina, impious, sinful. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They are not even human being who do not accept the authority of the Supreme Lord. Duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ. And they have been described as mūḍhāḥ. Mūḍha means rascal, foolish. Real meaning of mūḍha is ass. So those who are like that, duṣkṛtinaḥ, and full of impious activities, narādhamāḥ, lowest of the mankind, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ, whose knowledge has been taken away by the illusory energy, na māṁ prapadyante, they do not accept Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So in order to become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa we must associate with devotee. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. Then, by reciprocation with devotees, if one is... One comes to devotee also if one is pious. If something is there on the background, piety, then he comes to a devotee. So by mixing with devotee, by associating with devotee, our knowledge for salvation or getting out of the clutches of this māyā, repetition of birth and death, increases. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. The discussion on kṛṣṇa-kathā is vīryavān. Just like when there is sex life, if the man is vīryavān, there will be pregnancy. Similarly, if we hear from devotee, then immediate action will be there, some inclination that "Why not become Kṛṣṇa conscious?" That is vīryavān. "Why not become Kṛṣṇa conscious?" That is called śraddhā. Śraddhā bhaktir anukramiṣyati. Taj-joṣaṇād āśu apavarga-vartmani śraddhā. This is called śraddhā. If, by hearing from the devotees or in the association of devotees, one is inclined, "Now, why not become Kṛṣṇa conscious?" that is very nice, sukṛtinaḥ, immediately the effect of pious activities. Ādau śraddhā. That is the beginning of spiritual life. And if you want to develop your spiritual life more and more, then satāṁ prasaṅgāt, then you have to associate with devotees. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15].

And sādhu we have described already in three, four verses. The summary-a sādhu means a devotee. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. Ananya-bhāvena, without any deviation, unflinching, staunch devotee, they are called sādhu. So we have to associate with sādhu. Satāṁ prasaṅgāt. When you discuss about Kṛṣṇa with sādhu or devotees, it becomes very pleasing. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. Rasāyanāḥ means there is some taste. Just like you eat something; there is some taste. That is called rasa, or mellow. Then... Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says, raso 'ham apsu kaunteya [Bg. 7.8]. Rasa. Rasa means when you are thirsty, when you drink water, you taste something very nice to quench your thirst. So Kṛṣṇa has instructed that "To begin with, you can think of Me, aham, while you drink water." It is not difficult. Everyone can practice it, so easy thing. Everyone can practice it. Everyone drinks water, and the rasa, the taste, the nice taste, when you are thirsty, how it is palatable by drinking water. Without water, sometimes we die, and by getting little sip of water, we live. Water is so important. So water, we drink everyone, and there is rasa, that taste. That taste, if we simply think, "Here is Kṛṣṇa," very easy thing... Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ [Bg. 7.8]. As soon as you see the sunlight in the morning, you can think. Kṛṣṇa says. Why do you say, "Can you show me God?" God is showing you Himself. Why don't you see it? If you close your eyes, how you can see God? He says, "I am this." According to our position...

Just like here it is said, śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati. Anukrama means gradually, not that all of a sudden you can expect to see God, but you become qualified to see God. This is the way. Śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati. Ādau śraddhā. Just like with śraddhā. Somebody is thinking, "This hari-kīrtana is nuisance." They are amongst those, duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ. Those (who) are thinking that this hari-kīrtana, hari-kathā, which we are trying to spread all over the world, and they are accepting all over the world... And in India, especially here in Bombay, they are sending complaints to the police that we are creating nuisance. Just see the fun. Where Kṛṣṇa is born and kṛṣṇa-kathā is there, Bhagavad-gītā-we have not imported this book from elsewhere-now we are so fallen that we are thinking that "This kṛṣṇa-kathā, this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, is creating nuisance." Just see how much we have advanced after getting independence. They are complaining that we are creating nuisance. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. Kīrtana is recommended in the Bhagavad-gītā satatam, always, twenty-four hours. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. And worshiping the Deity with attention, with care. These things are going on here, and people are complaining we are creating nuisance. Just see. Asat is so dangerous. Therefore we have to create a society of sat. Then the world will be saved. Otherwise they are going to the hellish condition of life.

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām

adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām

[SB 7.5.30]



So if we want to save ourself-We do not know how to save. Gaḍurikā-pravāha. Gaḍurikā-pravāha-nyāya. There is a logic of gaḍurikā-pravāha. One man is doing something, and another man is following. Of course, if you follow a saj-jana, a devotee, that is very nice. But if you follow a rascal, then you also become rascal. But at the present moment the whole world is full of rascals, mūḍhāḥ, duṣkṛtinaḥ, narādhamāḥ. "Why do you call mūḍhāḥ duṣkṛtinaḥ narādhamāḥ? There is so much advancement of education. There are so many universities, so many degrees." But Kṛṣṇa says, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ: [Bg. 7.15] "Their so-called knowledge has no value because the essence of knowledge is taken away by the illusion." "Now why you say? They are educated. No, their knowledge has been taken away? Why? What is the reason?" The reason is āśuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ: "They have taken to the nonsense philosophy of godlessness." That's it. For this reason their so-called education, university education, degrees, are simply illusion of māyā.



Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung one song, jaḍa-vidyā jato, māyāra vaibhava. This material education without God consciousness is expansion of the influence of māyā. Jaḍa-vidyā jato, māyāra vaibhava, tomāra bhajane bādhā. They are simply impediments in the matter of advancing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Tomāra bhajane bādhā. Anitya saṁsāre. And why? Now, result of godless material education means that anitya saṁsāre moha janamiyā. We are already illusioned. Anyone who has come to this material world, he is illusioned. But advancement of so-called material education means the increasing of the same illusory propaganda. Jaḍa-vidyā jato, māyāra vaibhava, tomāra bhajane bādhā, anitya saṁsāre moha janamiyā. They are trying to become happy in this temporary material life. He has forgotten that he is eternal. Even if we become very happy, temporary life in this life, that will also illusion because we will not be allowed to stay and enjoy the status. But they do not understand.

So these things are to be understood in the association of devotees. A devotee knows everything. Tattva-darśinaḥ.

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



Tattva-darśī means who has actually seen the truth. Oṁ tat sat. One who has seen the Supreme Truth. That Supreme Truth is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that "You are searching after the truth. You are studying the Vedic literature, Vedānta-darśana. That is very good. But what is the goal of Vedānta-darśana?" Veda means knowledge, and anta means the end, Vedānta, the ultimate knowledge. What is that? Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Kṛṣṇa says that "If you are actually studying Vedānta, then ultimately you have to understand Me." Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham: "I am the compiler of Vedānta, and I understand. I am the knower of Vedānta." So if you hear from Kṛṣṇa what is Kṛṣṇa, that is actually understanding Vedānta. If you do not understand Kṛṣṇa and if you simply advertise yourself Vedāntī, that will not help you.



Therefore, without this knowledge, there is... They have been called in the Bhagavad-gītā as mūḍhāḥ. Mūḍho 'yaṁ nābhijānāti, mohitam [Bg. 7.25].

tribhir guṇamayair bhāvair

ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

mohitaṁ nābhijānāti

mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam

[Bg. 7.13]



The mūḍhas, they do not know it. So anyone who is in this material world, more or less, we are all mūḍhas. This morning I was walking while walking on the beach. More or less, we are all mūḍhas. Without being mūḍhaḥ, nobody comes here in this material world. Beginning from Brahmā down to the small ant, we are all mūḍhas of different degrees. So in order to become really learned, not to remain mūḍha, we have to associate with devotee. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. Then it will be relishable. Relishable. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. When it is relishable... Actually, when you take some foodstuff, if it is relishable, it gives you contentment, "Oh, very nice food." So bhavanti hṛt: "It is pleasing to the heart." "Oh, such a nice food." And pleasing to the tongue. Similarly, when kṛṣṇa-kathā is discussed amongst the devotees, it is pleasing to the heart and pleasing to the ear. Unless you taste, relish something through the ear and through the heart, how you can steadily follow kṛṣṇa-kathā? So that requires little training. And that training is given by the devotees, by their practical life, by their daily behavior, their routine work. If we follow, taj-joṣaṇāt... Joṣaṇāt means to practice, is it not? What is given, joṣaṇāt? Cultivation, yes. Cultivation means practice. Practice.



So the ācāryas and the devotee, big, big devotees, they have given the routine work for cultivation. Just like we have got this Nectar of Devotion, how to cultivate devotional life. It is being very well received in European, American universities. In some of the universities they have made our Nectar of Devotion as textbook, "The Science of Bhakti." So there is everything. If we want to cultivate bhakti, it is not sentiment. Sentiment, of course, that may remain for some time. But it is a great science. We have to learn it scientifically. That is The Nectar of Devotion, the science of devotional life. So those who are interested, they may kindly read this book, Nectar of Devotion, cultivation. Taj-joṣaṇāt. And practical cultivation-if you live with the devotees, in the association, then there will be practical cultivation: to rise early in the morning, to offer maṅgala-ārātrika to the Deity, then study some Vedic literature, then take prasādam, then do this, do that. They go for preaching. Actually, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, practically showing how to cultivate the devotional life, taj-joṣaṇāt. And if we do so, then āśu. Āśu means very soon, without delay, even in this life. Even in this life, not that we have to wait for another life. If we practice devotional service in this life, even for few days, still, it will be a permanent asset.

Tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi [SB 1.5.17]. If one takes to devotional service, tyaktvā sva-dharmam, giving up his routine duty... Sva-dharma means the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. They have got the all..., or brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha. They have got their particular duties. But nobody is following any duty. They are creating their own duty. So anyway, somehow or other, if one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ, and practices for some time regularly, then again, due to bad association or by something, he falls down, so śāstra says that "What is the loss? There is no loss. On the other hand, if a person is executing his occupational duties very nicely, but he does not know what is Kṛṣṇa conscious, then what is the gain? There is no gain." No gain. Even if you become very pious by acting as a strict brāhmaṇa or a sannyāsī, but if you do not understand what is Kṛṣṇa, then there is no gain. It is simply waste of time.

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



This is the verdict of Vyāsadeva. Śrama eva hi kevalam. You are very nice, executing your occupational duties. Dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ. Svanuṣṭhitaḥ. You are brāhmaṇa. That's nice. You are executing the brāhmaṇa's duties very nicely, or a kṣatriya, or a vaiśya, or a medical man, engineer, whatever you may be. That's all right. Dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ. But if, by executing your professional or occupational duties, you do not develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness... That is the main business of human life, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So then dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ viṣvaksena-kathā... [SB 1.2.8]. Viṣvaksena-kathā means kṛṣṇa-kathā. Notpādayed yadi ratim. If you do not become inclined, śraddhā, this śraddhā of kṛṣṇa-kathā, then whatever you are doing-simply wasting your time, and it is a labor of love only, that's all. Śrama eva hi kevalam. And a devotee, even if he falls down by chance... There is every possibility of falling down because māyā is very strong. And it is a fight against māyā. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Duratyayā. Māyā is very strong. We are getting experience. Some of them are falling down. But still, whatever he has done sincerely, that is a permanent credit of his account.



That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, that yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ. Bhraṣṭa means falls down, fallen down. So he has got the asset. Therefore he's not going to the other species of life. He's getting again a human form of life. That is a great profit, because we have to change our body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. And that... We do not know. Kṛṣṇa does not say what kind of body, but there are so many, 8,400,000. Any one of them can happen. But a devotee who has fallen down, he is guaranteed again human life. And what kind of human life? Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. He'll get a life, human being, in a very rich family or in a very pious family. Those who are more advanced, they will get their next birth in a pious brāhmaṇa family, very pure brāhmaṇa family or Vaiṣṇava family. That is called śucīnām. And śrīmatām. Śrī means wealth or beauty. Very rich family, beautiful body he will get. So those who have got their birth in high-class brāhmaṇa Vaiṣṇava family and those who have got their birth in rich very aristocratic family, they should consider that "This advantage is given to me by Kṛṣṇa. Because in my last life I could not finish my business of bhakti-yoga, now I have got it." Therefore I said to the Americans that "You have got wealth; you have got education; you have got beauty. This is the asset of your pious life. Now you utilize it for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then your life is perfect." So not only in America, everywhere, it is not easy that one man is born immediately very rich and one man is born in very poor family or very ugly family. There is distinction. There is some superior authority. It is not accident. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. A living entity gets his body by superior administration, by nature's quality. There is big science.

So if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then your life is secure, guaranteed. If you make complete the Kṛṣṇa conscious life in this life, then tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. That is wanted. But don't be neglectful. Those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they should be very serious. Why should you take another chance of getting birth in a very rich family or a brāhmaṇa family? That is also risky because it is not guarantee. Because generally, those who are rich, they don't care for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. "Oh, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness is meant for the poor fellow." Or if somebody is born in a brāhmaṇa family, he is also puffed up. He is thinking, "Oh, these are mlecchas, yavanas, Americans. Oh, I am brāhmaṇa. I am born in a very high family." That is a cause of falldown, yes, proud, pride, unnecessary pride. A Vaiṣṇava is very humble. Tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā amāninā mānadena. We have already discussed. Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām [SB 3.25.21].

So these are the chance, human being, and there is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, there is Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is advising personally-so many opportunities offered by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Why don't you take it? If you don't take it, then you are committing suicide.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741126SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.26

-

Bombay, November 26, 1974



Nitāi: "Thus consciously engaged in devotional service in the association of devotees, a person gains distaste for sense gratification, both in this world and in the next, by constantly thinking about the activities of the Lord. This process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the easiest process of mystic power; when one is actually situated on that path of devotional service, he is able to control the mind."



Prabhupāda:



bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyād

dṛṣṭa-śrutān mad-racanānucintayā

cittasya yatto grahaṇe yoga-yukto

yatiṣyate ṛjubhir yoga-mārgaiḥ

[SB 3.25.26]



So the whole process of understanding the Absolute Truth... Absolute Truth means the Supreme Person, the Supreme Being, Absolute. There is no contradictory. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name, Kṛṣṇa's form, Kṛṣṇa's activities, Kṛṣṇa's paraphernalia, Kṛṣṇa's attributes-everything Kṛṣṇa. That is called Absolute Truth. There is no difference. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's form is not different. Kṛṣṇa's hand and Kṛṣṇa's leg not different. Just like we have got difference: this left hand is different from the right hand; the nose is different from the ear. We have got. Because this is called sagata-vigata-vibheda(?). Kṛṣṇa hasn't got that thing. That is called Absolute. It is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti. Aṅgāni, we have got different parts of the body, limbs, for different purposes. But Kṛṣṇa can serve any purpose from any limbs of His body. Kṛṣṇa can eat by seeing only. Kṛṣṇa can go by thinking only. There are so many description that Kṛṣṇa is Absolute. So these contradictory things, how one can understand of the Absolute? He is absolute, advaya-jñāna. Absolute means no duality; everything is one.



So virāga, bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyād. Here our material disease is that we want to satisfy our sense. This is material life. The whole material civilization is going on, we have repeatedly said... Advancement of civilization means advancement of sense gratification. That's all. So bhakti means just the opposite. So, so long we are, I mean to say, very much interested in sense gratification, there is no question of bhakti. That is not possible. So we have to reduce the tendency for sense gratification by increasing our devotional activities. That is the process. Therefore it is said, bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga. Virāga, from where? Virāga means distasteful. Virakti. The other word is virakti: "No, no, I don't like." That is called virāga.

Rāga means attachment, and vi means vigata. Vigata-rāga. And from virāga-vairāgya. Jñāna-vairāgya. This is wanted. Human life is meant for jñāna and vairāgya. Two things required. We are continuing this material existence on account of rāga, attachment, attachment for sense gratification. That is the cause of material bondage. Material bondage means, we have explained several times, to accept one body, then create another body. We have got now this human form of body, and according to our, I mean to say, affection or infection to different qualities of the nature, we are creating another body. So in this way we are entangled. So unless we become virāga, virāga aindriyāt, sense gratification... These different changes of body are being possible on account of sense gratification. Nature or God or Kṛṣṇa will give me full facility. Just like in the Western countries especially, they are now trying to become naked, nudies. So nature will give them to stand naked like a tree, or tree, for many years. "You are so fond of become nudie. All right, you stand up here for ten thousand years without any dress." Nature will give you. Those who have no discrimination for eating-"Anything, damn rascal, let me. Give me. I will eat it"-"All right, then you can take the body of a pig and eat up to stool."

So nature will give you. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya.

puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi

bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān

kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya

sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

[Bg. 13.22]



Why we are getting different bodies? Because we have got different tendency for sense gratification. Indriya, aindriyāt. This is the disease, material disease. Everyone has got tendency for sense gratification, but not all of them of the same type. They have got different types. So our material bondage means these different types of sense gratification. Therefore we have to stop this. We have to be detestful from this sense gratification. Then our spiritual life will begin. That is possible by bhakti.



Therefore here it is said, bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga. Bhakti is so powerful that if you engage yourself in the bhakti-mārga or bhakti-yoga... Here it is said, ṛjubhir yoga-mārgaiḥ [SB 3.25.26]. Ṛjubhiḥ means very easy to perform. How? Now, dṛṣṭa-śrutān mad-racanānucintayā. Dṛṣṭa. You can see Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is kind enough. Although Kṛṣṇa is beyond our vision-we cannot see with these eyes Kṛṣṇa-but Kṛṣṇa has agreed to be seen by you or by us. How? He has assumed this arcā-vigraha. Kṛṣṇa, this vigraha-don't think it is stone. Even it is stone you think, but Kṛṣṇa can become visible before you like a stone, because you cannot see beyond stone. That is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Because your eyes or senses are so imperfect that you cannot see Kṛṣṇa present everywhere in His original spiritual... We have got difference between spiritual and material. We have got because we are imperfect. But Kṛṣṇa has no such distinction. Because He is Absolute, He can become spiritual, He can become material, as He likes. That does not make any difference of Kṛṣṇa. Then how Kṛṣṇa is almighty, all-powerful? He can change matter into spirit, spirit into matter. That is Kṛṣṇa. So don't think that, as the atheist class men, they think, that "They are worshiping an idol." Even it is an idol, still Kṛṣṇa. That is absolute. That is absolute nature of Kṛṣṇa. Even you think it is stone, it is metal, it is wood, still, He is Kṛṣṇa.

So how He is Kṛṣṇa, that will require your bhakti. Here it is said, bhaktyā, anucintayā. If you are thoughtful, if you are philosopher, and plus bhakti, then you will understand that even Kṛṣṇa is present here just like a stone, but stone is also Kṛṣṇa. How stone is also Kṛṣṇa? Now, Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,

bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

[Bg. 7.4]



Me prakṛtiḥ: "It is My nature." Bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā. So stone is another formation of earth. Earth, water, air, sky, mind, intelligence-they're all Kṛṣṇa. Because Kṛṣṇa says, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā. (aside:) That's all right. Get up. Nothing is different from Kṛṣṇa. Everything is Kṛṣṇa's energy. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they think that "Because everything is God, everything is Kṛṣṇa, then where is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is finished." But actually that is not. Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa; at the same time, He is everything. That is Kṛṣṇa. That we can understand by bhakti. Therefore it is said, bhaktyā. Bhaktyā. In Bhagavad-gītā also, Kṛṣṇa said, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. These things can be understood not by ordinary person without any devotion. One who is bhakta, he can understand that Kṛṣṇa is everything and everything is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is everything-that is dṛṣṭa. When a bhakta sees a tree, he sees Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakta's vision.



It is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti

[Cc. Madhya 8.274]



A devotee, sthāvara-jaṅgama... Sthāvara means which cannot move. Just like tree, it cannot move, or a mountain, it does not move. And jaṅgama means moving. Just like we are moving, animals are moving, and other, so many other, living entities, they are moving. So a advanced devotee, he sees both of them, the standing, immovable and movable, but he does not see immovable or movable; he sees Kṛṣṇa. There is another statement in the Brahma-saṁhitā, premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Sadaiva means always. Sadā eva, sadaiva. Who sees? Now, one who is devotee, one who is fully absorbed in love of Godhead, premāñjana-cchurita, or whose eyes are anointed with love of Godhead. Not this eye. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilo... That bhakti required. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. Santaḥ, saintly person, sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti. That is the position of santaḥ, always seeing Kṛṣṇa. He does not see anything else except Kṛṣṇa everywhere, but in everything, everywhere, the energy of Kṛṣṇa.



I will give you a practical example. If you love your child, if you see the shoe of the child, immediately you see your child. If you see the toy of your child, you see your child immediately. If you hear the voice of your child, immediately you see the child. This is practical. Similarly, if you have actually developed love of Kṛṣṇa... And Kṛṣṇa has explained that everything is expansion of His energy; therefore nothing exists except Kṛṣṇa. And if you have developed your love for Kṛṣṇa, whatever you see, you will see Kṛṣṇa. That is called bhaktyā. Bhaktyā, dṛṣṭa, and śruta. Śruta means Vedic literature, śruti. You hear from authentic literature. Just like in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is stated, cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. Now, apart from Brahma-saṁhitā, we have heard, devotees have heard, that Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana used to go with His cowherd boyfriends in the pasturing ground. So hundreds and thousands of devotees are there in Vṛndāvana. They have not seen, but they have heard. They have not practically seen, but they have heard only. And they have seen the picture of Kṛṣṇa with His boys, cowherd boys, or gopī friends. So a devotee can see and hear and immediately realize Kṛṣṇa. That is possible because he has developed love. Premāñjana-cchurita.

Unless one is advanced in kṛṣṇa-prema, love of Kṛṣṇa, he cannot see. He cannot understand. There is another verse in the Śrīmad... Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. So these blunt senses... By these blunt senses even we cannot understand what is the name of Kṛṣṇa, why these people are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. We cannot understand. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nām... Because Kṛṣṇa realization begins from the name. Therefore name, Kṛṣṇa's name, and Kṛṣṇa is not different, absolute, but we cannot realize. But the practice, if you practice chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, then you will realize. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When you actually, in devotional attitude, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... Therefore it is advised that you should avoid the offenses in chanting. Then you will... By simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, you will realize. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ, sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. Jihvādau. Now, kṛṣṇa-bhakti begins from jihvā, from the tongue. People will be surprised, "How is that?" Yes. You can utilize your tongue simply by chanting and tasting kṛṣṇa-prasādam. Then you will become kṛṣṇa-bhakta.

Therefore it is so easy. Susukhaṁ kartum avyayam, in the Bhagavad-gītā. Susukhaṁ kartum avyayam [Bg. 9.2]. To execute devotional service it is very easy and susukham, very nice and pleasing also. Just like this chanting and dancing. Even the child takes pleasure, what to speak of others? Others may be sophisticated, but a child is not sophisticated. When there is dancing and chanting, a child comes in front and he dances. Unless he feels pleasure, how does he do it? This is practical. He has not been taught, but he comes. As soon as he comes, he also takes part with the elderly person, chanting and dancing. And if you give him prasādam, he will also accept. Anyone will accept. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said susukham and kartum avyayam. Kartum avyayam. Avyayam means whatever little service you render, that is permanent settlement. If you come here and dance and chant or ring the bell or anything about the ārātrika, if you see, dṛṣṭa-anything you do, that is your permanent credit.

Therefore, for the common man, this chance is given. This temple is meant for that purpose, that people will come see the Deity. The Deity is Kṛṣṇa. Don't think otherwise. Kṛṣṇa has agreed to be dressed by you. If you think of Kṛṣṇa, about His virāḍ-rūpa, you will fail to bring dress for that virāḍ-rūpa. His head is on the sky; another leg is on the Pātāla. That is also true. But you cannot conceive of Kṛṣṇa in His virāḍ-rūpa and at the same time dress Him and give Him something to eat. That is not possible. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has become so merciful. Here, of course, the Deity is very big. Not very big. In Hyderabad we have got three times bigger Deity, like... But you can have a small Deity. Many Vaiṣṇava, they carry Deity with them, a small Deity in a small box, and they worship. So Kṛṣṇa... Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. He can become bigger than the biggest and the smaller than the smallest. That is Kṛṣṇa.

So real thing is bhakti, bhaktyā. Therefore it is said, bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyāt. And the more you serve Kṛṣṇa, serve Kṛṣṇa... You give Kṛṣṇa to eat; you give Kṛṣṇa to be dressed nicely. Then you will forget dressing of yourself. Now see these devotees. They are dressing Kṛṣṇa so nicely, they are satisfied with that dressing of Kṛṣṇa. They are not very much busy for dressing themselves. This is bhakti-yoga, virāga. Everyone is very busy how to dress himself very nicely so that he may be attractive, but if you try to dress Kṛṣṇa nicely, then you will forget yourself how to dress nicely. Is it not practical? Anyone will agree. These Vaiṣṇavas, these boys, they are young boys. The girls, they are... They don't care for their dress because they are dressing Kṛṣṇa. This is the way. You dress Kṛṣṇa nicely. You give Kṛṣṇa nice foodstuff. Then you will forget, "Oh, I will have to satisfy my tongue in this way and that way, by chop, by cutlet, by going to restaurant." You will forget. Therefore it is called bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyāt. The materialistic persons, they are simply busy for satisfying the senses. Go to the hotel; satisfy the tongue. Go to the cinema; hear the cinema song, see nice girls, and so on, so on. But these devotees, they are not interested at all. The cinema is here, a few steps away, but you will never see a student or a disciple of Kṛṣṇa consciousness will go to that nonsense place. Practical you can see. Why it has become possible? Bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyāt. It is practical. The more you engage yourself in devotional service, the more you will forget your sense gratification process. And as soon as you become completely detestful for sense gratification, then you are liberated person, fit for going back to home, back to Godhead. This is the process.

So the bhakti gives you chance to see Kṛṣṇa, as you can see now. On this seeing or any other kind of seeing, they are the same thing. There is no difference. When Arjuna was seeing Kṛṣṇa face to face-Kṛṣṇa was teaching Bhagavad-gītā-that seeing of Kṛṣṇa and when you read Bhagavad-gītā, it is the same thing. There is no difference. Somebody, they say that "Arjuna was fortunate enough to see Kṛṣṇa face to face and take instruction." That is not correct. Kṛṣṇa, He can be seen immediately, provided you have got eyes to see. Therefore it is said, premāñjana-cchurita... Prema and bhakti, the same thing. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. I will recite one story in this connection, that one brāhmaṇa in South India, in Raṅganātha temple, he was reading Bhagavad-gītā. And he was illiterate. He did not know neither Sanskrit nor any letter, illiterate. So the people, neighborhood, they knew that "This man is illiterate, and he is reading Bhagavad-gītā." He is opening the Bhagavad-gītā, "Uh, uh," like that he was. So somebody was joking, "Well, brāhmaṇa, how you are reading Bhagavad-gītā?" He could understand that "This man is joking because I am illiterate." So in this way, Caitanya Mahāprabhu also happened to be that day in the Raṅganātha temple, and He could understand that "Here is a devotee." So He approached him and He asked, "My dear brāhmaṇa, what you are reading?" So he could also understand that "This man is not joking." So he said, "Sir, I am reading Bhagavad-gītā. I am trying to read Bhagavad-gītā, but I am illiterate. So my Guru Mahārāja said that 'You must read eighteen chapters daily.' So I have no knowledge. I cannot read. Still, Guru Mahārāja said, so I am just trying to carry out his order and opening the pages, and that's all. I do not know how to read it." Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "You are crying sometimes, I see." Then, "Yes, I am crying." "How you are crying if you cannot read?" "No, because when I take this Bhagavad-gītā book, I see one picture, that Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He has taken the chariot driver, sārathi, of Arjuna. He is His devotee. So Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He can accept the position of a servant because Arjuna was ordering, 'Keep my chariot here,' and Kṛṣṇa was serving him. So Kṛṣṇa is so kind. So when I see this picture within my mind, I am crying." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately embraced him, that "You are reading Bhagavad-gītā. Without any education, you are reading Bhagavad-gītā." He embraced him.

So this is... How he was seeing the picture? Because he was a lover of Kṛṣṇa, it doesn't matter, he could read these ślokas or not. But he was absorbed in love of Kṛṣṇa and he was seeing, Kṛṣṇa was sitting there, and He was driving the chariot of Arjuna. This is required, not that education. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Kṛṣṇa said, "Not by passing M.A., Ph.D." Bhaktyā: "Simply by bhakti." Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ. And bhaktyā, the practical example, if you become pure bhakta, then you will forget all this material sense enjoyment. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. This is the test of bhakti. But if you have got taste for material enjoyment and at the same time you advertise yourself that you have become a bhakta, that is not bhakta. One who knows who is a bhakta, immediately detect that "Here is not a bhakta." Ei dharma dadi.(?) He has got the tilaka and kaṇṭhi simply for advertisement. He is not a bhakta, because he has got material taste.

So the bhakti means bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyāt. From indriya, this word has come, aindriya, "pertaining to indriya." Everyone in this material world is engaged in sense gratification. That is the only... The cats, dogs and so-called civilized man is simply nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4], doing all kinds of sinful activities. Why? Yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti, simply for sense gratification. Simply for sense grat... This is material world. And spiritual world means there is no question of sense gratification. Simply they want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is spiritual world. Just like Vṛndāvana. What is the picture of Vṛndāvana? Vṛndāvana means there mother Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja, the Rādhārāṇī, the gopīs, the cowherds boys, Śrīdāmā, Sudāmā, the land, the water, the trees, the birds-everyone is trying to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana means nothing. When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā, all of them become dead. That is Vṛndāvana. Similarly, you can live always in Vṛndāvana, always in Vaikuṇṭha, if you are mad after Kṛṣṇa. That was the teachings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. By His practical example, He showed. When He was in Jagannātha Purī, He was mad always, day and night. Last twelve years of His life was passed in madness. Sometimes He was falling down on the sea, sometimes somewhere, sometime, day and night, just like mad.

So of course, that is not possible. But that is śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvam. When you will find everything vacant, govinda-viraheṇa me, without Govinda, that is the highest state of devotional service. But that is possible. That is possible, that bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyād dṛṣṭa-śrutān mad-racanānucintayā. If you become a bhaktyā, you will find... Anything, creation, you will find Kṛṣṇa's intelligence. If you take one flower and see the constitution, how this flower is made, how the color is displayed, how it has come into existence, if we are intelligent, we can see Kṛṣṇa's racanānucintayā, how Kṛṣṇa has created intelligently. That is premāñjana-cchuri... Actually, it is created by Kṛṣṇa. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. Don't think like rascal, "It has come out automatically." Does thing come automatically? Why not your luci, puri, and everything comes automatically? Why you have to take so much trouble? No automatically. It has Kṛṣṇa's hand, but you cannot see. You cannot see. But those who are learned, they can see. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna. This is the Vedic instruction. Everything, in every creation, there is hand of the Supreme Lord. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. But one who has got eyes to see, he can see Kṛṣṇa, anucintayā, by thinking, by thoughtful, not like rascal, "It has come automatically." Why? Nothing comes automatically. How it comes automatically? That is rascaldom. It has come through the intelligence of Kṛṣṇa. But His power is so fine and so accurate that svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca. If you paint one picture of flower, you will have to arrange for so many things. Still, it will not be perfect. And this flower has come so perfectly. Does it mean there was no brain behind it? You nonsense. There is brain. And Kṛṣṇa says that mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "Don't think prakṛti, nature, is working automatically, no. Under My direction." So one has to eye, one has to develop that eye. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. Then one can see how things are going on. That is required, bhaktyā. Bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyāt. This will be possible.

So as you engage your indriyas, senses, in the service of Kṛṣṇa, so it is very easy, that first of all you engage your tongue. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and eat bhagavat-prasāda! You will become perfect. Nothing, no other things required. That we are doing. We are distributing prasāda and engaging people, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



741127SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.27

-

Bombay, November 27, 1974



Nitāi: "Thus by not engaging in the service of the modes of material nature, but by developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, knowledge and renunciation, and by practicing yoga in which the mind is always fixed in devotional service under the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one achieves My association in this very life. For I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth."



Prabhupāda:



asevayāyaṁ prakṛter guṇānāṁ

jñānena vairāgya-vijṛmbhitena

yogena mayy arpitayā ca bhaktyā

māṁ pratyag-ātmānam ihāvarundhe

[SB 3.25.27]



So asevayā ayam. What is our business at the present moment? We are serving māyā in different varieties. So māyā has got three modes-sattva, rajas, tamas or mixed. Just like the color displayer, very expert in mixing colors. Actually there are three colors: blue, red and yellow. This blue, red, yellow, the color display of the mix-three into three equal to nine; nine into nine, it becomes eighty-one. So in this material world we, living entities, we are colored in this way. Three into three-sattva, rajas, tamo-guṇa. Three into three equal to nine, and nine multiplied by nine, eighty-one. So there eighty-one colorful living entities are there. Somebody's human being; somebody's demigod; somebody's cat; somebody's dog; somebody's servant; somebody's tree; somebody's plant... There are 8,400,000's of forms of life. And that is our service. Just like the dog is barking. He's thinking that he's dog. So his business is barking. That means serving the laws of material nature. Similarly, somebody's serving, somebody's serving in some way someone-variety.



Because we are not meant for this service. We are, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Our main business is to serve Kṛṣṇa. In Vṛndāvana, in Goloka Vṛndāvana, somebody's serving Kṛṣṇa as His friend, cowherd boy. Somebody's serving Kṛṣṇa as gopī, as lover. Somebody's serving Kṛṣṇa as father and mother, mother Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja. Somebody's Kṛṣṇa's friend as servant, as tree, as water, as flower, as land, as cow's, as calf. So many ways. This is our business. But somehow or other we did not like to serve Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we have been put into the service of māyā in three modes of nature. Just like criminal. A criminal does not like to obey the laws of the state; therefore a criminal is put into the prison house and he's forced to abide by the law of the state. The state laws are there-either outside the prisonhouse or inside the prisonhouse. But one who does not obey ordinarily outside the jail the orders or the laws of the state is put into the prisonhouse. But he cannot avoid the laws of the state. That is not possible. Because a citizen means he must abide by the laws of the state.

Similarly, we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. I have explained many times. So as soon as we deny to render service to Kṛṣṇa, immediately the māyā is there, captures, "All right. You come here. You serve me." This is the position. Artificially you cannot become master. That is not our nature, and that will not be happy service for us-artificial. Artificial... I have given this example. Suppose with this finger I capture some very nice foodstuff, rasagullā, and if the finger thinks that "I have captured the rasagullā. I shall eat." No. You cannot eat. You must put here. And then you get the benefit. And if you spoil the rasagullā in your hand and don't put into the mouth, then everything is spoiled. Similarly, we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Our business is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Ekaṁ bahu syām. The Vedas, we understand God has become many. Many... In many ways we are also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. There are two kinds of manys. One many is called svāṁśa. Svāṁśa means personal expansions. And another expansion is differential expansion. The differential expansion are we, the living entities. We are also expansion of Kṛṣṇa, and the viṣṇu-tattva, They're personal expansions. But all of them are meant for serving Kṛṣṇa. That is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Kṛṣṇa has expanded. The demigods, they are also living entities like us, but they have got better position. Just like here also in the government. Ordinary living... Everyone is citizen, but somebody has got better position as the minister, as the president or some big officer. Similarly, the demigods, they are also living entities. The same thing as we are but different body. Different... The dog has got the dog's body. He's hungry or there is some company, barking. And somebody has got minister body, he's ordering. He's in better position. And better than him somebody else, better than him somebody else, better than him somebody else. In this way you go up to Brahmā, Lord Brahmā. He also servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is the position.

So we, living entities, we are servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is our nature. That is our nature. Simply we are trying to avoid Kṛṣṇa's service. Therefore we are engaged in this māyā's service, or material nature's, under different bodies.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



In the Bhagavad-gītā: prakṛteḥ. You have been put under the clutches of māyā. He's giving you as you are desiring because you are desiring, bhoga vāñchā kare. Sometimes I used to enjoy like this, enjoy like... Everyone is trying to enjoy. But enjoy means we are becoming entangled. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. If you want to enjoy with Kṛṣṇa, that is your natural propensity, and if you en..., want to enjoy life without Kṛṣṇa, that is māyā. That is māyā.



So we are trying to enjoy. Enjoyment is our business. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Ānanda, Kṛṣṇa is ānandamaya, and we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. We are also ānandamaya. But we are seeking ānanda in different atmosphere. Just like any man can become very honest citizen, do business honestly, earn money and live very honorably. But no, somebody has learned how to steal. The government does not say that you becomes thief and go to the prison house. The government does not say. But you have selected to become a thief. That is it because we have got little independence, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is fully independent; therefore we have got the quality of independence. But because we are very small, minute particle we have got minute particle of independence. Minute... Just like you take a drop of water from the sea. That is also salt, but very minute particle. The salt is there because it is part and parcel of the big sea. It must be salty. Similarly, Brahman, Parabrahman, Kṛṣṇa, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramam... [Bg. 10.12]. So here we have got all the qualities. We are Brahman, we are pure. But Kṛṣṇa's paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramam [Bg. 10.12]. He's the supreme, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). He's the chief, chief pavitra, chief brahma. We are also brahma, but small brahma. We are also pure. Because we are small pure, therefore we sometimes become impure. Otherwise by nature we are pure spirit soul. asaṅgo 'yaṁ puruṣaḥ. This is the Vedic information. The puruṣa... Puruṣa means the living entity who has come here to enjoy. Asaṅga, he has no connection with this material world, but somehow or other he's thinking that "I am this matter. I have to enjoy this material world." "I am this Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am man," "I am woman," "I am cat," "I am dog," "I am tree," "I am hog..." In this way he's identifying with this material nature and enjoying or serving. You cannot enjoy. You can simply serve.

So this is the philosophy to understand. That asevayāyaṁ prakṛter guṇānām. We have to learn how to forget to serve this material nature. That is bhakti-mārga. It is forced because we have kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. Somehow or other we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa and trying to enjoy this material world under different position. That we have to forget. This is not my business. When we understand this position, that is called self-realization, that "I am not servant of anyone. I am not servant of my country, of my society, of my friend, of my dress, of my cat, of my dog. I am nobody's servant. I am servant of Kṛṣṇa." That is self-realization. That is self-realization. Asevayāyaṁ prakṛter guṇānāṁ jñānena. When one comes to this understanding, not by sentiment, but by real knowledge, jñānena.

So when one becomes devotee, he's not a fool. Pure devotee is full knowledge. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births, when one is actually jñānavān, actually wise, he surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. How? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. He surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. "Kṛṣṇa, I forgot You so long. Now I understand that You are everything." That is knowledge. That is real knowledge. Therefore it is said, jñānena vairāgya-vijṛmbhitena. This jñāna means vairāgya-no more attachment for serving the so-called society, friendship, love, country. These are all foolishly engagement. But people do not understand it. They'll think that "This is my first service. This is my first..." How long you'll serve, my dear sir? But if you serve Kṛṣṇa, this service automatically becomes possible. Just like we are giving prasādam every week on Sunday, distributing prasādam. That is the bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that sympathetic to persons who are not devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Devotee or not devotee, by eating kṛṣṇa-prasādam, he'll gradually become devotee. As yesterday I explained that kṛṣṇa-bhakti begins from the tongue, sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. If you engage your tongue in the service of the Lord, then Lord manifests. He reveals Himself. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau. How it is possible that jihvādau, beginning from the tongue? This is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Jihvādau, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Very easy. You can begin Kṛṣṇa consciousness simply by chanting. And as soon as you chant, go on chanting, then ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam means cleansing the heart. Because all congestion or dirty things within your heart-"I am this. I am that. I am this. I am that"-that if you chant, then gradually you'll understand that you are spirit soul. You're not Indian, not American, not this, not that, not that. This is self-realization.

But this whole world is going on under this misunderstanding. I am thinking "I am Indian and you are American. Why you have come in our country? You must be CIA. You must be CIA. Why you have come to our country? Formerly the Britishers also sent missionaries and then gradually conquered, got hold of the government. Similarly, these Americans, they have also come as devotee, as CIA, and therefore their business is how to capture the government. So get out." Why this misunderstanding? Because there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness any gentleman, any sane man can understand that if these people are CIA, they have taken this Vaiṣṇava religion. They're practically having no comfort and everything is denied and no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no drinking, no intoxication, no gam... All no's, and accepting all no's, and they have come here as CIA? They have got no intelligence, common intelligence. And they are trying to put all impediments: "Oh, they cannot construct this temple. They must be refused." All planning. It was raised in the Parliament that "What is these people, Hare Kṛṣṇa movement? Why... Wherefrom they are getting money and what... They are understood to be CIA. What government is going to take action against them?" So the reply was there by the home member that "We have no information that they are CIA people. Therefore there is no question of action." "And their money, they are selling literature, books. They're getting money and some public contribution for foreign exchange." So the reply was that still people will accuse us in this way. So why this is possible? Because there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because they're servant of this māyā they're thinking like this. Therefore the first condition is asevayāyaṁ prakṛter guṇānām. They are dictated by the tamo-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, modes of material nature and thinking like that. Everyone is that. This whole world is like that. They're servant of māyā, this tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa, and manufacturing their own way of enjoyment.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness means completely become purified from the infection of māyā, sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. That is stated by Kṛṣṇa. One who is a devotee fully engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service... So what is his position? The position is sa guṇān... sa guṇān etān, this prakṛter guṇān. Here it is said, prakṛter guṇānām. There are three guṇas-sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa... So if one is engaged in devotional service, immediately he becomes transcendental to all these guṇas. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. Then he becomes again in his transcendental position, Brahman. Brahma-jñāna, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. This is... This position he comes. And as soon as one comes to this position, brahma-jñāna, brahma-bhūta... [SB 4.30.20]. Now we are māyā-bhūta, identifying with ourself with this māyā, this prakṛti-guṇa, the modes of material nature: "I am this," "I am that," "I am this," "I am that." But when he becomes brahma-bhūta-"I don't belong to these prakṛti-guṇān, these nature's..., these modes of material nature. I belong to the spirit soul, Supreme. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi"-this brahma-jñāna will immediately make him happy. That is the symptom of a person who has attained brahma-jñāna.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



That is the basic principle of bhakti. So here the same thing is explained, jñānena vairāgya-vijṛmbhitena. Jñānena. Therefore this class is held to awaken jñāna. Either you read these books, you hear from realized soul-that will awaken your jñāna, knowledge. Or otherwise if you cannot do this... Both things should be done. You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Very simply.



So in the previous verse we have discussed ṛjubhir yoga-mārgaiḥ [SB 3.25.26]. Ṛju, very simple method. Ṛju means very simple. Everyone can perform it. Susukhaṁ kartum avyayam [Bg. 9.2]. In the Bhagavad-gītā, very happy. If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and dance, it is very happy thing. And by dancing, dancing, as soon as you become hungry, take prasādam, ready. So where is the trouble? Therefore it is ṛjubhir yoga-mārgaiḥ. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice there is no trouble only. And another thing is that that is great hope. Everything you are doing under the spell of māyā we do not know where you are going, what is the ultimate aim. We do not know. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni. We are under the spell of māyā given by the guṇas. You must accept. If you don't take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and give it ourselves on the waves of māyā, then we do not know where we are going. The Caitanya Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says māyār bośe, jāccho bhese', Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi. Just like a straw in the waves of the ocean or the river. It is fully under the control of the waves. Sometimes diving, sometimes coming out, sometimes going this way, going that. Our position is like that. We do not know that, prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni [Bg. 3.27]. Under the material nature we are being carried by the waves of material nature, and you do not know where you are going because you have no control.

So if you want controlling the material nature, then you have to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is stated mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Otherwise you're carried by māyā. You may be very big prime minister or anything, but as soon as māyā will dictate, "Please vacate your post and go away," you become a dog. You have to become. How you can challenge prakṛti? That is not possible. Because karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1], your next body will be offered to you. Therefore the atheist class man (indistinct). That is next life. Because his life is sinful he'll get his next life, he'll be punished. He'll be put into abominable condition of life. He does not like to think like that, but that does not mean that he escapes. There is a Bengali proverb that (Bengali). One body, one person, he thought that "I've done so much sinful activity that Yamarāja will come and capture me and punish me. So what is the way to avoid?" So he thought that "Let me smear over my body stool so he'll not touch me." (laughing)

So that is not possible, sir. You are under the control of māyā, material nature. You try to avoid it somehow or other, but it is not possible. It is not possible. According to the infection... Just like if you have infected some disease, artificial means will not save you. You must develop that disease and must suffer. There is no way out. Simply the way out is that if you take precaution, some vaccine, some injection, then you may avoid. Similarly, cannot... It is clearly stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. You cannot avoid the hands of māyā upon you, or material nature. We call "māyā," and the modern scientific word is "material nature." Completely under. You cannot avoid it. But mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. If you surrender to Kṛṣṇa... When Kṛṣṇa will save me? I am so much sinful. Yes. Kṛṣṇa can do that. Kṛṣṇa says

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



So why don't you do that? Why you are so much eager to serve the modes of material nature? Why not serve Kṛṣṇa. Here is Kṛṣṇa. Where is the difficulty? No difficulty at all. Just there's Kṛṣṇa. Just give Kṛṣṇa nice foodstuff. Just chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Eat sumptuously and keep your health very good, nicely. Where is the difficulty? Mām eva ye... This very difficult? The only difficulty is that I cannot give up all these sinful activities. I cannot give up smoking. I cannot give up drinking. I cannot give up meat-eating. I cannot give up gambling. I cannot give up illicit sex. That is difficulty. Otherwise to serve Kṛṣṇa is not at all difficult. There is no difficulty. But I cannot give up the service of my sinful activities.



Therefore here it is said asevayāyaṁ prakṛter guṇānām. That you have to learn. That you can learn very easily if you turn your attention to the service... Therefore this bhakti-yoga service. We are simply insisting get up early in the morning, do this service. In this way, if we engage ourselves in the service of Kṛṣṇa, gradually we shall forget the service of māyā. The service of māyā means sinful activities. That's all. So, so long we are in the service of māyā, duṣkṛtinām, engaged in sinful activities, it is not possible. But if you engage the positive and the negative... The Māyāvādī, they are simply trying to be negative. There is no positive engagement. But here in the bhakti-yoga the negative is there and positive is there. Therefore there is electric light bulb, negative and positive. Therefore there is enlightenment. Simply negative will not help you. And if you don't care of the negative sides, simply positive also will not. But bhakti-yoga is so strong, if you take to the positive side of service of Kṛṣṇa, the material service or māyā's service will automatically become negative. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. That is called vairāgya. The bhakti-yoga means vairāgya-yoga. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam.

This was composed by Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya about Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. When he understood Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu he wrote this verse, vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga-śikṣārtham ekaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is that Purāṇa-puruṣa, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the original. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravar.. [Bg. 10.8]. Everything has come from Kṛṣṇa; therefore He's Purāṇa, the oldest. Oldest. Nobody can be older than Kṛṣṇa, but He's always young. That is Bhagavān. Advaitam acyutam anādi. Anādi. He has no ādi. He's ādi. Ādi means the original.

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



He's the cause of all causes. So this Purāṇa-puruṣa, Kṛṣṇa, He's the oldest. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33]. That is Kṛṣṇa. You'll never see Kṛṣṇa's picture as old man. No. Has anyone seen Kṛṣṇa as old man? No. Nava-yauvanam, always fresh youthful life. The same. You have seen the picture of Kurukṣetra battle. Kṛṣṇa was sitting... At that time He was great-grandfather, but He was looking twenty years old, young... That is Kṛṣṇa.



So we also become like Kṛṣṇa. In the Vaikuṇṭhaloka, the inhabitants, they are also living entities. Just like in this, within this universe, this material universe, there are living entities-there are also living entities, but they are in spiritual body, the same form of body as Kṛṣṇa. You have read in the Sixth Canto of Bhāgavata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the Ajāmila, the vaikuṇṭha-dūta came for Ajāmila to take Ajāmila. They are also four-handed, very beautiful. That is Vaikuṇṭhaloka. But in Kṛṣṇaloka they are two-handed. So in the spiritual world there are so many varieties-four-handed, two-handed living entity. They're all nitya-mukta. They're all everlastingly liberated. So we have been just like a prisoner is. Although he's a prisoner, he can be also good citizen. There is no hopelessness. Similarly, we are now prisoner in this material world, and we have got this material body. Therefore we are changing: sometimes young, sometimes old, sometimes these boys, some But tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then, after leaving this body, you're not any more getting this material body. That is stated. tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. Then what happens? Mām eti. He comes to back to home, back to Godhead. And as soon as you go, you get your original, spiritual body, same beautiful body as Kṛṣṇa has, as Nārāyaṇa has. This is the opportunity.

So why should we not take this opportunity of human life, take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and become devotee of Kṛṣṇa and make our life? Therefore it is said here, pratyag-ātmānam ihāvarundhe. In this life you can get this opportunity simply by following the bhakti-yoga process. Yogena mayy arpitayā ca bhaktyā [SB 3.25.27]. That is required. You learn how to become a bhakta. Simply practicing śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam, arcanam... [SB 7.5.23] any of them. Either this nine processes or eight or seven or six or five or four. Take at least one and make your life successful. Everyone can... Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore prescribes the most important one-śravaṇam, simply hear. That's all. That will make your life successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



741128SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.28

-

Bombay, November 28, 1974



Devotee: "On hearing the statement of the Lord, Devahūti inquired: What kind of devotional service is worth developing and practicing to help me easily and immediately attain to the service of Your lotus feet?"



Prabhupāda:



kācit tvayy ucitā bhaktiḥ

kīdṛśī mama gocarā

yayā padaṁ te nirvāṇam

añjasānvāśnavā aham

[SB 3.25.28]



So, it is the duty of the disciple, disciple means everyone, human, human body, one who has got human body, athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the Vedānta-sūtra advice. Atha, ataḥ, brahma-jijñāsa. This life, human life is meant for inquiry. What is that inquiry? Brahman inquire, about the absolute truth. So the Vedic injunction is that if you are inquisitive about self-realization, Brahman realization, then you should approach a guru. Therefore here Devahūti is accepting his (her) son, exalted son, incarnation of God, Kapiladeva, inquiring from Him. That is the Vaiṣṇava process. Vaiṣṇava process is not to speculate oneself. If one is actually inquisitive to know about the absolute truth, he must approach a bona fide spiritual master. (indistinct) First business is to find out guru, guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151], Caitanya Mahāprabhu says. At the present moment this is a mentality, of course they have got some bad experience, but the process is that you must go to a guru. That is Vedic injunction. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Abhigacchet means "must," there is no other alternative. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said,



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti tad jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



If we actually are very serious to get out of the clutches of māyā, the repetition of birth, old age, and disease, and get back our original spiritual life, eternal life, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20], there is, that is our real identification. We do not die after the annihilation of this body, but you are so dull by the influence of māyā, we think that death is inevitable. No, why death is inevitable? Death can be avoided, birth can be avoided, disease can be avoided, but you do not know, you have become so dull. We do not know how to overcome. We are busy temporary inconveniences. The whole world is struggling, some temporary. The real business is ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti, everyone is trying to minimize the miserable condition, but they are busy for temporary miserable condition. But the Vedic knowledge is how to mitigate the topmost miserable condition. That topmost miserable condition is the repetition of birth, death, and old age. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam, anu-darśanam [Bg. 13.9]. We should not be very much afflicted with these temporary things. We must have the sense how to solve the ultimate miserable condition of life. That, tad-vijñānārtham, in order to know that science sa gurum evābhigacchet.



If one is interested to know that science, then it is necessary to approach Just like Arjuna was busy, perturbed that he has to fight with his relatives, the other side, and they will be killed. And he was presenting so many problems that, If I kill my brothers, my sister-in-laws will become widow and they will be polluted, and there will be varṇa-saṅkara generation, then the whole world will be hell. In this way he was thinking, the immediate material problems, but when, after arguing with Kṛṣṇa, he could not find out any solution, then Arjuna submitted to Kṛṣṇa, śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. "My dear Kṛṣṇa, now I don't want to talk with you as friend, because friendly talk, the talking will be very much, but there will be no benefit." Generally we do so. We talk with some person, some friend, without any duty, just to waste time. That is not the way. If you go and talk with some person, then you must derive some benefit. Gain should be there, otherwise simply waste of time. And it is the injunction of the śāstra that, unless one is submissive, the superior man should not talk, tad viddhi praṇipātena [Bg. 4.34], unless one is submissive he will not be able to accept the sublime instruction.

So one has to become submissive. That submissiveness Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is teaching us, śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam. I am now submitting myself to you, not that equal position with you, friend and friend equal position, that I am giving up. I am becoming your disciple, submissive, śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. Prapannam means submissive, that is the way. You cannot speculate. Your speculation has no value, athāpi te deva ciraṁ vicinvan [SB 10.14.29]. Ciraṁ vicinvan, you can go on speculating for many births, many years, still you will not be able to understand the ultimate goal of your life. It is not possible, therefore all the śāstras, they advise that you go to a guru. Guru means weighty, one who has got more weight, one who can teach you, because everyone thinks that "I am learned. I am all learned." Who can teach you? No. Nobody is like that. Everyone requires instruction, therefore the Vedic system is (indistinct), to make one's life fruitful, one must approach guru.

Therefore our system is, Vedic system is from the very beginning, a child, a boy is sent to gurukula to learn. Not that automatically one learns. One must go to gurukula, brahmacārī. Brahmacārī goes to guru, and he works like a menial servant. He may be a son of a big brāhmaṇa or big king, it doesn't matter. The one who goes to gurukula, he immediately becomes the menial servant of guru. This is the system. That means guru can order him to act any, I mean to say, low class service, still he is prepared to do it. This is the business of brahmacārī, and he takes all trouble, and childhood, he doesn't mind. Even Kṛṣṇa, he went to gurukula. To teach us. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, what is the use of His going to gurukula? No, He is teaching, āpani ācari' prabhu jīveri śikhāya. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also accepted guru, teacher, guru more mūrkha dekhi' karila śāsana [Cc. Ādi 7.71].

When Caitanya Mahāprabhu was talking with Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī was very learned scholar and he knew that Caitanya Mahāprabhu was also very learned scholar. So he was criticizing Him that "This sannyāsī from Bengal who has come to Benares, He is simply chanting and dancing and does not give attention in the reading of Vedānta, so He is not a bona fide sannyāsī. He is sentimental." He was thinking like that, but one brāhmaṇa, Maharastrian brāhmaṇa, he arranged a meeting with Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī and Lord Caitanya. There was discussion. So Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī inquired from Him that "You are a sannyāsī. Instead of giving your attention in the matter of reading Vedānta-sūtra, Sāṅkhya philosophy, what is this that you are chanting and dancing?" So Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied that "My guru found Me, I am a fool number one, guru more mūrkha dekhi [Cc. Ādi 7.71], I am not very much learned. So he said, My guru said, that 'You cannot read Vedānta-sūtra.' " Actually Vedānta-sūtra, Vedānta philosophy is not meant for ordinary learned person. It requires great knowledge in Sanskrit language and philosophy. So He, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, took the part of ordinary person, at the present moment that guru more mūrkha dekhi' karila śāsana [Cc. Ādi 7.71] . Generally people are not so learned that they can understand Vedānta-sūtra. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu taking the part of the mūrkha society, the illiterate, ignorant society, He said that "I cannot read Vedānta-sūtra. He advised me to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and I am doing that. And I am getting the result.

So at the present moment, especially in Kali-yuga, they are not very much educated, mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhā... [SB 1.1.10]. They are simply busy how to earn some money and fill up the belly, that's all. They are not no more interested in Vedānta-sutra. Mandāḥ, mandāḥ means very slow, or very bad. They are so badly infected with the influence of māyā, they do not care to understand that there is life after death, and that life may be anything of these 8,400,000 forms of life. And if I become one of them, if I become tree, if I become cat, if I become dog, or insect or even human being, then, if I am in a very inconvenient condition then they do not care to know. Sometimes they say, "Never mind if I become a dog, what is the wrong there? I will forget everything." People say, in western country, even the university student, they say they don't, so ignorance. Therefore they have been described as mandāḥ.

Formerly, especially in India, the cātur-varṇyaṁ, the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, so at least the most intelligent class of men, the brāhmaṇas, they were interested to understand brahma-jijñāsa. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. But at the present moment they are all śūdras. They are not interested about brahma-jijñāsā. They are interested how to get more money, where is the cinema, where, what picture is going, they are interested in that, not about brahma-jijñāsā. But the human life is meant for that purpose. Therefore we learn from Bhagavad-gītā. Arjuna is personally teaching us. He is accepting Kṛṣṇa as guru, śiṣyas te 'ham [Bg. 2.7], "Kṛṣṇa now I become Your servant, not that I remain as Your friend." Friend to friend talk is not very serious. Now I want to talk with serious. You become my spiritual master, you teach me, and I will take your lesson. This should be the It is not meant for only Arjuna. It is meant for everyone, that if you, you must find out the guru. The first guru is Kṛṣṇa, and anyone who is Kṛṣṇa's representative, he is guru. Guru is Kṛṣṇa, the original guru, and if Kṛṣṇa representative is found, is available, then he is also guru.

Just like you are a businessman and anybody goes to canvass for business, to get some order for your business, he is your representative. It is not very difficult to understand. If he is your representative and talks something nonsense then he is not your representative, he is cheating you. He is taking your money and doing something else. No, real representative is he who is canvassing for Kṛṣṇa, not canvassing for himself that "I have become Kṛṣṇa." No, he is not guru, he is cheater.. The representative is he who canvasses business for Kṛṣṇa. That is guru. Kṛṣṇa wants this business. What is that? "You rascal, give up everything and surrender unto Me, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]." Kṛṣṇa wants this business. And Kṛṣṇa's representative also says that you give up everything, simply surrender to Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa's representative. Sometimes we are very much eulogized, "I have done a wonderful thing, but I have done as representative of Kṛṣṇa." Same thing. I have told all these boys and girls nothing magic. I never showed any gold-making magic. I simply said to them the "Here is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you surrender unto Him." That's all. Ask any (indistinct). I never said anything. So that is actually representative.

Anyone can become Kṛṣṇa's representative, everyone, especially Indians. They should become Kṛṣṇa's representative. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission,

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

(janma) sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



Para-upakāra means the whole world does not know about the message of Kṛṣṇa, therefore it is the greatest welfare activity to carry this message and inform them. This is the work of Kṛṣṇa's representative, and any Indian can do it but they'll not do it. They will take Bhagavad-gītā and speak their hodge podge, that's all. That is not Kṛṣṇa's representative. Therefore it has not been successful. For the last 200 years so many swamis and yogis went to foreign countries, but nobody spoke about Kṛṣṇa. Simply hodge-podge. Therefore there was not a single person accepted this cult; Vedic culture. That is fact.



So as Arjuna We are reading Bhagavad-gītā, you can understand that Arjuna is a friend, why he's accepting Kṛṣṇa as guru? Why? He's a friend. He's talking equally, sitting equally, friend and friend, sometimes talking nonsense. Kṛṣṇa, in the Eleventh Chapter he was begging Kṛṣṇa, "Forgive me. As a friend I have misbehaved with you." Friend has got right, Kṛṣṇa did not mind for that, but he knew that "Kṛṣṇa, although He is my friend, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, He is the proper person to become my guru." And he says also that "The perplexity which I have been put into now in this battlefield, this cannot be solved by anyone else except Yourself." That he said also. So this is instruction we get from Bhagavad-gītā, everyone reads Bhagavad-gītā, that we have to accept Kṛṣṇa as the guru, or Kṛṣṇa's representative as guru. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34], and we have to give service to such guru and we have to surrender ourself. Not that I accept you guru just to know how much you are learned, how much you can talk with me, not with that spirit. (indistinct) ...that I surrender to you sir, śiṣyas te 'ham, I have become śiṣya. Śiṣya means voluntarily accepting his ruling. Whatever guru will say he will accept, that is called śiṣya. Śiṣya means ruling, who accept disciple, means disciplinary measure. Whatever guru says, one who accepts he becomes disciple. He, I don't care for my guru's order and still I am disciple, that is not accepting guru. Of course it has become a fashion like that, to have a guru but don't care for guru. That is not, that will not help. Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7], and immediately Kṛṣṇa as we, as soon as He accepted to become guru of Arjuna, He immediately chastised him,

aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ

prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase

gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca

nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ

[Bg. 2.11]



"My dear Arjuna, you are not taking like a learned man. You are thinking that you are very learned man, that you are talking with Me, what will happen to this, to that if I fight. You have wasted so much time. But actually I find that you are a fool number one. You do not know anything. Aśocyān anvaśocas tvam, because you are lamenting for things for which one should not lament. What is that? This body. You are thinking of this body of your relative, and because they will be in the war, they will be killed. You are thinking like that. But actually this is not the subject matter pondering. The real subject matter is how to save the soul."



Therefore He began instructing that we are not this body, we are soul. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā, tathā dehāntara-prāptam [Bg. 2.13], in this way He gave first instruction that we are not this body. So here also Devahūti is woman. Everyone is less intelligent before his guru, especially woman. Striyo śūdra tathā vaiśya te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim, but God, or Kṛṣṇa, is open for everyone. It is not that Kṛṣṇa is open for the brāhmaṇas, the learned scholars or the Hindus or the Muslims or Christian, no, Kṛṣṇa is open for everyone. Striyo śūdra tathā vaiśyās te 'pi yānti param, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ [Bg. 9.32], even pāpa-yonayaḥ. Pāpa-yoni means low class. Just like in our country we have got low class people, the cobbler muci, the caṇḍālas the dog-eaters. They are considered as low class. So Kṛṣṇa is open even for the low class.

This is universal movement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because it is concerned with the soul, consciousness. Therefore you have named the word consciousness. Consciousness belongs to the soul, that is the symptom of presence of soul. At the present moment because the soul is in the body, if I pinch your body then you will feel, consciousness, feel pains or pleasure. But as soon as the soul is gone out of the body, if I chop off your body with a dagger, you will not protest. The consciousness is gone. Yena sarvam idaṁ tatam avināśi tu tad viddhi, yena sarvam idaṁ tatam. Sarvam idam, this body. This body, wherever you pinch it you feel pain. Why? Because consciousness is there. So Kṛṣṇa advises that consciousness is eternal. Therefore we have to purify our consciousness, then our life is successful.

Consciousness will go with us. At the time of death the consciousness carries me to another body. Sūkṣma, the fine, or the subtle body, the mind, intelligence, and ego, but we do not see that mind, intelligence, ego. And the soul, it is still finer. Mind is, we know you have got mind, you know I have got mind but you do not see. I know you have got intelligence, you know I have got intelligence but you can not see. But how the mind, intelligence carry the soul to another body, how you can see? We see that this gross body is stopped, we say it is everything finished, because we have got gross intelligence, we have no sūkṣma, in Therefore we have to approach guru, just like Arjuna approached guru. And Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa teaching that you are thinking of this body like a rascal. Nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ. He said in a very gentlemanly language, no learned man thinks like that, that means you are a fool. Nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ, that you are not a paṇḍita, you are a fool. Just try to understand, that real life is for the soul, therefore you should take care of the soul. The whole Vedic language, Vedic education means to take care of the soul. The soul is entangled, embodied, engaged in this material affair, and he is suffering, and to rescue him, to get him out of this material clutches, that is called education.

That is called education and for that education one has to approach a proper guru like Kapiladeva. Kapiladeva is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. So guru is there, Kṛṣṇa, and His instruction is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. Why you are not taking advantage? You have become so foolish. The instruction is there. Guru is there. Somebody says that Arjuna had the opportunity, good opportunity to talk with Kṛṣṇa face to face, but we haven't got that. But what is that talk? The talk is already there. You hear it from His representative, the same instruction. Where is the difficulty? But they will not do that. They will take Bhagavad-gītā and misinterpret in a foolish way, in rascaldom, and spoil his career and other's career. That's all. Otherwise everything is there. Where is the difficulty? Kṛṣṇa says that there is the owner of the body within the body and He has explained in so many ways, acchedyo 'yam adāhyo 'yam, distinguishing the quality that the soul is never to be cut into pieces, acchedyo 'yam. It cannot be burned into the fire. It cannot be moistened by water. That means everything matter, there is interruption. Any matter will be interrupted by another matter, but the soul is not anything of this material world. In the material world, any hard thing, the iron, the stone, can be cut into pieces if you have got the instrument. But Kṛṣṇa says the soul is acchedyo 'yam, it cannot be cut into pieces. So it is above all material action and reaction. Adāhyo 'yam, in material, even iron can be melted, even a stone can be melted, but adāhyo 'yam, aśoṣyaḥ 'yam, in so many ways. That means it is different from this material thing, the soul.

Therefore na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This instruction, the common sense is that if my position is like that, acchedyo 'yam adāhyo 'yam na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20], that what is that life? How I can attain that life? That is brahma-jijñāsā. One should be inquisitive. If you remain fools and rascals like cats and dogs to maintain this body only, then what is the benefit of this human life. Human life is meant for understanding this science that I am not this body, but I am busy with this bodily comfort. I am soul within the body, what I am doing for that which is Brahman? This is required. Therefore tad vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12], if you want to learn about that then you must find out a guru. What kind of guru? Just like Kapiladeva, Kṛṣṇa, or His representative. Not a bogus guru. Then you will be cheated. Andhā yathāndair upanīyamānāḥ. The so-called rascal guru, he does not know also what is the aim of life, and if he makes some disciples then śāstra says, andhā yathāndair upanīyamānāḥ, one blind man is trying to guide many other blind men. So what is the benefit? There is no benefit. So if you want to be guided by somebody, he must have opened eyes. Tattva-darśinaḥ, upadekṣyanti tad jñānaṁ tad jñānī tattva-darśinaḥ. Darśana. Darśana means who have got eyes to see what is the absolute truth. Don't go to a blind man, who has no knowledge about the absolute truth. The absolute truth is there, Kṛṣṇa. The sun is there, everyone can see. Sun is not hiding but I am hiding. I am closing my door, how can I see sun? Come to the field, open to the sun and you will see sun. There is sun, there is light. Similarly God is there, Kṛṣṇa. You come to Kṛṣṇa. Take His lesson, Bhagavad-gītā, you will learn what is God.

But the rascals will not do that. They will manufacture some meaning. This meaning this, this meaning that, this meaning that. They will not accept Kṛṣṇa. That is the difficulty. Otherwise there is no difficulty. Even there is difficulty, one can say that "Yes, it is all right. Kṛṣṇa's instruction is there, Kṛṣṇa's Deity is there, but still how can I see? How can I understand?" This is obstinate. That Kṛṣṇa is so kind, "All right, you see Me in the water, come on. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ [Bg. 7.8]. Why don't you see Me? You are seeing water and why you take water? For satisfying your thirst, and that quality of satisfying your thirst, I am," Kṛṣṇa says. So if you think of Kṛṣṇa when you become satisfied by drinking water, if you think of Kṛṣṇa, you will become one step advanced, immediately. Is that very difficult? Nothing difficult, but we are obstinate, we will not do that. We will not try to understand Kṛṣṇa, we will not take Kṛṣṇa's instruction. Why it is so? Māyā. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14], that is very strong. As soon as I try to accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Lord, māyā will whisper in my ear, "No, no, no. There are many gods, why you are accepting Kṛṣṇa?" Immediately, "There are many gods, why you are accepting Kṛṣṇa?" But śāstra says, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28], īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. That we will not hear. I will not take lesson from the śāstra, from the ācāryas. At least in India we have got big, big ācāryas, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Viṣṇu Svāmī, even Śaṅkarācārya, even Guru Nanak, they have accepted, all, Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Why should we not? Why you? I shall be another competitor to Kṛṣṇa. This is our misfortune. Therefore Bhagavān said, na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Because we are sinful, because we are rascals, we do not accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are searching after Kṛṣṇa, making speculation, philosophical. Don't do that. Accept Kṛṣṇa and be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and be happy. Thank you very much. (end)



741129SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.29

-

Bombay, November 29, 1974



Prabhupāda:



yo yogo bhagavad-bāṇo

nirvāṇātmaṁs tvayoditaḥ

kīdṛśaḥ kati cāṅgāni

yatas tattvāvabodhanam

[SB 3.25.29]



Tattva avabodhanam. Tattva means truth. So the idea is how to understand the Supreme Person, Supreme Being, in tattvataḥ, in truth.



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



This tattva word has been used in the Bhagavad-gītā, that everyone has got some idea of God. Not everyone; but out of many many millions of person: manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu. Not ordinary men. There are millions and millions of person who don't care, just like animal. They don't care to know what is God, what is our relationship with God, how to act in that relationship. The Vedic instruction, the whole Vedic instruction is for this purpose. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is the purpose of Veda.



So first of all we have to know what is our relationship with God. That you do not know. Neither you try for it. This child... Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, Kṛṣṇa says, not we say, that out of many many thousands and millions of persons, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu [Bg. 7.3], so kaścid, somebody becomes interested what is the purpose of life. That is actually awakening of human life. Otherwise like cats and dogs: eating, sleeping, having sex intercourse, and after some time finished, that is the life of cats and dogs. That is not human life. Human life as it is stated in the Vedas, athāto brahma jijñāsā. This life is meant for inquiring about the Supreme Being, Brahman, Parabrahman. That is human life. The whole Vedic civilization is based on this basic principle that to understand the Absolute Truth.

So in this Kali-yuga nobody is interested even. We are spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, very few people are interested to know about Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme Being. So that is not human life. Human life means when we inquire about the Absolute Truth. That is human life. So there are so many societies, so many religious institutions. But nobody is interested to know Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Being. Kṛṣṇa means the Supreme Being, all-attractive. No educational system, no university. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3], that is siddhi of... Siddhi means perfection of life, to understand God. Because in the human life if one tries he can understand God, he can understand himself, he can understand what is his relationship with God, he can understand how to act in that relationship and thus make his life perfect. That is human life. So manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. Siddhi. Siddhi means self-realization. And yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3]. And even though one is siddha, or self-realized, he also does not understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Even one is siddha. That siddha has still to be progressed. Then he will come to jñānavān. Jñānavān means one who is siddha, one who has understood himself. That siddhi means to understand oneself that "I am not this body." That is siddhi.

Everyone is misguided, everyone is acting in this world under the bodily concept of life. And they are very very much unhappy on account of this. Because as soon as one understands that "I am not this body," he immediately becomes Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā. Prasannātmā means, what do you mean by prasannātmā? Na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. No more material desire. That is brahma-bhūtaḥ. Everyone is trying for material sense gratification-the animals, the beasts, the birds, and the human being. That is material world. He is simply śocati and kāṅkṣati. When there is loss he is crying, and when there is no possession he is hankering. These are the two diseases of material existence.

So when one is brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20], he realized that "I am not this body, I am pure spirit soul," ahaṁ brahmāsmi, then the next stage is naśocati na kāṅkṣati. That is the. But that is not all. That is not all. That is not steady. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na... [Bg. 18.54], samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. At that time, because he is not in the bodily platform of life, he does not see the body but he sees the soul. So as spirit soul we are one. Simply we are differently dressed in different body on account of our desire and karma. So one who has realized that "I am not this body," he does not make any difference of body.

vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 5.18]



He does not make any difference that "Here is a learned brāhmaṇa and here is a dog." Because he knows the learned brāhmaṇa has got a different body and the dog has got a different body. Ultimately the dog is also a spirit soul and the brāhmaṇa is also a spirit soul. That is his vision. It does not mean that he's so fool he makes a brāhmaṇa equal to the dog. No. That is not. But he knows the fact what is the dog and what is the brāhmaṇa. That is Brahman realization. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Then mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. Then the real bhakti begins.



That means after self-realization, when he understands that he is not this body... In the bodily conception of life I am thinking "I belong to this family," "I belong to this society," "I belong to the country," and so many. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Janasya moho 'yam, this illusion is going on. And brahma-bhūtaḥ means one who is above this illusion. He has no more such distinction that "I am this body. I am belong to this family, I belong to this country or community." No. "I belong to Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa says jīv..., mamaivāṁśa. Kṛṣṇa says. And brahma-bhūtaḥ stage means I have realized that I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa and my only business is to serve Kṛṣṇa. That is Brahman realization. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ [Bg. 7.3]. Tattvataḥ means one has to understand in truth what is Kṛṣṇa and what is my relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Simply siddha is not perfection. Siddha means "I am not this body." That is all right, that is perfection. But you have to make further progress. Brahma-bhūtaḥ, you have become now self-realized, that's all right. Na śocati na..., samaḥ sarveṣu. But you have to enter into the parā-bhakti. Then your self-realization will stand. Otherwise again you will fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32].

I have given this example that you have got a very nice sputnik, airplane, you can go many thousands and millions miles up. But if you don't get any shelter either in the moon planet or any other planet then you come back again. The same example. Similarly, you may become brahma-bhūtaḥ, Brahman realized, but if you simply remain in the impersonal or void... Brahma-bhūtaḥ means to make this material world null and void and you come to the another world, spiritual world. So if you cannot enter into the spiritual world, mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54], if you simply remain brahma-bhūtaḥ, then you will fall down. Because you are by nature seeking ānanda, blissful life. So if you do not get varieties of life... Just like we want varieties in this material world. This material world is simply imitation of the spiritual world. So we are attached to the varieties; therefore we are seeking ānanda. But because it is material and we are spiritual being, we cannot enjoy this ānanda, material varieties fully. There are so many defects, inebrieties, and we are seeking that spiritual variety. So if you don't enter into the spiritual world with spiritual variety then you will again fall down. That is called bhakti-yoga.

Just like Kṛṣṇa says yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. When you get spiritual varieties, that you can get when you enter into the spiritual world, either in the Vaikuṇṭha world, planet or in the Goloka Vṛndāvana planet, there are varieties. The varieties are mentioned in the śāstra.

cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]



Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣam [Bs. 5.30]. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa figure is the imagination of some artist or painter. No, no. These are the description in the Vedas. Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, is playing on His flute. Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣam [Bs. 5.30]. And His eyes are like the petals of lotus flower. Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ barhāvataṁsam. There is a feather of peacock, asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam, His complexion is like black cloud but very, very beautiful. Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam, kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya. He is so beautiful that more attractive than many, many hundreds and thousands of Cupid. Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam aham bhajāmi [Bs. 5.30]. This is the Govinda's description. There are so many descriptions.



So this is spiritual varieties. Material varieties cannot give us full satisfaction. Therefore you want change. Change, another change, another change. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Here in the material world we are simply chewing the chewed. Once chewed and thrown it away, again somebody is coming chewing. So spiritual variety is not like that. Spiritual varieties is ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam. The more you are attached to spiritual variety, it is just like ocean. An ocean does not increase, but spiritual varieties are said they are increasing. Now just like here you have got the Arabian Sea. It is not increasing. It would have increased, then Bombay town would have been finished long ago. So it is not increasing. It has got a certain limit. You go to the beach you see no, no more than. But it is compared with ānandāmbudhi, the ocean of bliss, increasing, vardhanam. Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam. The more you enter into the spiritual bliss, the more you become joyful. That is spiritual. Spiritual, just like these boys, these girls they are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Had it been hackneyed, how long they would have chanted? No. That is not possible. Unless it is spiritual, nobody can be satisfied simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa. You take any other word, "Mr. John, Mr. John, Mr. John," how long you will chant? After chanting for half an hour you will be fed up. But this is ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam. The more you chant the more you become spiritually advanced. This is called ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam. Otherwise how one can be satisfied simply by chanting, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa? They are not mad, they are not foolish. They are human being. And how they have given up everything simply by chanting if it is not ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam, if it is not increasing in spiritual blissfulness. Practical. They have forgotten everything, they are also young men. They don't go to cinema. Just one block after there is cinema, they will never go, giving up this chanting and go to the cinema. Don't you see practically?

So spiritual life, that is spiritual life, that if you take to spiritual life and take to the process then your ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam, your spiritual life, will be blissful more and more. It is not decrease. Because we want ānanda. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). That is the Vedānta-sūtra. Living being or Parabrahman or Brahman, everyone is ānandamaya. That ānanda can..., you get perfectly when you take ānandamaya with Kṛṣṇa, in association with Kṛṣṇa. You associate with Kṛṣṇa as servant or as friend or as father, as mother, as conjugal lover. There are five rasas: śānta, dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, mādhurya. Here also in this material world we have got the same rasas. We are related with somebody as father, or somebody as son, somebody as lover, somebody as beloved, somebody as master, somebody as servant. This is relationship. This is the perverted reflection of the spiritual world. Therefore although we have got the same relationship for relishing... Today I am loving my son and tomorrow my son may be the greatest enemy. There is no eternity of such love. Or the son may die. There is no eternity. Today I am loving some man or woman; it may break tomorrow. That is the defect of the material world. But in the spiritual world the same relationship will never break. It will ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam, simply increase, simply increase. That is called perfection. That is called per...

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



If we understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ, not superficial... Here the word is used yatas tattvāvabodhanam. Tattvāvabodhanam: "Kindly explain to me that bhakti-yoga which we can fully understand the truth, Absolute Truth." Tattvāvabodhanam.



So how that tattva can be understood? That is explained by Kṛṣṇa that janma karma ca divyaṁ me yo jānāti tattvataḥ. So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa, tattvataḥ, by truth. And how? We can understand that Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. This is tattva word. So tattvāvabodhanam. Devahūti is asking Kapiladeva that "Kindly describe that process of yoga by which we can understand in truth, tattvāvabodhanam, not superficially." Tattvāvabodhanam. And in another place the tattvam is described in three ways: vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam [SB 1.2.11]. They are not different. That is everything is tattva, tattva. There are three kinds of tattva: brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. This very thing, tattva, is described in three features: impersonal Brahman, localized Paramātmā, and at the end Bhagavān.

So understanding of Bhagavān means understand of Brahman and Paramātmā. But understanding of Brahman or Paramātmā is not understanding Bhagavān. Therefore the Brahmavādīs, the Paramātmavādīs, they are impersonalists. They cannot understand the Supreme Being Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. They cannot understand. That is the defect. Therefore some yoga system, jñāna-yoga system, or dhyāna-yoga system, and there is bhakti-yoga system. That bhakti-yoga system is the perfect. And jñāna-yoga system or dhyāna-yoga system, that is partial understanding, Paramātmā feature. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. In that way you can understand, you can come to the platform of understanding samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. But that is not perfection. Still you have to go. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. After realizing samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu, this principle, then you will have to enter into the devotional service, parā-bhakti. Parā-bhakti means transcendental. Bhakti means parā. Bhakti does not mean material. Material, it looks like material activities, but it is not material activities. Just like the example can be given just like a man, a boy is flying kite. He is, what is called, the reel? So sometimes he brings down the kite and sometimes he allows the kite to go. There are two kind of playing. So similarly, the one kind of activity means you are becoming free from the resultant action of activities, and one kind of activity is you are becoming entangled.

So that is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, yajñārthe karmaṇaḥ anyatra karma-bandhanaḥ. If you work for Yajña, for Kṛṣṇa, then you are becoming relieved from the resultant action of karma. But if you work for your sense gratification, then you are becoming entangled with the resultant action of your karma. Therefore sometimes this bhakti-yoga is misunderstood as karma. Māyāvādīs, they cannot understand. They think that bhakti-yoga is also karma. "These people are less intelligent, so they are in the... Because jñāna-yoga means vikarma or akarma, akarma. There is no resultant action." That is the view of the jñānīs, Māyāvādī philosophers. But because they see that the bhaktas they are working also just like ordinary man, therefore it is māyā, that is Māyāvāda. They think bhakti activities as māyā. Therefore we call them Māyāvāda. But actually bhakti-yoga, if you act according to the shastric principles, if you act according to the order of your spiritual master in bhakti-yoga, that is not karma. That is bhakti-yoga, beyond this karma-yoga. But they cannot understand.

Just like Kṛṣṇa described in the śāstras: cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. Surabhīr abhipālayantam. Kṛṣṇa is very much fond of tending cows, surabhi cows. The Māyāvādī will see, "What is this Kṛṣṇa?" Even Brahmā was bewildered, "How is that this Kṛṣṇa, this boy in Vṛndāvana is being worshiped? He's spoken like the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How is that He is taking care of the cows, this cowherd boy?" Indra was also bewildered. Muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ. To understand Kṛṣṇa, even Brahmā, Indra, they become bewildered. Therefore,

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



We have to understand Kṛṣṇa in truth. Otherwise we will be bewildered. And for that reason you have to hear from Kṛṣṇa or His representative to understand Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise you will also be bewildered.



So if we can understand Kṛṣṇa, that these activities of Kṛṣṇa, divyam..., janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9], divine, and they are not ordinary activities. If we can understand it, immediately we become liberated. Simply if we can understand the activities of this Kṛṣṇa's dancing with the gopīs, they are divyam, they are not ordinary. Just like here also a young man wants to dance with many young girls; it is not like that. And because people cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, and if they hear about the dancing of Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs, they take it the concession, "Now let us dance with young girls." And they are going to hell. Therefore you have to learn from the proper person about Kṛṣṇa's activities. If you learn Kṛṣṇa from the professional uneducated person, nondevotee, then you will go to hell. Therefore immediately we should not try to understand Kṛṣṇa's dealing with the gopīs. It is very confidential. It is kept in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That means you have to understand Kṛṣṇa as He is by reading first nine cantos of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Then you will be able to understand janma karma ca divyam. The Kṛṣṇa's activities, they are not ordinary thing. They are divine. And if we actually understand, then immediately you become liberated. Janma karma ca divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ.

Therefore here it is said, kīdṛśaḥ kati cāṅgāni. How that bhakti-yoga is situated and how many processes or branches are there? Kīdṛśaḥ kati ca aṅgāni yatas tattvāvabodhanam. Then we can understand Kṛṣṇa in tattva, in truth. That is required. That is bhakti-yoga. And that aṅgāni, aṅgāni means they are all the same. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. There are nine aṅgas, nine... Aṅga means different varieties. They are the same. Spiritually they are the same, spiritually absolute. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam. Either you hear or you chant or you memorize or you offer worship, arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyam, or you simply work under the direction of your spiritual master or Kṛṣṇa. Just like Hanumān: he dāsyam. He simply carried out Lord Rāmacandra's order. He was supposed to be animal. He's not animal. But he was looking like a monkey animal. But having no education, no. He had everything. But superficially he..., he is not teaching Vedānta. He is simply carrying order of Lord Rāmacandra, that's all. He appears to be very foolish. Not foolish, but superficially animal. He was simply carrying out, dāsyam. Arjuna, simply he took Kṛṣṇa as his most intimate friend, that's all. He was not a Vedantist; he was a fighter, he was a kṣatriya. He had to deal with politics. No time to become Vedantist. But still he's the greatest devotee. Bhakto 'si priyo 'si me [Bg. 4.3]. Kṛṣṇa says, "My dear Arjuna, you are My very dear friend and devotee." So people may say, "Oh, he is not a Vedantist, he is not even brāhmaṇa, he is not a sannyāsī. How Kṛṣṇa accepts him as bhakto 'si?" That is called bhakti. Bhakti is ahaituky apratihatā. If you become a devotee there is no impediment. No material condition can check your progress of bhakti, if you are a bhakta.

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

[SB 1.2.6]



If you want real life, prasanna... Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. If you take to bhakti, automatically you become prasannātmā. Yayātmā suprasīdati. What is that? Ahaituky apratihatā bhakti. Without any motive. "I shall serve Kṛṣṇa with a motive," that is also good in this sense, that he is pious, he has approached Kṛṣṇa. He is not impious like the atheist, like the nonbeliever. But he is good, although he has approached... Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja worshiped Kṛṣṇa with a motive. But after being perfect in devotional service he becomes without motive. When he saw actually Kṛṣṇa, he said, "No, no, no. I don't want anything from You." Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]. "I don't want any benediction." That is bhakti. Ahaituky apratihatā. Not that we shall worship Kṛṣṇa to serve some material purpose. That is also good, because he has come to Kṛṣṇa. Someway or other he has come. Catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtino 'rjuna. That is his piety. Anyone who comes to Kṛṣṇa someway or other, he is very fortunate. He is not ordinary man. Ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Bhāgyavān jīva means very fortunate person. He comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not ordinary person.



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



Kṛṣṇa-bhajana is not so easy. But if you voluntarily, if after hearing so many qualities of Kṛṣṇa, transcendental qualities, if you somehow or other become attracted to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then your life is successful. Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet. Somehow or other you attach your mind to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ.



Then Kṛṣṇa says that "Anyone who is engaged in My devotional service with love and faith, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam." This is buddhi-yoga. Buddhi-yoga means bhakti-yoga. Buddhi-yoga means, bhakti-yoga is not for the foolish person. Bhakti-yoga means buddhi-yoga, one who is highly intelligent. Or somehow or other he has become intelligent, that "I shall take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Then his life is perfect immediately, and gradually he will realize Kṛṣṇa, tattvataḥ. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. You somehow or other take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, engage yourself in devotional service under the direction of śāstra and the spiritual master, then you will understand Kṛṣṇa and then your life is perfect.

Thank you very much. (end)



741130SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.30

-

Bombay, November 30, 1974



Nitāi: "...after all, I am a woman. It is very difficult for me to understand the Absolute Truth because my intelligence is not very great. But if You will kindly explain it to me, even though I am not very intelligent, I can understand it and thereby feel transcendental happiness."



Prabhupāda:



tad etan me vijānīhi

yathāhaṁ manda-dhīr hare

sukhaṁ buddhyeya durbodhaṁ

yoṣā bhavad-anugrahāt

[SB 3.25.30]



So this is submission. The process of understanding transcendental subject matter is not by challenge but by submission. The whole bhakti process is submission. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's preaching.



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



If one is interested to advance by chanting, then Caitanya Mahāprabhu advises that you should be humbler than the straw or grass and tolerant than the tree. Tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā, amāninā: Without feeling oneself becoming very proud of intelligence, he should give respect to others and in this way one can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra offenselessly.



So Devahūti, although mother of Kapiladeva, because she is woman, not only woman, because she is going to be disciple or the student, she is presenting herself as very humble student, not that superior mother, no. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. One has to learn. The first condition is praṇipāta. Prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa nipāta, complete surrender. Praṇipātena. Then paripraśna. Sad-dharma-pṛcchat. First of all, praṇipāta, a full submission, then paripraśna, guided by sevā, service. We have to please the spiritual master, the teacher, by service. This whole bhakti process depends on service attitude. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau. I have several times explained this verse. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. Our present material senses are blunt. By these present senses it is not possible to understand the transcendental nature of Kṛṣṇa, His name, His form, His quality, His pastimes. Everything of Kṛṣṇa, they are all divyam, divine. Janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. So divyam, transcendental subject matter, is not possible to understand by these material blunt senses. Therefore one has to purify it. That is bhakti-mārga. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. One has to purify the senses, and when the senses are purified, then, with that purified senses, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate. When our senses are purified, then we can serve Hṛṣīkeśa. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam. Bhakti means to serve Kṛṣṇa, the master of the senses, by our senses. But these present senses, they cannot be fit for serving Kṛṣṇa. It has to be purified.

So how this purification is possible? Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau: [Brs. 1.2.234] by engaging oneself in service of the Lord, and the first service begins from the tongue, jihvādau. We have got many senses, sense organs, but devotional service begins from the tongue, jihvādau, by chanting. It is very difficult subject matter, but it is made easy because... Devahūti says, sukhaṁ buddhyeya: "Very easily I can understand, because I am woman." Kṛṣṇa is open to everyone: striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ [Bg. 9.32]. Although they are considered less intelligent, still, Kṛṣṇa is open to everyone. And especially in this age, kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet: [SB 12.3.51] "Simply by chanting Kṛṣṇa's name, this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra," kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ, "one becomes liberated, and then paraṁ vrajet, he is transferred to the spiritual world. Although this Kali-yuga is full of faulty things, everyone is embarrassed with so many difficulties, still, very easy metho..."

This is spoken by Śukadeva Gosvāmī after describing the faults of Kali-yuga. There are many, many hundreds and thousands of faults. People will suffer. They are all described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. People's intelligence, bodily strength, mercifulness-everything will be reduced. And so many things are described. Some of them are very prominent even at the present moment. Just like in the Kali-yuga, it is stated lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam: "People will think by keeping long hairs they will become beautiful." Lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. So that is very visible now, especially in the Western countries. They keep very long hairs. Dāmpatye ratim eva hi: "Marriage, husband and wife, they will be simply by agreement." Nowadays that is happening. You go to a marriage-maker and agree, and marriage is finished. Not like before. Dāmpatye ratim eva hi. And rati means sex desires. So long their sex desires will be completed, they can live. Svīkāra eva codvāhe. These are stated, all. Vipratve sūtram eva hi: "Become a brāhmaṇa, just have a sacred thread." Sacred or not sacred, get a thread. That's all, without executing the brahminical duties. That is going on. In this way there is a long list of Kali-yuga's activities.

So after submitting the list, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ: "My dear King Parīkṣit, I have described all the faults of this Kali-yuga. But there is a special advantage in this age. That is," he said, kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51], "people can become liberated and go back to home, back to Godhead, simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra."

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



So this easy process, sukhaṁ jihvādau, that begins from the jihvā, tongue. If you kindly train your tongue to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and if possible without offense... There are ten kinds of offenses. If we avoid the offenses and you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, you become liberated. And it is very easy. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. Mukta. Anyone who is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, if he is chanting sincerely... Sincerely or not sincerely, if he chants, then he will become sincere and purified. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam [Cc. Antya 20.12].



So this is the easiest process. So durbodhaṁ yoṣā bhavad-anugrahāt. But this chance is gotten by the grace of Kṛṣṇa. Bhavad-anugrahāt. If Kṛṣṇa sees somebody, that he is sincerely chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... He is within everyone. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So He can understand that "Here is a sincere devotee." Then He gives chance. He as caitya-guru, the Supersoul, caitya-guru, and this external guru. He gives the chance of meeting external guru also, His representative, so that Kṛṣṇa helps a sincere devotee externally and internally. Internally, He helps, Himself, as Paramātmā. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam. Kṛṣṇa says that "I give him intelligence from within." And without, externally, His representative, the spiritual master, is there. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Combination of guru and Kṛṣṇa. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa, one gets a bona fide guru, and by the grace of the bona fide guru, one gets Kṛṣṇa. This is going on. So as we are fallen, similarly, śāstra has given us very easy method to appreciate our transcendental life, our blissful life. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. This we are teaching everywhere, that "You chant this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra," śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. And when they are advanced, they are engaged in Deity worship, in preaching work, and so many other.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



So Devahūti-devī, she thinks herself, because woman, yoṣā, durbodham. So she is accepting her son as guru and very submissively, and she wants to understand the very difficult subject matter very easily by the grace of Kapiladeva. This is very important thing, to receive the causeless mercy of Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master, both. By Kṛṣṇa's mercy we shall get spiritual master, and spiritual master's... Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he has very much stressed on the mercy of guru. And that is actually fact. If we receive the mercy of guru, if we can satisfy guru by our service, and if he gives his blessing, that is very, very great opportunity. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. Guru is confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa. Guru never claims that he is Kṛṣṇa, he is God. That is not guru. Guru, although worshiped as Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa... Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. Not in one śāstra, but all the Vedic śāstra, they describe guru, guru-brahma. They describe on the equal footing. Guru, being representative of Kṛṣṇa, he is worshiped as Kṛṣṇa. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. All śāstra recommends that. Tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ. And those who are pure devotees, they accept. But that does not mean that guru declares himself that "I am Kṛṣṇa. I am God." No. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. He is the most confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he is very dear. And as he is very dear to Kṛṣṇa, if he recommends somebody, "Kṛṣṇa, accept him," He will accept him. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. That is the system.



Guru is very confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa. Why confidential servant? Because he is canvassing door to door, "Please become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Please surrender to Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], and guru takes that very mission, but does not say like Kṛṣṇa, that "Your surrender to me." He says, "Surrender to Kṛṣṇa." One has to surrender to Kṛṣṇa through the via media of guru, directly. This is the process. Therefore guru accepts respects from the disciple not for his personal self, but conveying the respect to Kṛṣṇa. This is the process. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi **. If you cannot get the mercy of guru, then it is very difficult to approach Kṛṣṇa. We cannot approach Kṛṣṇa directly. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. That is the statement in the Bhagavad-gītā. Paramparā. Guru, he offers the same respect to his guru, his guru. It goes. In this way, it goes to Kṛṣṇa, paramparā system. Therefore it is stated, bhavad-anugrahāt. Bhavad-anugrahāt: "Please kindly become merciful upon me."

So in this way, one has to learn how to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Our Vaiṣṇava system is ādau gurv-āśrayam. If we want to approach Kṛṣṇa, then in the beginning, ādau, the beginning is to take shelter of guru. That is being shown by Devahūti. Although He is son, (s)he is begging the mercy of Kapiladeva so that by His mercy she could understand what is devotional service and how to approach Kṛṣṇa. Tad etan me vijānīhi yathāhaṁ manda-dhīḥ. So this is very good qualification. Manda-dhīḥ: "My intelligence is not very sharp, manda." That is especially in this age. Of course, Kapiladeva and Devahūti was not in this age. Still, she is submitting because she happens to be woman, and although she is such exalted woman that she could give birth to the Personality of Godhead Kapiladeva-she was not ordinary woman-still, she thinks manda-dhīḥ: "I am less intelligence." Manda-dhīr hare: "My dear Kapila, You are Supreme Personality of Godhead, but I am manda-dhīḥ. My intelligence is not very sharp. Still, I want to understand the sublime subject matter, transcendental subject matter, from You. So it is possible." Bhavad-anugrahāt: "If You become merciful, then it is possible." This is the process.

So in order to get the mercy of guru, so yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **, we must search out a bona fide spiritual master, representative of Kṛṣṇa or Kapiladeva, and then we shall submit and offer service. In this way we shall please the guru, and if he is satisfied, then our business is complete. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi **. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended this process, this process, jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva. The process of understanding or approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead is this. Caitanya Mahāprabhu approved this when He was discussing with Rāmānanda Rāya. So the process of approaching the Supreme Lord... So he first of all explained the varṇāśrama-dharma. Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān, viṣṇur ārādhyate [Cc. Madhya 8.58]. The human life is for viṣṇur ārādhanam. That is the human life, Viṣṇur ārādhanam. In varṇāśrama, the system... Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13], Kṛṣṇa says. Why establish this cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam? Because through the cātur-varṇya, systematic institution, following the rules and regulations of brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, one can approach Lord Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur ārādhyate. This varṇāśrama-dharma is very important. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that it is very difficult even to execute the rules and regulation of varṇāśrama-dharma in this age. Actually that is a fact. Therefore, after explaining varṇāśrama-dharma before Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He said, Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, eho bāhya: "Yes, it is one of the processes, but in this age it is very difficult." Who is going to be brāhmaṇa? It is very difficult. Especially it has become very difficult in India. We are advertising, we are soliciting, "Please come here in this Hare Kṛṣṇa Land and just become a brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava, and we shall try to serve you by giving you good place," but nobody is coming. Therefore it is very difficult to revive the old varṇāśrama-dharma culture.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu, therefore, said, "No, no, it is all right, but it is very difficult now." He is practical. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the...Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. He is studied by Rūpa Gosvāmī as the most munificent avatāra, incarnation. There are many incarnation, but He's the most munificent, vadānya, the supreme charitable. Why? Kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te. He is distributing love of Kṛṣṇa like anything. Kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. One cannot understand Kṛṣṇa.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



To understand Kṛṣṇa is very, very difficult. Out of many, many millions of person, one tries for making his life successful. And out of many, many such successful, yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3], one who has attained siddhi, such person, may... One may understand Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa, to understand... So first of all, we cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Then what is the, where is the question of love of Kṛṣṇa? If you do not understand somebody, how you can love him? Love is far, far away. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu is so kind that He is distributing kṛṣṇa-prema: "Take, anyone. Come on." Kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. So therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu is very practical, that "I want to give kṛṣṇa-prema. One should be ecstatic, emotional in kṛṣṇa-prema. One shall cry for Kṛṣṇa." And He taught everyone by His practical example how He was mad after Kṛṣṇa. Govinda-viraheṇa me. Śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. This is kṛṣṇa-prema: without Kṛṣṇa, one should see everything vacant. This is Rādhārāṇī's prema.



But that is not possible for ordinary human being. It might be possible for Caitanya Mahāprabhu and few devotees. Just like His immediate disciples, the Six Gosvāmīs, they were also following the same principle. In the Vṛndāvana the Six Gosvāmīs used to live. But they were seeking Kṛṣṇa, becoming mad.

he rādhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ

ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau



So they were mad after Kṛṣṇa: "Where is Kṛṣṇa?" They never said, "We have seen Kṛṣṇa." And Caitanya Mahāprabhu also, He said, "I was dreaming of Kṛṣṇa, and why you wake Me? I have lost the chance." In this way they were making bhajana. This is called viraha-bhajana, viraha-bhajana, separation. That is very recommended process. So we should be awakened, awaken our consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in such a way that being separated from Kṛṣṇa, we shall become mad after Him. This is called kṛṣṇa-prema. That prema was being distributed by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And He is still distributing.



So how this prema can be awakened easily, that has been recommended by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, quoting from Lord Brahmā's prayer to Kṛṣṇa, jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva. Don't try to understand Kṛṣṇa by your tiny knowledge. We are imperfect. How we can speculate on Kṛṣṇa? That is not... Because there are certain persons, jñānīs, they want to know. Just like theosophists. They want to know the Absolute Truth by speculation. But that is not possible.

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



Ciram, for many, many years, if you speculate, you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. You have to receive the mercy of Kṛṣṇa through the spiritual master. Then it is possible. That is recommended by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir ye prāyaśo 'jita. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Ajita; you cannot conquer Him. When Kṛṣṇa was present, He had to fight with so many demons, but nobody could conquer Him. That is the history. He conquered everyone, but nobody could conquer Him. He is conquered by His devotee only. That's all. Therefore His name is Ajita. Ajita. If you want to conquer over Ajita, then you simply... Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "Don't speculate." Sthāne sthitāḥ... Jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva. Be submissive: "Kṛṣṇa, I am very poor. Kṛṣṇa, I have no means to understand You. So if You kindly be merciful upon me, then I can understand something about You." Surrender. That is wanted. Kṛṣṇa is very merciful as soon as He sees that somebody is surrendered.



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām

[SB 1.2.17]



If we... This is the process. If we hear about Kṛṣṇa...Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You remain in your position. Don't change. Either you are brāhmaṇa or śūdra or gṛhastha or sannyāsī, it doesn't matter. But you hear about Kṛṣṇa. This is the process. This is the first-class process.



So we are opening hundreds and thousands... Not thousands, we have opened about 102 centers all over the world. But we want to open thousands. But we are in need of assistance. But nobody is coming. Anyway, the Europeans, Americans, some of them have joined. Still, we required many thousands because Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission is pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma: He wants to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement not in this city or that city but nagarādi grāma. Just like here we have opened a center in Gandhigram. But in Bombay such hundreds and thousands centers can be opened. It is so big city. Similarly, there are other cities. It is required. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission.

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma



And that is the duty of the Indians, bhārata-vāsī. That is also Caitanya Mahāprabhu's desire.



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



This Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mercy, kṛṣṇa-prema distribution, is the best, topmost para-upakāra, welfare activity. Therefore every Indian should understand the philosophy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu or the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the same philosophy. Kṛṣṇa says His philosophy is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Just surrender to Me. I will give you protection." And Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy is the same. He is Kṛṣṇa, but as He has appeared as devotee. He says, yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] "Whomever you meet, you Indian, bhārata-vāsī, you just try to understand this Kṛṣṇa philosophy, Bhagavad-gītā, and make your life successful and go door to door and say this 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja. Bas. You become guru. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission.



So we should give chance to people to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we are opening so many centers. Please come and hear about Kṛṣṇa. Then gradually you will assimilate. Because Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's words, they are not different-absolute. When we hear about Kṛṣṇa, that means we are directly associating with Kṛṣṇa. And the more you associate with Kṛṣṇa, the more you become purified. Hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti. Kṛṣṇa helps in washing your dirty things within the heart. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. The same thing, Caitanya Mahāprabhu says. Then, when we are free, tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], you become purified, we become purified. Then immediately we revive our Kṛṣṇa consciousness and engage ourself in Kṛṣṇa's service.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741201SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.31

-

Bombay, December 1, 1974



Nitāi: "Śrī Maitreya said: After hearing the statement of His mother, Kapila could understand her purpose, and He became compassionate towards her because of being born of her body. He described the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy, which is a combination of devotional service and mystic realization and is received by disciplic succession."



Prabhupāda:



viditvārthaṁ kapilo mātur itthaṁ

jāta-sneho yatra tanvābhijātaḥ

tattvāmnāyaṁ yat pravadanti sāṅkhyaṁ

provāca vai bhakti-vitāna-yogam

[SB 3.25.31]



So Kapiladeva is the propounder of Sāṅkhya philosophy. This is original Kapiladeva. Later on, there was another Kapiladeva, so he is called the atheist Kapila. And this Kapiladeva is known as Devahūti-putra, "the son of Devahūti" Kapila. So sāṅkhya-yoga, the later atheist Kapila's sāṅkhya-yoga, is different from this sāṅkhya-yoga. The atheist Kapila's sāṅkhya-yoga is analysis of the material elements. So this analysis of material elements by the atheist Kapila is very much liked by the Western philosophers. And the sāṅkhya-yoga explained, propounded, by Devahūti-putra Kapila is practically unknown.



So this Kapila, Devahūti, son of Devahūti Kapila, His sāṅkhya-yoga means bhakti-vitāna-yogam, how bhakti, devotional service to the Lord, is expanded. That is sāṅkhya-yoga. And how it is received, that is also stated here, tattva āmnāyaṁ yad pravadanti sāṅkhyam. Āmnāyam, by disciplic succession. No philosophical speculation, but as it is received by predecessor, by tradition, āmnāyam. Tattva āmnāyam. We cannot manufacture tattva. That is improper way of understanding the truth. Generally, the Western philosophers, they try to understand the Absolute Truth by the ascending process. There are two processes of understanding the Absolute Truth. One is called ascending process, or inductive logic, and another process is descending process, or deductive logic. So ascending process is based on speculation, and descending process is based on fact.

This evening we were talking about Bhagavad-gītā, that Bhagavad-gītā is understood by the descending process, as Kṛṣṇa said. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that this yoga system... Bhagavad-gītā is also yoga system. That is bhakti-yoga. Although there are description of karma, jñāna, and the mystic yoga and ultimately bhakti-yoga, but actually it is meant for bhakti-yoga, the Bhagavad-gītā. Those who are jñānīs, speculative, for them also, it is described. And those who are haṭha-yogīs, they are also described there. But ultimately, the conclusion is bhakti-yoga. Just like in the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā the yoga system is described. The yoga system is described, that one has to go in a secluded place, and he has to sit down straight, right angular, and see the front portion of the nose, and the eyes half closed. In this way the haṭha-yoga system, or aṣṭāṅga-yoga system, is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. But when Arjuna said that "This system of yoga is very difficult for me. Kṛṣṇa, I cannot concentrate my mind in this way"...

cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa

pramāthi balavad dṛḍham

tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye

vāyor iva suduṣkaram

[Bg. 6.34]



Five thousand years ago a personality like Arjuna, who was so qualified that he could talk with Kṛṣṇa as ordinary friend... How much exalted he was, just we can imagine. And born in the royal family, very exalted position, great warrior. He said that "Kṛṣṇa, I cannot execute this yoga system. It is not possible." Cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa pramāthi balavad dṛḍham, tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye [Bg. 6.34]. "My mind is so disturbed that to control the mind is exactly like that, to control the wind." Suppose there is very heavy wind, and if one tries to stop it by spreading his hand, is it possible? It is not possible. He has given this example. Pramāthi balavad dṛḍham. Mind is so uncontrollable, just like madman. Mind's business is like that. Immediately I am accepting something and again rejecting. Everyone has got this experience. Therefore he frankly said that "To control the mind is not possible for me. I cannot do so."



So now just try to understand the... A personality like Arjuna is not ordinary man. He was advised by Kṛṣṇa to practice this yoga system, meditation, generally. Actually yoga system means meditation. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. The yogis, they dhyānāvasthita manasā, mind being absorbed in meditation and concentrates the mind on Viṣṇu form of the Lord, four-handed Viṣṇu. That is dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1].

yaṁ brahmā varuṇendra-rudra-marutaḥ stunvanti divyaiḥ stavair

vedaiḥ sāṅga-pada-kramopaniṣadair gāyanti yaṁ sāma-gāḥ

dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yogino

yasyāntaṁ na viduḥ surāsura-gaṇā devāya tasmai namaḥ



So this yoga system is meant for persons who are too much bodily attached, this haṭha-yoga system. And otherwise, real yoga system is the sāṅkhya-yoga or bhakti-yoga, real yoga system. This is preliminary. Therefore when Arjuna declined, that "I cannot execute the yoga system," so Kṛṣṇa, in order to pacify Arjuna... Because he was friend-Kṛṣṇa thought that Arjuna is thinking unable to execute this yoga-He pacified him by saying ultimately, "My dear Arjuna, don't be agitated." Indirectly He said that "You are a first-class yogi." "How is that, I am first-class yogi?" "Now, because you are always thinking of Me." Arjuna, he did not know anything but Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, when He placed Himself divided into two in the battlefield... Because it was a family fight, so Kṛṣṇa said that "I can divide Myself." Both of them approached. Duryodhana approached and Arjuna also approached, "Kṛṣṇa, You become my side." So Kṛṣṇa said that "I have got eighteen akṣauhiṇī, division of soldiers. That is one side. And I personally, one side." So Arjuna (Duryodhana) thought that "What shall I do simply by taking Kṛṣṇa? And He says that 'I'll not fight. If I go to any side, I'll not fight.' " So Arjuna (Duryodhana) thought it wise that "Let me take His soldiers, eighteen divisions, many thousands of elephants, horses, chariot." There is estimate, very big number of elephants, horses. I don't remember exactly. But... So Duryodhana decided to take the soldiers of Kṛṣṇa. (aside:) That child may be... But Arjuna thought that "If I get Kṛṣṇa in my side, that is sufficient. I don't want His soldiers."



So Kṛṣṇa was so friendly and very loving friend, not ordinary friend. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said, "My dear Arjuna, don't be disappointed because you cannot execute this aṣṭāṅga-yoga. The first-class yogi is he who always thinks of Me." Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā [Bg. 6.47]. One who has taken Kṛṣṇa within his heart and always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, satataṁ smartavyaḥ viṣṇuḥ, this is the system. This is meditation. If one is thinking of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours, that is the first-class meditation. You are seeing Kṛṣṇa here, standing with Rādhārāṇī. And if you see always, then you naturally you get impression of Kṛṣṇa within the heart. And if you serve Kṛṣṇa... Those who are engaged in service, just like they are offering this foodstuff, Kṛṣṇa. They have prepared this foodstuff very nicely, thinking that "Kṛṣṇa will eat. Let us do it very cleanly and attentively." And whatever they can offer, first-class thing... That is meditation, because they are thinking of Kṛṣṇa, "This foodstuff will be taken by Kṛṣṇa. This dress will be used by Kṛṣṇa. These flowers will be offered to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa." Real meditation is this. And that is the first-class yoga. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is advising in the Seventh Chapter that "If you cannot think of Me, then you can think of Me in your ordinary dealings." Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: [Bg. 7.8] "I am the taste of the water."

So that, this yoga system, we have to practice, this yoga system. This is called sāṅkhya-yoga. That is explained here, provāca vai bhakti-vitāna-yogam. The more you think of Kṛṣṇa... Satataṁ cintayanto mām, satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. These are advised in the Bhagavad-gītā. If you always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then you remember Kṛṣṇa. Immediately the form of Kṛṣṇa is awakened within your heart. And Kṛṣṇa says, yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā: "Always within the heart..." That is the sāṅkhya-yoga system, or perfect yoga system, bhakti-yoga-vitānam. And Kṛṣṇa says personally,

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



They are first-class yogi. So anyway, some way or other, if you can think of Kṛṣṇa always... That is... We have named Kṛṣṇa consciousness, always conscious of Kṛṣṇa. Then you become the first-class sāṅkhya-yogī. Bhakti-vitānam.



So Kapiladeva could understand the desire of His mother. The mother was submissive because to understand the sāṅkhya-yoga, bhakti-yoga, it requires... The first condition is submission. Tad viddhi praṇipātena [Bg. 4.34]. You cannot understand the sāṅkhya-yoga system or bhakti-yoga system by falsely being proud that you are very learned scholar or speculator. These things will not help. You have to hear about Kṛṣṇa very submissively and accepting, not challenging. Then you will be able to understand. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You remain in your position. It doesn't matter what you are, simply you hear about Kṛṣṇa. There are so many things about Kṛṣṇa we can hear. Even if we are not educated, we can hear from a person who can speak rightly. But that person must be selected, not ordinary person, not professional person, but here it is said, tattva āmnāyam. Āmnāyam means by disciplic succession. We have to accept a positive party.

Just like in political activities you accept some party, Congress party or this party or that party. That is the system, even in politics. Similarly, you have to accept a party of devotee. There are not different parties; they are of the same party. Just like the political parties may be different, but their aim is how to improve the condition of the country or the people. The aim is the same, but they may be a little different in their ways. Similarly, there are four āmnāya party. Āmnāya means disciplic succession. One party is coming from Lord Brahmā, and one party is coming from Lakṣmī, goddess of fortune, or the consort of Nārāyaṇa, Viṣṇu. That is called Brahma-sampradāya and the Śrī-sampradāya. Śrī. Śrī means Lakṣmī. Śrī means beauty. Śrī means fortune. Therefore, according to Vedic system, the "śrī" word is added before anyone's name, śrī. So there is Śrī-sampradāya, and there is Kumāra-sampradāya, and there is Rudra-sampradāya. There are four sampradāyas of Viṣṇu, er, Vaiṣṇava. So Brahma-sampradāya, Śrī-sampradāya, Rudra-sampradāya, and Kumāra-sampradāya-they are called āmnāya. If you want to know the truth, then you have to accept. Tattva āmnāyam. Tattva āmnāyaṁ yat pravadanti sāṅkhyam. This is Sāṅkhya philosophy. You try to understand the Absolute Truth through the disciplic succession of āmnāya, āmnāya.

So in the Vaiṣṇava sampradāya these four sampradāya, this Brahmā is Brahma-sampradāya and Śrī-sampradāya. The Brahma-sampradāya is, at the present moment, is represented by the Madhva-sampradāya. Just like we are belonging to the Madhva-gauḍīya-sampradāya, our original sampradāya from the Madhvācārya. So in that sampradāya, disciplic succession, there was Mādhavendra Purī. From Mādhavendra Purī his disciple is Īśvara Purī, and Īśvara Purī's disciple is Lord Caitanya. And we are coming through the disciplic succession of Lord Caitanya. Therefore our sampradāya is called Madhva-gauḍīya-sampradāya. But we are in the āmnāya-sampradāya. We are not upstart. We have not manufactured a sampradāya. It is coming from Lord Brahmā. Similarly, there is Rāmānuja-sampradāya. They are coming from Śrī-sampradāya. Similarly, there is Viṣṇu Svāmī. They are coming from Lord Śiva, Rudra-sampradāya. And there is Kumāra-sampradāya, Nimbāditya-sampradāya. So śāstra says, sampradāya-vihīnā ye mantrās te niṣphalā matāḥ: "If you do not belong to any sampradāya, party of bhakta or devotees, then niṣphalā matāḥ, your verdict or conclusion is niṣphala, without any fruit." It is not acceptable.

So our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to present the Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or the conclusion given by Kṛṣṇa, or the conclusion in the Bhagavad-gītā, in this āmnāya Sāṅkhya philosophy, disciple after disciple, not that "I know little more ABCD. I am, therefore, a big scholar. I can interpret Bhagavad-gītā in my own way." This is useless. This is useless. You cannot make your own comment. But that is not also good. So many commentaries which have been made without this āmnāya, Sāṅkhya process, they are useless. There is no effect. This is very essential. Therefore Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa says in the Fourth Chapter, evaṁ paramparā prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. That is required, paramparā, āmnāya, disciplic succession. Otherwise it will be useless. This is the secret of success. You have to accept the same philosophy as it was contemplated by Brahmā, by Nārada, by Brahmācārya, er, Madhvācārya, by Mādhavendra Purī, by Īśvara Purī, by... You cannot make any new thing beyond the scope of the āmnāya Sāṅkhya philosophy system. That is called āmnāya. Because we are imperfect. We must first of all know that we are all imperfect. However great scholar I may be, because my senses are imperfect, therefore, whatever conclusion I make by my so-called scholarship, that is imperfect. Therefore all these scientists, philosophers, they use this word "perhaps," "it may be," because there is no right conclusion. There is no right conclusion. He is simply speculating.

So speculative knowledge cannot be perfect. Just like we are sitting here. If there is some sound on the roof... Now we are, say, one hundred persons sitting here. We can speculate that "This sound may be for this reason." That, all of them, may be imperfect, and if somebody says from the roof that "This sound was caused for this reason," that is perfect. That is perfect because he has got direct experience. That I was speaking in the evening, that you have to accept Bhagavad-gītā by this āmnāya-patha. Tattva āmnāyam. Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna that this bhagavad-bhakti-yoga or Bhagavad-gītā yoga... That is a yoga. Yoga means which connects, and viyoga means which disconnect. So we are now disconnected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now we have to connect again our relationship. That is called yoga. That yoga is described in the Bhagavad-gītā as karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and aṣṭāṅga-yoga, and at last bhakti-yoga.

So bhakti-yoga is the last status of yoga system. Therefore it is said, bhakti-vitāna-yogam. Bhakti... Just like you are going upstair, and step by step, when you go to the topmost step, that is the end of your going up, similarly, the karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and dhyāna-yoga, and then bhakti-yoga, so ultimate end is bhakti-yoga. So if you have got, gone few steps, that is karma-yoga, if you have got few more steps, that is jñāna-yoga, and if you go few more steps, that is dhyāna-yoga, and when you reach the ultimate status, that is called bhakti-yoga. The step is the same. Mama vartmānuvartante manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ. Everyone is going, trying to reach the ultimate Absolute Truth. But it is simply a partial understanding. By jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, karma-yoga, you can understand partially the Absolute Truth. But bhakti-yoga you can understand completely. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. He does not say, "By jñāna, by karma, by meditation, one can understand Me fully." No. He does not say. He says clearly, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ: [Bg. 18.55] "Tattvataḥ, in truth what I am, that can be understood only by bhakti-yoga." You see Bhagavad-gītā.

So to understand the Absolute Truth you have to accept this sāṅkhya-yoga or bhakti-vitāna-yogam. Then you will understand very... Because question was, by Devahūti, that manda-dhīḥ sukhaṁ buddhyeya. Sukhaṁ buddhyeya: "Very easily, without any much trouble, I may understand. You kindly describe in this way-the Absolute Truth I can understand very easily." So that is bhakti-yoga. In the Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā it is said, susukhaṁ kartum avyayam [Bg. 9.2]. Susukham. If you practice bhakti-yoga, it is very easy, at the same time very pleasing, very pleasing. Susukhaṁ kartum avyayam. And avyayam. Avyayam means not deteriorating. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. If you execute even partially, it has got so potency that it will lead you more and more to the ultimate goal of life. This is called perfect sāṅkhya-yoga.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for giving education to the people of this sāṅkhya-yoga system or bhakti-yoga system, because it is the recommended process by authorities. And all the āmnāya, origin of the āmnāya, just like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, then Kapiladeva-here is Kapiladeva-they are mahājana. Mahājana means great authorities. Dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. It is very difficult to understand the path of perfection. Therefore the śāstra recommended that "You follow the mahājana." This is called āmnāya. "You follow the mahājana." And who are mahājana? They are also described in the śāstras: svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ [SB 6.3.20]. Svayambhū means Lord Brahmā. Lord Brahmā is... Another name is Svayambhū. He was found in the lotus flower emanating from the navel of Viṣṇu. So practically, he was not born of father and mother; therefore he is called Svayambhū. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ. Nārada Muni is authority. And Śambhu, Lord Śiva. Therefore there is Rudra-sampradāya, āmnāya, because he is authority. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kumāraḥ [SB 6.3.20], this Kumāra. And Kumāra means catuḥsana, Sanat-kumāra, catuḥsana. They are also authorities. And Kapiladeva, here, Devahūti-putra Kapiladeva, He is also authority. In this way, Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Kapiladeva, Manu, and Bhīṣmadeva, Janaka, Janaka Mahārāja, Bhīṣmadeva, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Prahlāda Mahārāja-in this way there are twelve authorities, and all of them are following the Sāṅkhya philosophy or bhakti-yoga, all of them.

So we have to accept one of these mahājana. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Then you will be successful. Tarko 'pratiṣṭhaḥ: If you want to learn the Absolute Truth by logic and argument, it will never be possible. Logician... You may be one logician, better logician than me, and another logician may be better than you. But the Absolute Truth is avan manasa-gocara. By logical arguments how you can reach? That is not possible. Tarko 'prati... Therefore it is useless waste of time. Tarko 'pratiṣṭhaḥ śrutayo vibhinnāḥ. Scriptures, even you take the Vedic scriptures, there are so many: four Vedas... Some of them are following the Yajur-veda, some of them following Ṛg-veda, some of them Sāma-veda, Atharva-veda. Then there are Upaniṣads. Then there are Purāṇas, then Brahma-sūtra, the Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata. They are all right. But because I am ill-advised, I take conclusion differently. Śrutayo vibhinnāḥ. Or you take Bible or Koran. So by simply reading all the scriptures, it is very difficult also. So śrutayo vibhinnā nāsāv munir yasya mataṁ na bhinnam. Muni, means thoughtful men, philosophers, they are also defeating, one thoughtful man, another thoughtful man. Unless he defeats another man, philosopher, he does not become a very big philosopher. Therefore it is said, nāsāv munir yasya mataṁ na bhinnam. Why? You cannot become a muni unless you propound a different system of philosophy. So this is the position. Dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyām. Therefore the truth of spiritual life is very complicated. It is very difficult to understand. Then how I shall be able to understand? The conclusion is mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. You follow the mahājana. Out of these twelve mahājana, you follow any one of them, and you will be successful.

So our proposition is that Kṛṣṇa is the original mahājana. Kṛṣṇa instructed Brahmā. Brahmā is also mahājana. And Kṛṣṇa instructed everyone. Just like Bhagavad-gītā. He is instructing everyone. How? Aham ādir hi devānām: [Bg 10.2] "All the demigods, they are subordinate to Me." Aham ādiḥ: "I am the original." Everyone has learned from Kṛṣṇa. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye. So Kṛṣṇa is teaching personally just like Kapiladeva is teaching personally. So you take Kapiladeva's philosophy, Sāṅkhya philosophy, Kṛṣṇa's philosophy, Bhagavad-gītā, but try to understand as He says. Don't interpret in the wrong way. So this is āmnāya-tattvam. So if we fix up the idea how to receive transcendental knowledge and how to practice it, if we simply take the instruction of these mahājana, āmnāya, so that will be very beneficial and easy also.

So Kapiladeva will describe the Sāṅkhya philosophy to His mother, and not only mother, but tanvābhijātaḥ. Naturally, if we take birth from my mother, I have got natural affection for my mother, but Devahūti is not ordinary mātā. She is very submissive. Therefore it is said that jāta-snehaḥ. Naturally there is affection, and when Kapiladeva saw that "This woman... Woman is supposed to be less intelligent, but she is very submissive and My mother," in both ways He became compassionate, that "She is eager to know about the truth, and she is so submissive, and after all, I have taken, I have received this body from this woman, My mother. So let Me try to give her the best of the philosophical conclusion." And that is Sāṅkhya philosophy. He will speak from the next verse.

Thank you very much. (end)



741202SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.32

-

Bombay, December 2, 1974



Nitāi: "Lord Kapila said: The senses are symbolic representations of the demigods, and their natural inclination is to work under the direction of the Vedic injunctions. As the senses are representatives of the demigods, so the mind is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The mind's natural duty is to serve. When that service spirit is engaged in devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, without any motive, that is far better even than salvation."



Prabhupāda:



devānāṁ guṇa-liṅgānām

ānuśravika-karmaṇām

sattva evaika-manaso

vṛttiḥ svābhāvikī tu yā

animittā bhāgavatī

bhaktiḥ siddher garīyasī

[SB 3.25.32]



Bhakti is transcendental even to mukti. People generally consider dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. In the beginning dharma, artha, economic development, kāma, sense gratification, then mokṣa, merging into the supreme one. But bhakti is above that. Siddher garīyasī. It is above mukti. Mukti is not very much important thing for a bhakta. Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura says,



bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syād

daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjali sevate 'smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ



This is the experience of Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura. He was a South Indian brāhmaṇa, very rich brāhmaṇa. But by bad association or something like that, he became a very staunch prostitute hunter. So he engaged all his income, money, everything, after one prostitute. Her name was Cintāmaṇi. So it is a very nice story. I am briefly describing. So one night... Every night he was to go to that prostitute, and one night it was very terribly raining. So the prostitute thought, "Now this night Bilvamaṅgala is not coming. It is terribly raining." But Bilvamaṅgala went there, crossing the river, and the door was closed. He jumped over the door catching a snake. In this way, very dangerously, he reached the prostitute's house. And the prostitute was astonished, that "How is this condition you could come here? Oh, you are so much attracted by this skin. If this much attraction you would have to Kṛṣṇa, how it would have been nice for you." So immediately he left the prostitute's house and went to Vṛndāvana.



The fact is in his previous life he executed devotional service up to bhāva-bhakti. So his Cintāmaṇi, that prostitute, became his guru, remind that "You are so much fond of prostitute. If this attraction would have been to Kṛṣṇa, how much successful you would have..." So it acted, and he left to Vṛndāvana and lived for seven hundred years. So he has a book, Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura. That is recommended by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for reading, Kṛṣṇa-karnāmṛta. So in that book he writes, bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syāt: "If we have got fixed-up devotion unto You, my Lord, Bhagavān," then daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ, "then very easily we can see Your form," divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ, "Your divine form," kiśora-mūrtiḥ, "very young boy." Kṛṣṇa is always kiśora. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Kiśora. Kiśora-mūrtiḥ. Kiśora means kaiśora, before marriage, before..., eleventh to sixteenth year. This is called kiśora age. So kiśora-mūrtiḥ. Kṛṣṇa is always kiśora-mūrtiḥ. So by devotional service, one can see the kiśora-mūrtiḥ of Kṛṣṇa very easily. Bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syāt: "If it is possible, then very easily we can see You."

When Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura was in Vṛndāvana he voluntarily plucked out his eyes. Because he was very much fond of seeing beauty of woman, so he thought, "These eyes are my enemies." So he personally plucked out his eyes. When he was going to Vṛndāvana, still he became attracted by a woman, and therefore... That woman, of course, was a very rich merchant's wife. So she told her husband that "This man is coming after me. What to do?" So that merchant received him. "Oh, he's saintly person. All right, you serve him." So Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura came to his senses. He said, "Mother, you give me the pins of your hair. So I am so much after the beauty of woman, so let me pluck out the eyes." So he made voluntarily blind. So he could not see, but still, Kṛṣṇa was coming in Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa is always in Vṛndāvana. So He was supplying milk. So divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ, he practically realized through bhakti. Therefore he wrote by his personal experience, bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syād daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ. And so far dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41], mokṣa, muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjali sevate asmān: "Mukti is not very important thing. She is always standing at my service," mukulitāñjali, "with folded hands, Mukti: 'My dear sir, what can I do for you?' " This is mukti's position.

So a devotee is not very much anxious for mukti because a devotee is always mukta. He is already mukta. Why should he... Suppose if you have got millions of dollars, why should you hanker after ten rupees? So bhakti is such a nice thing. But what is that bhakti? That bhakti is animittā bhāgavatī. That bhakti should be animittā, not with a motive that "I shall go to the temple and serve Kṛṣṇa for this purpose." Kṛṣṇa can fulfill any purpose you desire. It is not very difficult for Him, because He is almighty, full with all opulences. So if you want something, material happiness, from Kṛṣṇa, it is not very difficult for Kṛṣṇa. He can give you mukti even. But to ask from Kṛṣṇa anything else than bhakti is foolishness. That is foolishness. My Guru Mahārāja used to give this example: just like if you go to a rich man and he says, "Now whatever you like, you can ask from me. I shall give you," then if you ask him that "You give me a pinch of ash," is that very intelligent? Similarly, to... There is a story, that one old woman in the forest... I think it is in Aesop's Fable or somewhere. So she was carrying a big bundle of dry wood, and somehow or other, the bundle fell down. It was very heavy. So the old woman became very much disturbed, "Who will help me to get this bundle on my head?" So she began to call God, "God, help me." And God came, "What you want?" "Kindly help me to get this bundle on my head." (laughter) Just see. God came to giving benediction, and she wanted to "Give this bundle again on my head."

So we are doing the same thing. When we go to God we ask Him, "Kindly give me the bundle on my head. My family become may happy. I may have a large amount of money to enjoy material things." We ask that. That is our foolishness. Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches us, therefore, that actually, if you want something from God, that should be only begging for His service. This Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra means addressing God, "Kṛṣṇa," "Hari," and His energy Harā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī or Lakṣmījī, Hare: "O this internal potency of Kṛṣṇa..." Hara is Kṛṣṇa's internal potency. The external potency is Durgā, and the internal potency is Rādhārāṇī. Jaya Rādhe. So this is daivī-prakṛti. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ [Bg. 9.13]. The devotees, they take shelter of the daivī-prakṛti, Rādhārāṇī, Lakṣmījī. They worship, therefore, Vaiṣṇava, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, Sītā-Rāma, the first of all, the energy. The energy. So this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is first addressing the energy, the internal energy, potency, of Kṛṣṇa. Hare. From Harā to Hare. That is the sambodhana. So Hare Kṛṣṇa: "O Rādhārāṇī, or Lakṣmī, or Sītā, and Kṛṣṇa, or Rāma, or Nārāyaṇa"-the same thing. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, addressing Them, "O my Lord, O my Lord's energy." So when you address somebody, you want to ask something. So if they reply, "Yes, why you are calling?" then we're calling, "Please engage me in Your service." This is the prayer, not that "Give me money" or "Give me beautiful wife" or many followers. This is material hankering.

Everyone wants some prestigious position, lābha pūjā pratiṣṭhā, some material profit, lābha, and prestigious position so that people will give him salaam, minister, president, and to become very famous, historically very famous. These are material hankerings. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, "No." Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. We don't want. This is animittā bhakti. Nimittā, for some certain reason, if you become a bhakta, then you are not a śuddha-bhakta. You are a viddha(?)-bhakta, a polluted bhakta. Pure bhakti is anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], zero. Material hankerings, anything material, hankering, should be void. The void philosophy, nirvāṇa, that indicates that you should completely finish these material desires. That is Lord Buddha's philosophy, nirvāṇa. Nirvāṇa means material desires, to make it void, no more. Lord Buddha said up to that. Because the people who were following him, they were not so expert, advanced; therefore he did not say what is after giving up every desires. Because desireless it cannot be. Desires... People say that "You become desireless. Give up your all desires." That give up all desires means you give up your material desires, because you cannot be desireless. Then you are dead body. But we are eternal living entity. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. We are getting different types of body on account of different desires. So I become desireless of this habit; then I desire another habit. So that is going on.

So desireless is not possible. Desirelessness means you have to purify your desire. Don't desire anything except the service of Kṛṣṇa. That is desirelessness, animittā. Animittā bhaktiḥ siddher garīyasī. If you come to that position... As Caitanya Mahāprabhu, teaching us, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye, mama janmani janmanīśvare... [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. He says, janmani janmani, "birth after birth." That means He does not require even salvation, because salvation means apunar bhava-janma, no more janma, no more birth. No more birth-there are two kinds of more more birth. For the Māyāvādīs, or impersonalists, they want to stop birth, to merge into the existence of the Supreme, brahma-nirvāṇa. Brahma-nirvāṇa... The Buddha philosophy teaches nirvāṇa, devoid of all material desires, that much. He does not give any more. Śaṅkarācārya gives further, more, that brahma-nirvāṇa, that "You become desireless of this material world, but you enter, merge into Brahman." That is called brahma-nirvāṇa. And the Vaiṣṇava philosopher says that "You make null and void all your material desires, enter into Brahman and be engaged in the service of the Lord." This is called bhakti. So brahma-nirvāṇa is also siddhi, but more than that siddhi is to be engaged in the service, Brahman service.

That service is not ordinary service. The service to the Lord is not to be calculated as equal to this material service. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they cannot understand it. But Kṛṣṇa says personally that this devotional service is in the transcendental platform, Brahman service. Therefore He says, māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate [Bg. 14.26]. This bhakti-yoga, one who is actually employed, engaged in pure devotional ser..., animittā, without any motives, without any material purpose, that is real spiritual service.

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. That service is on the Brahman platform.



So some people, they do not know that there is another platform of service or another platform of activities which is called Brahman activities, because those who are grossly in the bodily concept of life, they have no information there is Brahman, or soul, within this body. So mukti means to deliver that Brahman from this material encagement. But actually, if you don't give him engagement, because actually the soul is working... That everyone can appreciate. We are very active. "Oh, I am prime minister." "I am president," "I am Birla," "I am Srila (?)," and so many things. That's all right. But is... That prime minister is this body or the soul? Because as soon as the soul is out of the body, what is the value of this prime minister's body? It is no more useful-finished. That we do not understand. Actually, the soul is working in different capacities. Either as prime minister or Lord Brahmā, King Indra, or the cat, or dog, or the insect, the soul is working in different atmosphere, in different body.

So the perfection of these activities, of the soul, that he has got already indriyas... We are acting with our hands, legs, ears, eyes, nose, everything, karmendriya. Ten kinds of activities are being performed by the senses, and there are five kinds of sense objects, tanmātra, fifteen, and the eight elements material, earth, water, fire. So fifteen and eight, twenty-three, and the soul. This is twenty-four. That is the subject matter of Sāṅkhya philosophy, how these twenty-four different items are combined together and work. This is the study of Sāṅkhya philosophy. Yesterday we talked about sāṅkhyam. Tattvāmnāyaṁ yat pravadanti sāṅkhyam. So there is material Sāṅkhya philosophers. They (they're) simply satisfied, simply studying these twenty-four types of elements. But the real Sāṅkhya philosophy, as propounded by Kapiladeva, that is bhakti. That is... He has said, bhakti-vitāna-yogam. The activities of the spiritual field, that is Sāṅkhya philosophy, not of the material fields. In the material field you will find these twenty-four kinds of elements analyzed, but beyond these twenty-four there is soul, and the soul is acting. That is called spiritual activities, or bhakti-yoga.

So because it is transcendental to material activities, therefore in the bhakti-yoga there is no such desire for material benefit, animittā. Therefore it is said, animittā. Here all activities are done for some material profit. Nobody is... Even the so-called political leaders sacrifice everything. That's all right. But everything is for material benefit. Even in our country a big man like Mahatma Gandhi, he sacrificed everything-his family, his profession. And many other leaders... But what for they were working? They were working for some material benefits, that's all, not for any spiritual benefit. So that is not transcendental activities. That is material activities, expanded material thoughts. Somebody is working for his family or somebody is working for himself, like animals, the cats and dogs. They work for himself. And human being, they're little advanced. They work for family, for wife, children, or, further extended, for society, for community, for nation. You can expand. Even international. They are all material activities, nimittā, simply expanded, expanded. Suppose if you steal for yourself and if you steal for your family or if you steal for your community, that stealing is there. Because you are stealing for greater family, that does not mean that you are not a thief.

There was a story, Alexander and the thief. The Alexander arrested one thief, big dacoit, plunderer. So when he explained, "My dear sir, Alexander, so what is the difference between you and me? I am also plunderer; you are also plunderer. I am a small plunderer; you are a big plunderer. So where is the difference in quality?" So Alexander the Great, he was very sensible. He released him: "Yes, there is no difference." So to become a big thief, big plunderer, does not mean that he is advanced. Similarly, our sense, for personal sense gratification or my family's sense gratification or for my nation's sense gratification-that is sense gratification. That is not spiritual activity. That is material activity.

So long you will have desire for sense gratification, localized or expanded, the quality does not change. The quality will change when this sense gratification will be transferred to Kṛṣṇa, not sense gratification for me, for my family, for my society, for my nation, or for my species. Just like there are many philanthropists. They are busy doing welfare activities for the human race, but they are not interested for the benefit of the animal race. "Animal race should be slaughtered, and human race shall eat." This is their philosophy. But we have already discussed Kapiladeva's philosophy, suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. Suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. The animal has got also body; we have also got body. But a Vaiṣṇava is not only a friend to the human society, but he is friend to the animal society also, the bird society, tree society, every society. A Vaiṣṇava does not like unnecessarily a tree should be cut down. That is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. A Vaiṣṇava does not like to trample over an ant. That is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Sarva-dehinām. Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām [SB 3.25.21]. We have already discussed this verse.

So how this can be possible? This suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām is possible when one has surrendered himself to the Supreme Being. On His account, because he has surrendered to the Supreme Being, he is friend to all living being. Artificially you cannot. Artificially you select some section, the poorer section, and worship him like Nārāyaṇa, and you call him daridra-nārāyaṇa. But a devotee, if he has got vision of Nārāyaṇa, he will see the daridra-nārāyaṇa, the rich Nārāyaṇa, the chāga-nārāyaṇa, and the every Nārāyaṇa, paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. Why a section should be called Nārāyaṇa? If you have got such broader vision, that you are seeing Nārāyaṇa in everything, then what the rich man has done? He is also Nārāyaṇa. And the goat has... He is also Nārāyaṇa. The cow, he is also Nārāyaṇa. Then you should... If you have such broader vision, that you see everywhere Nārāyaṇa, then why should you specify a section, daridra-nārāyaṇa?

So it is not possible. So long one is not a devotee, one who is not on the transcendental platform, this equal vision is not possible. It is crippled, all crippled. Therefore bhakti-yoga should be animittā, ahaitukī. These words are used. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, ahaitukī [SB 1.2.6]. "I am serving Kṛṣṇa..." The devotee is serving Kṛṣṇa not with any purpose; just to satisfy Him, not any purpose, my profit-Kṛṣṇa's profit. That is the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā. I... Several times we have repeated. Arjuna, on his own account, he was not willing to fight. "No, no, Kṛṣṇa, I will not fight. The other side, they are my relatives, my brother, my nephews. No, no, I cannot kill them." But when he understood that "Kṛṣṇa wants this fight," he said, "Oh, yes, I shall do." Kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73]. So this is bhakti, that we have to do anything for pleasing Kṛṣṇa. That is called animittā, no condition. Ahaitukī. Ahaitukī means no condition or animittā, no reason. Everything should be done for Kṛṣṇa.

So animittā bhāgavatī bhaktiḥ siddher garīyasī. That is better than siddhi. Siddhi means self-realization or Brahman realization. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says also. What Kṛṣṇa says and what Kapiladeva says, they are the same thing. Therefore here it is also said, bhagavān uvāca. And in the Bhagavad-gītā also, you will find, bhagavān uvāca. Never said, kṛṣṇa uvāca or kapila uvāca, because They are Bhagavān. So those who are self-realized soul, who know what is Bhagavān, so instead of speaking kapiladeva uvāca, he says, Vyāsadeva says... Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is compiled by Śrīmad Vyāsadeva. So as Bhagavad-gītā also, it was heard by Arjuna, it was released to Sañjaya, and then, from Sañjaya heard Vyāsadeva, and he made it recorded in writing in Mahābhārata... So he says, bhagavān uvāca. Bhagavān uvāca means that is the perfect version. There is no mistake. If some ordinary says, there will be so many defects and cheating, because ordinary person has no perfect knowledge. He may be very, very advanced scholar, but that does not mean he is perfect. Perfection is different thing. Perfection means there should be no mistake, no illusion, no cheating, and no imperfections of the senses. That is perfection. And therefore it is said here, bhagavān uvāca. Bhagavān is all-perfect. Therefore we should take knowledge from Bhagavān or one who speaks according to the version of Bhagavān. We should not hear anybody else. That is imperfect.

So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement on this principle. We are speaking not anything manufactured by us. That is not our business. Because how we can manufacture? We are defective. We are deficient, imperfect. What is the use of my philosophy? What is the use of my thinking? Generally they say, "I think," "In my opinion." He does not think that "I am a rascal. I have no value of my opinion." He thinks that he is something very big. No. Because our senses are imperfect, whatever knowledge we have gathered by our sense speculation, that is imperfect. That cannot be perfect. Therefore we have discussed already, tattva āmnāyam. We have to receive knowledge from disciplic succession, tattva. Then we will understand the truth. Tattvāmnāyam. This subject matter we have discussed already, āmnāyam, evaṁ paramparā, that we should not manufacture knowledge. We should take knowledge from the perfect. Just like here it is said, bhagavān uvāca. In the Bhagavad-gītā also, bhagavān uvāca. If we follow this āmnāya system, then we become guru.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said who is guru. He asked everyone to become guru. His mission is that people are suffering all over the world for want of this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or God consciousness. That's a fact. So He is advising everyone, especially those who are born in India,

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



That is His mission. He is requesting every Indian, every Indian, because they have got the facility for understanding what is Bhagavad-gītā, what is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, what is Vedas. They have got this opportunity. Therefore He says, janma sārthaka kari': "You have taken your birth in India. You make your life successful by taking advantage of these scriptures and then assimilate the knowledge and preach all over the world." They are in darkness. That is being repeatedly said. But we are not taking advantage of. We are so misfortunate. We are misguided by the so-called leaders that we are neglecting this valuable literature which is spoken by Bhagavān. We are talking of some nonsense. That is our misfortune. So we have to take knowledge from Bhagavān and spread it all over the world. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... So He says that "You become guru." He says, āmāra ājñāya guru hañā: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] "By My order." Don't become a so-called guru, manufactured guru. "You become guru by following My instruction." Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā.



Guru means who follows the predecessor, authorized predecessor. He is guru. Not that everyone is guru. So therefore we have to follow the superior order. Then we become guru, not that by cheating others we become guru. No. That is cheater. That is not teacher. Guru means who is following the superior order. The superior order is Kṛṣṇa or His representative. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa. He is ordering, āmāra ājñāya, "By My order," guru hañā, "you become guru." "Sir, it is very difficult to become guru. I have no education. I have no culture. I am not born in a very high family. I am very low." A devotee always thinks like that. He never thinks that "I have become very great man." Just like Caitanya-caritāmṛta, author of, he says, purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha [Cc. Ādi 5.205]. Purīṣa, purīṣa means stool, and there are worms in the stool. So Caitanya-caritāmṛta author is saying that "I am lower than the worms in the stool." That is Vaiṣṇava conception. Tṛṇād api sunīcena. He is very humble. He never says, "Oh, I am the Supreme. I have become God." A most rascal, foolish. So that is not... Therefore we have to follow. If we actually want to become guru, there is necessity of many thousands of gurus to teach this cheated public. But how to become guru? That is... Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, āmāra ājñāya: "By My order." "What is Your order, Sir?" Yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Then you become guru. You simply advise people to follow Kṛṣṇa's instruction. Then you become guru.

So that is our mission. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that we are simply trying to convince people what Kṛṣṇa has said, that's all. We are not manufacturing anything. So that is our business. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. We are training our disciples "Just always think of Kṛṣṇa, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and become Kṛṣṇa's devotee, offer Him prasādam, dress Him nicely." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī: "Worship Me." Worship Kṛṣṇa, the same thing. Kṛṣṇa says, "Worship Me"; we are saying, "Worship Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa says, "Surrender unto Me"; we are saying, "Surrender to Kṛṣṇa." So we have no difficulty. To become a guru there is no difficulty, provided we repeat the same thing as Kṛṣṇa says. And if you say something more or less, then you are not a guru. Very simple thing. Very simple thing.

So that is advised here, animittā bhāgavatī, bhāgavatī bhaktiḥ. You cannot manufacture the ways of bhakti. Bhāgavatī, what is advised by Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. You cannot manufacture a line of dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma is the law given by the Supreme Lord. You cannot manufacture, "This dharma, that dharma, this dhar..." No. Dharma is one. Dharma cannot be different. Dharma means to abide by the orders of God. This is dharma. But if you do not know God, if you do not know what is order, then you must manufacture something rubbish and fight amongst yourself. That is not dharma.

Therefore Bhāgavata says, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] "All cheating types of dharma is rejected and kicked out from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." Dharmaḥ projjhita. Projjhita, prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa ujjhita, just like you collect all dust and throw it. Similarly, this Bhāgavata-dharma is not a cheating dharma. Bhāgavata-dharma means in relation with the Supreme Lord. Bhāgavatī bhaktiḥ. Bhakti can be applied only to Bhagavān. Bhakti means the business between Bhagavān and bhakta. That is bhakti. If there is no Bhagavān then where is bhakti? And where is bhakta? If Bhagavān is zero, then where is bhakti? Bhakti means the transaction between Bhagavān and bhakta. Just like here, the Bhagavān is there, and bhaktas are there, and the transaction is dressing the Bhagavān, feeding the Bhagavān, chanting the Bhagavān's name, calling people to hear about Bhagavān, to publish books about Bhagavān. This is bhakti, bhakti bhāgavatī, simply in relation with Bhagavān, no other business, animittā, without any material desire. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11]. There is no touch even of jñāna. Jñāna means speculation. And trying to understand the Absolute Truth by his... [break]

jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me

yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca

gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā



These are the instruction of Lord Kṛṣṇa to Brahmā. Sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca. Aṅga, this bhakti-aṅga, this śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23], these are different, I mean to say, branches, or not actually branches, different phases or features of bhakti, to hear just like we are hearing and chanting. I am speaking, chanting; you are hearing. This is bhakti. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. What we are chanting and hearing? Viṣṇu, not any other one. No. Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. You cannot say any other demigod. No. That is material. That is material. If you try to hear about some great person or demigod, that is material. But when you hear and talk about Viṣṇu, that is bhakti. This is bhakti, different processes. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam.



So in this way we have to execute, as it is said, animittā bhāgavatī bhaktiḥ, which is siddher garīyasī... [break] (end)



741203SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.33-34

-

Bombay, December 3, 1974



Nitāi: "...service, dissolves the subtle body of the living entity without separate effort, just as fire in the stomach digests all that we eat." (devotees chant responsively:) Na-never; eka-ātmatām-merging into oneness; me-My; spṛhayanti-they desire; kecit-any; mat-pāda-sevā-the service of My lotus feet; abhiratāḥ-engaged in; mat-īhāḥ-endeavoring to attain Me; ye-those who; anyonyataḥ-mutually; bhāgavatāḥ-pure devotees; prasajya-assembling; sabhājayante-glorify; mama-My; pauruṣāṇi-glorious activities. (translation:) "A pure devotee, who is attached to the activities of devotional service and who always engages in the service of My lotus feet, never desires to become one with Me. Such a devotee, who is unflinchingly engaged, always glorifies My pastimes and activities."



Prabhupāda:



jarayaty āśu yā kośaṁ

nigīrṇam analo yathā

[SB 3.25.33]



naikātmatāṁ me spṛhayanti kecin

mat-pāda-sevābhiratā mad-īhāḥ

ye 'nyonyato bhāgavatāḥ prasajya

sabhājayante mama pauruṣāṇi

[SB 3.25.34]



So jarayaty āśu yā kośam. Kośam means covering. We have got, the spirit soul has got two kinds of covering. As Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehinaḥ, the proprietor or the occupier... Proprietor is not actually. The occupier. I have several times explained that this body, gross and subtle, both the bodies... Just like shirt and coat covering of the body, similarly, there are two kinds of covering of the body: subtle body and gross body. The gross body is made of earth, water, fire, air, sky, and the subtle body is made of mind, intelligence, and ego.



There are eight kinds of material elements. Five are gross-we can see-and three are very subtle-we cannot see. And the soul is still more subtle.

indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur

indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ

manasas tu parā buddhir

yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ

[Bg. 3.42]



We have got experience of this body. That is gross experience. Anyone can see. I see your body; you see my body. But you don't see me actually; I don't see you actually. We see or perceive your presence when the soul is off from the body. Then we cry, "Oh, my friend has gone away. My friend has gone away." Why your friend has gone away? He is lying here. Then we can perceive that "My real friend or my real father, the soul, who is different from this body..." And now, at the present moment, "He is my father, he is my friend, who is this body"-that is animal vision. That is not human being vision. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke...sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Animals also see, "Here is a friend dog. Here is my mother dog."



So we have no eyes to see. So we cannot see even the soul, minute soul, and how we can see God in these blunt eyes? And still we want to see God. We cannot see even you; you cannot see me. We are part and parcel of God. And how you can see God? Therefore it is said, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ: [Cc. Madhya 17.136] "The present senses is incapable of seeing God." Or seeing you and me. There is no spiritual vision. But we can perceive. Just like after death we can understand there was something which has gone away: "Now, the body which I was seeing is neither my father nor my friend. It is a lump of matter, that's all." This is knowledge.

So one who understands this body as a lump of matter before death, he is called wise. Jñāna-cakṣusā: "He sees the soul by the eyes of knowledge." Paśyati jñāna-cakṣusā. Those who are not in the platform of jñāna, on the gross platform of the animals, they cannot see the soul or Bhagavān, Supersoul. So it requires many, many births. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. After practicing karma... Generally, people are karmīs. Karmīs means gross fruitive worker to get some profit for material benefit. They are called karmīs. So out of many millions and thousands of karmīs, one is jñānī. Jñānī means one who understands that "I am not this body." The karmīs cannot understand. They are in the gross field. Jñānī can understand that "I am not this body." Brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. And out of many millions of jñānīs, one becomes liberated. Liberated means "I am not this body." Actually, he understands that "I am soul." But sometimes the Māyāvādīs, they become liberated, but they think, "Because I am spirit soul, therefore I am one with the Supreme." So 'ham. So 'ham. Actually, I am spirit soul. I am equal in quality. But that does not mean I am the Supreme Soul. Therefore in the next verse you will find: naikātmatāṁ me spṛhayanti kecit. The devotees are not so fool that they will desire to become one with the Supreme, Na ekātmatām, because they are in full knowledge. And those who are not full in knowledge, in full knowledge, and, but thinking that they have become liberated, conception of this body... That is theoretical, not practical. Theoretical. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. They are thinking that they have become now liberated, Nārāyaṇa. Now he has become equal with Nārāyaṇa. Therefore the Māyāvādīs, because they have become Nārāyaṇa, one with Nārāyaṇa, they are addressing one another, "Namo nārāyaṇāya." "You are Nārāyaṇa, I am Nārāyaṇa, and the everyone is Nārāyaṇa." Then daridra-nārāyaṇa, rich Nārāyaṇa, this Nārāyaṇa.

But this is not the verdict of the devotee. Mat-pāda-sevā abhiratā mad-īhāḥ. Those who are devotees, fully engaged in the service of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, mat-pāda-sevā abhiratāḥ. Abhi means constantly, and ratāḥ means attached, abhiratāḥ-they do not think like that. They do not like that nonsense idea, that "I shall become one with..." How it is? If I am one with the Supreme, how I have fallen in this condition? No. I am not one. I am one in quality, a small particle. We have explained several times that we are also constitutionally the same spirit identity as God is. But we are aṁśa. Just like gold mine and a small particle of gold. You can say, "This is gold," and the gold in the mine, big mine, many millions of tons of gold... Quality is the same. A drop of sea water and the vast sea, the chemical composition is the same, the drop of water. But you cannot say that this small particle or drop of water is equal to the sea. That is nonsense. That is nonsense. That means less intelligent. Less intelligence.

So those who are less intelligence, they want to become one. But those who are actually in knowledge, for them, it is said, na ekātmatāṁ spṛhayanti. They never even desire that "I shall become one with..." That is śuddha-bhakta. Just like one gentleman was speaking that "Even the Māyāvādīs, they worship sometimes Lord Viṣṇu." Yes, they do. That is... They do not actually believe in the form of Viṣṇu, but they take it as a means, a imagination, to imagine the form of Viṣṇu. This is Māyāvāda philosophy. Sādhakānāṁ hitārthāya brāhmaṇaḥ rūpa-kalpanaḥ.(?) They imagine. Just like they are worshiping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādī will say, "This is imagination. Actually, the Absolute Truth has no rūpa, no form." That is impersonalism. They do not know that here is the actual form, Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Vigraha. Vigraha means who has got form. They do not know that. Therefore they mistake that that is not... There are many so-called Vaiṣṇavas. They are worshiping Viṣṇu, but thinking of becoming one with the Supreme, imagining. They cannot be one. How it can be? That is not possible. They sometimes give the example: the drop of water, when it mixes with the vast mass of water in the sea, it becomes one. But does it actually become so? No. According to scientific division these, there are the atomic molecules of water. So each molecule and atom is different from one another. Sometimes they call cell or they call molecule. So it app... Just like the sunshine. The sunshine is combination of many millions and trillions of small shining particles. That is sunshine. But each particle has got individual identity. They are not homogeneous. But because we have no eyes to see such a small atomic division, therefore we think that they are one. No. Even physically they are different. Similarly, although we are very small particle, we are different identity, not one.

In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa has explained that "All these soldiers and kings who have assembled here, you and Me, all of us we existed in the past, and we are now present, and in the future also, we shall exist." But Kṛṣṇa never said that "Arjuna, you and Me and all these soldiers or kings, we shall become one." He never said. He never said. "We shall keep our individuality." This is knowledge. And in another place Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa or God sanātana, eternally, not that at the present moment I have become separated from the spirit soul, and when I shall be uncovered by this gross and subtle body, we shall become one. Their theory is like that. Ghaṭākāśa, poṭākāśa. Just like ghaṭa, a pot. In the pot there is also sky, and outside the pot there is also sky. Outside the pot there is big sky, and within the sky, within the pot, a small sky. But if you break the pot, then small sky becomes one with the big sky. This is Māyāvāda theory. But Kṛṣṇa says that "These living entities, they are eternally My parts and parcel, small particle." It is not that sometimes they were one, homogeneous; now they have become part. That we do not get.

Therefore those who have got complete knowledge, they never expect like that: "I shall become one with the Supreme." Na eka, ekātmatām. Na ekātmatāṁ me spṛhayanti. They even hate to desire it. They simply want to remain... That is the constitutional position. Here we are also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, although we are now covered by this material body. That can be dissolved. This material, it can be easily dissolved by bhakti-yoga. Therefore it is said that jarayaty āśu yā kośaṁ nigīrṇam analo yathā. Just like if you have got good digestive power, you eat anything-it will be digested. You will not find any difficulty. Similarly, if you have got strong bhakti-yoga, then you are not any more in material body. You are free. You are in spiritual body. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that māṁ ca yaḥ avyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate. Avyabhicāreṇa means without any deviation. Śuddha-bhakti, pure devotional service. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. They... Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam means any kind of material desire. The, this desire, that "I shall become one with the Supreme," that is also material desire. That is not spiritual desire. That is artificial.

Now, just like we want to beco..., to hold very big post. So when we are baffled, then we want to become one with the Supreme, Nārāyaṇa. That means "Nārāyaṇa is the husband of Lakṣmī, so I shall become the husband of Lakṣmī. Now, in this material world, I am hankering after Lakṣmī, but I could not get it. Now let me become the husband of..." This is their theory. They want to become Nārāyaṇa. Such a foolish theory. Nārāyaṇa is the Lakṣmī-pati. Can anyone attempt to enjoy Lakṣmījī? Because they are not bhaktas, they think like that, this rascaldom. How I can be Nārāyaṇa? That is not possible.

In the śāstra it says that,

yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vīkṣeta

sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam

[Cc. Madhya 18.116]



You cannot equalize Nārāyaṇa even with such exalted demigods as like Lord Śiva or Lord Brahmā. Amongst the devas, demigods, Lord Śiva is called Mahādeva. He is the foremost demigod, and similarly Brahmā. Brahmā is less than Lord Śiva, but because in this material world Brahmā appeared to be the father of Rudra, therefore he is given a little more respect. But actually, Lord Śiva is more than Lord Brahmā. But even Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā-rudrādi-daivataiḥ-Rudra means Śiva and Brahmā means..., not..., they also cannot be equalized with Nārāyaṇa. And we are so foolish that we are making daridra-nārāyaṇa: "Nārāyaṇa has become daridra." Śāstra says, "Don't equalize even with such exalted demigods like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva," and these foolish rascals, they are making equal Nārāyaṇa with daridra. How Nārāyaṇa can be daridra? He is Lakṣmī-pati. We are asking for the favor of mother Lakṣmī, "Give me some money, mother." Dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi rūpavatī-bhāryāṁ dehi, dehi, dehi. And Nārāyaṇa is worshiped by Lakṣmījī. Not one Lakṣmījī, śata-sahasra. Lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam [Bs. 5.29]. Nārāyaṇa is being worshiped by many thousands of goddess of fortune, sambhrama, with great fear. Just like Rukmiṇī-devī. She is Lakṣmī-devī, and she was always afraid of Kṛṣṇa, that "He may not leave me away," always afraid. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa was joking with Rukmiṇī-devī, "My dear Rukmiṇī-devī, rāja-kanyā, you are the daughter of a king, and you, it was better you could have married Śiśupāla. I am simply a cowherd boy." In this way, husband and wife, joking. Kṛṣṇa was joking. And Lakṣmī, Rukmiṇī-devī, became so afraid that immediately she fainted, that "Kṛṣṇa is now finding out the way to give me up." This is called lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam [Bs. 5.29]. The Lakṣmīs are so with great respect and that Nārāyaṇa has become daridra. Just see the logic.



So these are all rascal philosophy. This is not. Nobody should become so ambitious as to become one with the Supreme. That is not very good intelligence. Good intelligence is that "I am eternal part and parcel of Nārāyaṇa, and it is the duty of the part and parcel to serve the whole." That is correct philosophy. Just like this finger is part and parcel of my body, so it is the duty of the finger to serve the whole body. Whenever I ask any service from the finger, "Come here," it is coming here. "Come here," it is coming here, "Come here." This is the duty. That is the normal condition. If at once with my order the finger cannot come here or come here, then it is diseased-because it cannot give service. So, so long as we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Lord, our duty is to give service. That is the description given by Lord Caitanya. Everywhere in every śāstra, that is the... Jīvera 'svarūpa' haya-nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Eternally we are servant.

So as in this material condition... Of course, a devotee is not under material condition. As soon as he becomes servant of Kṛṣṇa and gives pure devotional service with love and faith, immediately he becomes spiritually situated. Therefore it is said, jarayaty āśu yā kośaṁ nigīrṇam analo yathā. Just like if you put something in the fire, immediately it is burned and turned into ashes, similarly, as soon as you put yourself in the devotional service without any material desire, anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], immediately your subtle body and gross body become dissolved; you remain only spirit soul, immediately. The same example is given here. Immediately. Just like Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66], as "you surrender." Then what...? Immediately you become purified. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyaḥ. We are contaminated by sinful activities. We are getting different types of bodies on account of our sinful activities-or pious activities, you take it. Pious activity or sinful activities, they, they are meant for giving you different types of body. That is suffering.

So long you will have this material body, you will have to suffer. You cannot avoid it. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. That is stated in the Bha... Mātrā-sparśāḥ. What is the suffering? Suffering means on account of this body. The same water, it is very pleasing during summer, and the same water, it is very distressing in winter. So water is the same, but it is distressing and pleasing on account of this body. Very simple thing, one can understand. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ. The water is neither pleasing nor distressing. It is due to my this body and bodily concepts of life, we are suffering or enjoying, so-called enjoying, so-called suffering. Actually, I am the spirit soul. I am different from this body, gross body and subtle body. I have no suffering, no, I mean to say, enjoying. It is simply my imagination. Therefore a mukta-puruṣa, a liberated person, he is not affected by this so-called suffering or enjoying. That is called liberation.

So our actual constitutional position is that we are small particle of Nārāyaṇa. And our business is, because we are part and parcel of Nārāyaṇa... Why Nārāyaṇa has created? Ekaṁ bahu syām: "The Nārāyaṇa has become many." Why He has become many? To enjoy. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). He has created us. Just like a gentleman accepts a wife, putrārthe kriyate bhāryā, that is the aim, that "If I get one wife, I'll get children." Putra-piṇḍa-prayojanam. This is the spiritual value of begetting children, that "Putra will offer piṇḍa. So in my next life I am in difficulty; by offering piṇḍa, he will save me." This is the purpose of putrotpāda. Pu means pun-nāmno narakāt. Pun-nāmno narakāt. Tra means trāyate, "delivers." Pun-nāmno narakāt trāyate iti putraḥ. This is the meaning of putra. But if the putra is going himself to the pun-nāmno narakāt, then who will deliver me? That is the position now. Nobody is offering śrāddha ceremony. Nobody believes in that. So anyway, if a man taking the responsibility of maintaining wife and children, why? Because he thinking that "I will enjoy life. I will enjoy good atmosphere." Everyone is trying to that. Any family you go in this evening, they are trying to enjoy life with wife and children and friends. Therefore they are taking the responsibility.

So this is ānanda, but because in this material world the ānanda is being converted into distress... But you can get the ānanda when you are with the supreme father, Kṛṣṇa. We are all children of the supreme father.

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad-yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



Kṛṣṇa says that He is the father. He has created for enjoyment, not for distressing the children and Himself. But we children of Kṛṣṇa, we have given up the supreme father. We wanted to enjoy independently; therefore we are suffering. Just like if a big man's, very rich man's son, he gives up his home and he want to live and enjoy life independently, it is not possible. Therefore our duty is to go back to home, back to Godhead, again return to our original father, Kṛṣṇa. That will give us happiness. Kṛṣṇa is full of opulences, and He has got enough money, enough strength, enough beauty, everything enough, unlimitedly. So if we go to our original father, back to home, back to Godhead, then we can also enjoy with Him unlimitedly. That is the philosophy, not that... You cannot enjoy... Father has given you birth. You are separate entity from the father. And if you are suffering, if you say father, "My dear father, I am very much suffering. You make me again one with you," is it very good proposal? Father says, "I have begotten you separately to enjoy. You remain separate, I remain separate, and we enjoy. And you are now asking to become one with me? What is this nonsense?"



So this Māyāvādī philosophy, to become one with the supreme father, is like that. They are suffering here. Kṛṣṇa has created. Kṛṣṇa created him to enjoy with his company, but he did not like that. He suffered in this material world. Now he's thinking of becoming one with the father. What is this? So this is... Therefore here it is said, naikātmatāṁ me spṛhayanti kecit. No pure devotee will desire like that. It is foolish proposal. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. They are called aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ, whose intelligence is not yet clear or purified. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. They are thinking, "Now we have become spiritually realized, vimukta, liberated from material bondage." Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Patanty adhaḥ. Now, they are thinking, "Now we are liberated. We have become Nārāyaṇa." Vimukta-māninaḥ. They are thinking like that. Actually, they are not liberated. That is another, the last snare of māyā, that "You are God." Māyā is still talking that to bewilder him. Māyā's business is to bewilder the living entity. So this is the last snare, that to become one with the Supreme. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-mā...tvayy asta-bhāvāt. Because they have no information that they can go back to home, back to Godhead, and enjoy the company of the Supreme Lord, they think that to become one with the Supreme, that is the highest perfection.

But that is not the perfection. Because our original constitutional position is... Kṛṣṇa, or God, created us to enjoy the company. Just like we are sitting together; we are enjoying. Suppose you had..., none of you would have come here, so what I would have enjoyed alone? So variety is the mother of enjoyment. Therefore real enjoyment is in Kṛṣṇa's company. Therefore a devotee who is actually in knowledge, na ekātmatām. Na ekātmatām. To become one with the Supreme, they never desire. They never desire. They... Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu is saying, mama janmani janmani īśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi: "My dear Lord, I do not want to stop even." Mukti means stopping of this repetition of birth, death. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, mama janmani janmani: "Let Me take birth after birth. It doesn't matter. But let Me be engaged in Your service." That is ānanda. That is real ānanda, not that you become one with...

And one means you cannot enter into the spiritual planets. There are so many, not devotees but spiritualists; they want to become one. That oneness means that you remain outside the spiritual planet in the brahmajyoti, in the rays. We are part and parcel of the rays. Just like I have given the example: the sun rays means combination of so many bright, minute, atomic particles. Similarly, we can remain as atomic soul outside. Just like this sunshine is outside the sphere of the sun globe. It is outside. It is not... Inside also, that is brightness, but the sunshine is outside the sun globe, and inside there is sun-god. That information we get from Bhagavad-gītā. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. The sun planet is also a planet like this, but it is fiery planet. And it is earthly planet. The sun planet is fire. But fire and earth is the same material element. Bhūmir āpaḥ analaḥ. Analaḥ. Analaḥ means fire. So either it is made of earth or it is made of fire or it is made of water or it is made of air or prominent, it is all material.

So the sun planet is also material planet like this earthly planet, but it is made of fire. Just like there are so many things we have got experience. There is water, sea. There also, living being, aquatics. They are not dying. But if you are thrown into the water, you will die. But that does not mean that in the water there is no living being. There is. There are hundreds and thousands. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi. We are the men population. We are only 400,000. And in the water there are 900,000's, aquatics. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁś... Everything is there is the śāstras. So... But you cannot live within the... You have got a separate body. Similarly, these so-called scientists, they are thinking that nobody can live in the sun planet. "There is no life." That is wrong. They have got a separate type of body-they can live in the fire. That is the information. There is also towns. There is also palaces. Everything is there. But they are made of fire. We cannot understand that. In the fire you cannot live. In the water you cannot live. But there are living entities. Just like you see in the beach there are crabs. They are living within the sands, but you cannot live. That does not mean in the sand there is no life. There is life. Life sarva-gaḥ. It is said life can exist everywhere, either in the fire or in the water or in the earth or in the air. We are practically experiencing. So everywhere there is life. So... But different position. As you cannot enter in this body either in the moon planet or in the sun planet, similarly, unless you are fully qualified devotee, you cannot enter into the Vaikuṇṭha planets. You have to live outside. You have to live outside in the brahmajyoti. That is called aikānta.

So if you desire that, Kṛṣṇa will give you the oppor... Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. Mām... Kṛṣṇa is everything. Kṛṣṇa is brahmajyoti; Kṛṣṇa is Paramātmā. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. So if you want oneness, so you will be allowed outside the Vaikuṇṭha planet in the brahmajyoti. But there you cannot stay. That is the difficulty. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Because we want varieties of enjoyment... In the brahmajyoti you are simply live eternally, but there is no varieties. But because these persons, they have no information of the Vaikuṇṭha varieties, they have to come down again to these material varieties. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. This is the process.

Therefore a devotee, automatically he dissolves his material and..., material bodies, subtle and gross, dissolves in this life. That is called jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate. That is called jīvan-mukti. Īhā yasya harer dāsye. Anyone, īhā, mad-īhāḥ. Here it is said, mad-īhāḥ. What is that mad-īhāḥ? Always thinking of how to serve Kṛṣṇa. That is called mad-īhāḥ, thinking of Kṛṣṇa, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. That Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained this mad-īhāḥ. What is that? Īhā yasya harer dāsye. Anyone who is always thinking of how to serve Kṛṣṇa, karmaṇā manasā vācā... You can serve by your body activities, by your mind, by your words. Just like we are talking about Kṛṣṇa. We are serving Kṛṣṇa by words. You are hearing: that karmaṇā, the activities of the senses, you are hearing. Karmaṇā manasā, we are thinking; I am thinking. So any way, if we are simply engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service or at least trying to do that, karmaṇā manasā vācā, īhā yasya harer dāsye... But it is not to become one but to serve. If this attitude you keep, so nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate, in any condition of life he is liberated. Any condition life. He may be engaged in some business or in some occupation or this way. If he is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, how to serve Him, then he is liberated. This is the idea of actual liberation, not by thinking that "I shall become one with the Supreme."

Thank you very much. (end)



741204SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.35

-

Bombay, December 4, 1974



Nitāi: "O My mother, My devotees always see the smiling face of My form, with eyes like the rising morning sun. They like to see My various transcendental forms, which are all benevolent, and they also talk favorably with Me."



Prabhupāda:



paśyanti te me rucirāṇy amba santaḥ

prasanna-vaktrāruṇa-locanāni

rūpāṇi divyāni vara-pradāni

sākaṁ vācaṁ spṛhaṇīyāṁ vadanti

[SB 3.25.35]



In the previous verse it is said, anyonyato bhāgavatāḥ prasajya sabhājayante mama pauruṣāṇi. Those who are devotees, they assemble together. Bodhayantaḥ parasparam. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, "They discuss about the glories of the Lord." Bodhayantaḥ parasparam. That is sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. We have also discussed this. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. When things are discussed about the Supreme Personality of Godhead amongst the devotees, it becomes a different thing than the discussion in the debating club of the nondevotees. The kṛṣṇa-kathā is not a subject matter for debating club. It is meant for the devotees. Without devotees, nobody can understand. The others who are not devotee, they simply waste their time in reading Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, such literature. They simply waste their time because these subject matters are for the devotees.



We have several times discussed this point that the so-called scholars, politicians, and philosophers, they read Bhagavad-gītā and comment in a different way. This is their foolishness. They cannot understand Bhagavad-gītā. It is not possible. My Guru Mahārāja used to say, "It is just licking the bottle of honey." Now you want honey. I give you one bottle, but you do not know how to taste it. You begin to lick up the bottle. Then what you will taste? If you think, "Here is the bottle of honey. Let me lick," you will not get any taste. It must be opened. But the opening key is with the devotee. You do not know how to open it. Therefore it is said, satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. The devotees know how to open it, the bottle. And then they can taste. Therefore, sabhājayante mama pauruṣāṇi.

In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna that "I am speaking to you this science of Bhagavad-gītā." Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. Idaṁ yogam. Bhagavad-gītā means bhakti-yogam. So Kṛṣṇa said formerly, say, four hundred millions of years ago. Bhagavad-gītā is not new. It is... First of all it was spoken to sun-god, and from the Manu's age and others' age we can calculate it is about some millions of years ago it was spoken. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. So Kṛṣṇa said, "That very old yoga system I am speaking to you again. It is not a new thing that I am manufacturing for you. No." Everything... God is eternal and His instruction is also eternal. And the followers are also eternal. There is nothing new. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ purāṇaḥ. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ purāṇaḥ. Very old, but still, it is eternal and fresh. This is spiritual matter. You read Bhagavad-gītā. It was spoken four hundred millions of years ago, and then again, five thousand years ago. Still, if you read Bhagavad-gītā daily, you will find it fresh. You will never find it old. As Kṛṣṇa is never old, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣam [Bs. 5.33]. Kṛṣṇa is the Purāṇa..., the oldest man, but nava-yauvanaṁ ca. But He is always... See. You will find Kṛṣṇa just a young boy of twenty years. Nava-yauvanaṁ ca. So similarly, Kṛṣṇa's words, everything Kṛṣṇa, absolute. His name, His form, His quality, His activities-they are all fresh and new. Otherwise, how the devotees can glorify the same Kṛṣṇa daily with greater enthusiasm? Greater enthusiasm. The more you glorify, you feel more enthusiastic to more glorify, glorify, glorify.

This is spiritual. In the material world, if you speak one thing once, twice, thrice, four times, then it becomes disgusting. But how this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... You are chanting. You can chant twenty-four hours. It will feel fresh and enthusiasm. That is spiritual. Therefore... Therefore it is not a subject matter, this sound is not like this radio, material sound. It is also sound, but it is spiritual sound, and it is coming from the spiritual world. Just like in the material world we can release some sound. From here, it can be heard from thousands of miles, but not more than that. The spiritual sound, it is released from many, many millions and millions and trillions of miles away; still, it can be heard, provided you have got the machine to capture it. That is bhāgavata-prema.

So those who have got developed love of Godhead, they can hear. As it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa says that "I am speaking to you the old message, Bhagavad-gītā, which I spoke to sun-god some millions of years ago." So "Why You are speaking to me? I am not a Vedantist. I am not a sannyāsī. I am not any advance in spiritual understanding." People may say. But Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes. You are My bhakta." Bhakto 'si. Therefore to understand Bhagavad-gītā means one has to become first of all a bhakta. The so-called nondevotee, atheist class, scholar and politician, they cannot understand. It is not possible. They cannot enter into it. The same thing, licking up the honey bottle, that's all. What you will taste? It is not possible. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says,

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



The same example can be... You can go to a person who knows how to open the bottle of honey. Then you can taste. Otherwise, if you simply lick up the book, Bhagavad-gītā, becoming a very big scholar, you will never taste it. You will never taste it. You can satisfy yourself, "Now I am licking up daily Bhagavad-gītā, thrice," but what you will understand unless you are a devotee? You will not understand. The bottle is packed up.



So here it is said, paśyanti te me rucirāṇy amba santaḥ? "They can see Me, santaḥ." Not these rascals and fools. They cannot see. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25], Bhagavān says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "I am not exposed to these fools and rascals, nondevotees." Why I say "fools and rascals" to the nondevotees? I am not saying; Kṛṣṇa says. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Mūḍha means rascal. Mūḍha means rascal. And duṣkṛtinaḥ, duṣkṛtinaḥ mean always engaged in sinful activities, no restraint. They can eat everything, they can drink everything, they can do everything without any restriction. They think, "What is there in drinking and eating in the matter of religion?" That is the new invention of swamis and yogis, that "You can do everything, and still you become advanced." But that is not possible. One has to become a pure brāhmaṇa. Then why, in the Vedic civilization, a pure brāhmaṇa is so respected? Because they are symbolic representation of the Vedas. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyam [Bg. 18.42]. That is brāhmaṇa, who has got this qualification, satyam, who has taken the Absolute Truth as the aim of life. People, ordinary people, how they will know? Satyaṁ śaucam, very clean always, tri-sandhyā-snāna, taking bathing thrice. Satyaṁ śaucaṁ śamam, controlling the mind, not that "I am servant of my mind. I shall do whatever my mind dictates." These are the qualification of brāhmaṇa. Śamaṁ damam, controlling the senses. These are the symbolic representation of the Vedas.

So therefore satāṁ prasaṅgān, that one has to discuss about the Supreme Personality of Godhead amongst the satām, santaḥ. Satām, santaḥ, the same thing. Santaḥ. Here the word is used, santaḥ. Paśyanti me, te me rucirāṇy amba: "Mother, they can see, santaḥ." Santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti. In the Brahma-saṁhitā again this word is used, santaḥ.

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.38]



So the Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, Śyāmasundara, is meant for the santa, not for the narādhamas, duṣkṛtinas, mūḍhas. They cannot understand. One has to qualify himself to be sinless. Na māṁ duṣkṛtinaḥ... This is said, and another paragraph is there, yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām: "Those who are completely free from sinful activities," yeṣāṁ tu anta-gatam, "no more touch with sinful life," te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 7.28], "they can fix up their devotional service to Kṛṣṇa." It is not so easy. But one can become immediately a santa, within a second. How? That also, Kṛṣṇa says, that,



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



The qualification is: unless one is sinless, he cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. He cannot understand what is kṛṣṇa-bhajana. But if one is eager-he's actually very eager-he can do it immediately. What is that? Surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Sarva-dharmān parityajya: [Bg. 18.66] Give up all these nonsense so-called religious principle. Simply surrender to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, I was forgotten about You. Now I surrender unto You fully. If You like, You can kill me; if You like, You can give me protection." This is surrender, not business. "Kṛṣṇa, if You give me this nice thing, then I will surrender." That is not surrender. That is business.



When Prahlāda Mahārāja was offered benediction that "My dear Prahlāda, you have suffered so much for Me even from your father. Now your enemies are all off. You can ask any benediction you like," Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "Why is this, my dear Lord? Am I a bāniyā, baṇik, that because I have suffered for You, I shall ask some benediction? No, no, don't offer me like that. Because You are the supreme powerful, whatever I want, I can get from You. And I am born in the asura families. I am inclined for this material enjoyment. So don't delude me, my dear Sir. Then I can ask You. And why shall I ask You? Because I have seen my father, so powerful even the demigods were afraid of him, and You have finished all his power within a second. So why shall I ask for these things? Kindly engage me in the service of Your servant. This much I want. I don't want anything."

Therefore a devotee never asks anything material from the Supreme Personality. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught us, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. They are simply satisfied by glorifying the Lord. That is their only satisfaction. If they get the opportunity of glorifying the Lord, as it is said in the previous verse, that sabhājayante mama pauruṣāṇi... Mama pauruṣāṇi, the glorious activities of the Lord. This is the way of bhajana. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. This is the way of bhakti-yoga. Simply glorify this... Your glorification, so much activities... Kṛṣṇa therefore comes to give advantage to the devotees for glorifying Him-because He acts. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. To kill the demons and to give protection to the sādhus, He has to work. From the very beginning of Kṛṣṇa's birth, the enemies are there, demons are there. Kaṁsa advised his constables, "So be very careful. As soon as there is Kṛṣṇa's birth, immediately inform me, and I shall kill Him." He was always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, a first-class Kṛṣṇa conscious, always..., but to kill Him.

Similarly, you will find there are so-called religionists. Their only purpose, so-called scholars, their only purpose is how to kill Kṛṣṇa. You will find so many commentaries by the politician, by the so-called scholars, but their only aim is how to kill Kṛṣṇa, how to take away Kṛṣṇa from Bhagavad-gītā. No mention of Bhagavad-gītā..., of Kṛṣṇa. They will talk so many nonsense, but they will never say that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and He should be worshiped." They will never say. That means asuras. Āsuraṁ bhāvam. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. "Oh, they are very big, big scholars, sir. You are talking about them as mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ?" Yes. Because although they are so-called scholars, their real knowledge has been taken away. Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. Why this punishment, that their knowledge has been taken away? Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ? "They are simply thinking of killing Me, that's all." How to evade kṛṣṇa-bhakti, that is their whole propaganda.

So we should not be like that. If we want to be fixed up then, in devotional service, then, as it is advised by Kapiladeva... He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead incarnate. He says, paśyanti te me rucirāṇy amba santaḥ? "They can see that..." So unless God has got form, how one can see? How God can be nirākāra? God is never nirākāra, but He's sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. His ākāra is not like us. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. His form is sac-cid-ānanda. This body is not sac-cid-ānanda. Sat means eternal, and cit means full of knowledge, and ānanda means full of bliss. So if we study, "Is our body eternal?" no, sir. It is temporary, say, fifty years, sixty years, utmost hundred years. So it is not eternal, it is not sat. Asat. Asato mā sad gama, the Vedic injunction, that "Don't keep yourself in this asat body. Just get your original sat body, eternal body." We are not interested. We are simply interested with this temporary body: "I am this body." I am not this body. I am spirit soul. I am within this body. This is knowledge. This is called siddhi. So long I am thinking, "I am this body," then I am cats and dogs. They are thinking like that. But when I know that "I am not this body. I am the spirit spark, spirit soul. I am encaged within this body," that is knowledge. That is knowledge. So those who are self-realized spirit soul, they can see.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



That bhakti means they can see God, Kṛṣṇa, and they can serve Him. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Bhakti means to engage your senses, hṛṣīka, in the service of the Hṛṣīkeśa. That is bhakti.



So here it is said, paśyanti te me rucirāṇi. Kṛṣṇa is so beautiful, rucirāṇi. Rucira means very attractive. Now, fortunately, people in Bombay say that our Deity here is more beautiful. They say there is no such Deity in Bombay city. So this is our duty, to dress Kṛṣṇa in such an attractive way that people at least see that it is very beautiful. Then he becomes a devotee, simply by appreciating. Simply by appreciating, if they say, "Now the Deity worship is very nice," then they go a step forward, step forward immediately, simply by appreciation. Then other things will come gradually. Therefore the temple worship should be exactly to the routine, to the instruction of the śāstra and guru and ācārya, so that the worshiper in the temple as well as the visitor, both of them will benefit. They will be gradually seeing. Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He has consented to appear in a way so that we can see. At the present moment we cannot see Kṛṣṇa as He is spiritually embodied, sad-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, because we have no eyes to see sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. So here is also sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, arcā-mūrti. It is not idol worship. The atheist class may say so, but it is not so. Those who have got eyes, they can see. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He entered the temple of Jagannātha, immediately He fainted, "Oh, here is My Lord. Here is My Lord." So one has to become santaḥ. Then one can see. But it is culture, by culture. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva [Bs. 5.38]. When you develop that culture, when you develop that love for Kṛṣṇa, then you will see immediately and you will faint, "Oh, here is my Lord."

So prasanna-vaktra aruṇa-locanāni. Prasanna-vaktra. Prasanna means pleasing. Somebody was talking that "Your Deity is just like trying to talk with me." Prasanna-vaktra. Yes. He is here to talk with you, but He is waiting whether you're interested to talk with Him. That's all. Kṛṣṇa says that teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam [Bg. 10.10]. He talks, but with whom? Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānām. One who is twenty-four hours engaged with love and faith in the service of the Lord. To whom? Just like if you want to talk with some big man, then you must have qualification. Is it possible that if you want to talk with the big man here, immediately you like? No. You cannot talk. You must be fit to talk with him. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is ready to talk with you. He has come. He has descended in arcā-mūrti to talk with you, to be visible by you. Now you make yourself ready and fit to talk with Kṛṣṇa. Then He will exchange conversation. Santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti. This is possible. This is a qualification.

So rūpāṇi divyāni vara-pradāni. Divyāni. Divya means divine. Divyāni. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. Divyam. They are not material things. One has to see. So if you say, as it is said, sākaṁ vācaṁ spṛhaṇīyāṁ vadanti, spṛhaṇīyām, very favorably you talk... Suppose if I say, "You have no eyes. You are blind," this is not favorable. So the nondevotees, Māyāvādīs, they say that God has no eyes. So it is indirectly saying, "God is blind." So if I say, "You are blind. You nonsense, you are blind," is it favorably talking? Most unfavorable. Directly insulting. So those who are talking about God, nirākāra-no eyes, no leg, no head, no tail, nothing, nirākāra-they are simply blaspheming, not spṛhaṇīyām. God does not want to hear such nonsense things. Therefore it is said, sākaṁ vācaṁ spṛhaṇīyāṁ vadanti. You cannot say that "Kṛṣṇa is blind. Kṛṣṇa is lame. Kṛṣṇa has no hands. Kṛṣṇa has no nothing, nothing." Indirectly saying, "Kṛṣṇa has..., does not exist." This kind of addressing Kṛṣṇa, nirākāra, is not favorable talking with Kṛṣṇa.

Favorable talking-if you want to talk with Kṛṣṇa, then you must consult the Vedic literature, how Kṛṣṇa is worshiped.

veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ

barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam

kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.30]



"My Lord, Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, is playing on His flute." Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣam: [Bs. 5.30] "His eyes are just like petals of the lotus flower." Aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ barhāvataṁsam: "Oh, He has some nice peacock feather." These are the Vedic description of Kṛṣṇa, not that the devotees have imagined some... Just like Māyāvādī says, "Just imagine the form of God." God's form cannot be imagined. That is not God. Anything imagination is not fact. It must be factual. And the factual information you get from the Vedas. Not only you get the Vedas, when Kṛṣṇa was present on this earth He exhibited His rūpa, His form, His activities, His līlā. Everything He exhibited so kindly. So you have to think of this kṛṣṇa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa's form, Kṛṣṇa's activities. Janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. They are divine. They are not material, because Kṛṣṇa has got divine body, sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. But to favor us, because devotees are always anxious to see, therefore He comes.



When Kṛṣṇa said, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, sambhavāmi yuge yuge... [Bg. 4.8]. He comes for two business. First business is paritrāṇāya sādhūnām. The sādhus, the santas, or the devotees, they are always, I mean to say, given trouble by this atheistic class of men. So therefore they have no other means. They simply think of Kṛṣṇa. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Even his father was giving him trouble, so much trouble that he was..., he wanted to kill him somehow or other. So they... Here, the santas, they come. They have to suffer so much trouble by the demons. Therefore we have already discussed that verse that, what is that? Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ [SB 3.25.21]. A santa means he has to suffer. Just see in the Western countries the Lord Jesus Christ. He was preaching about God, God consciousness. That was the only fault, and he was crucified. Just see. He was crucified. The state ordered him to be crucified because he is talking. Similarly, Hiraṇyakaśipu, his five-years-old body, he was talking only of Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa. So therefore his father became enemy. He was trying in so many ways to kill him. This is the very old story, that if you become a devotee, you must be prepared to be put into miserable condition by the demons. That is their business. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Asuras... Just like even Kṛṣṇa, even God Himself, He was attempted to be killed by Kaṁsa. Not only that, He engaged so many demons, Pūtanā, Aghāsura, Bakāsura, Mahīśāsura, so many asuras. But Kṛṣṇa is always Kṛṣṇa. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. He is able to finish these duṣkṛtas or the asuras by His omnipotency. That He can do. But the asuras are always... Their only business is to give trouble to God and His devotee.

Therefore it is advised, titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām [SB 3.25.21]. A devotee should be so advanced that in spite of being troubled by the asuras, he should tolerate, titikṣavaḥ, and still, he should be kind upon him, not that "This man is talking against me, against God. Therefore I shall be angry and drive him away." No. Titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ. Everyone in this material world, more or less, they are asuras, atheists. So if you want to preach, then you have to learn tolerance and speak in such a way that these asura can become also devotee. That is the business.

So here it is said that sākaṁ vācaṁ spṛhaṇīyāṁ vadanti. So we should pray in such a way Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, spṛhaṇīyām. Don't think He is dead stone. That is the conclusion of the atheist class of men. No, dead, no. You talk in such a way that He will be pleased upon you. He will be pleased. He is pleased, He is satisfied in Himself, but He wants to see that you are also talking about Him pleasingly. That's all. Therefore He comes. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. You talk unpleasingly or pleasingly; it doesn't matter to Kṛṣṇa. But if you talk pleasingly, then you become benefited. You become benefited. So therefore there are stotra. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's another name is Uttamaśloka. Uttamaśloka mean He is worshiped, God is worshiped, by the best selected words, not patchy words. No. All selected words. So you will find in so many prayers, not only in our Vedic scripture and other scripture also, in Bible, in Koran, the prayer. Prayer is also devotion. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam, arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyam [SB 7.5.23]. Vandanam, this vandanam. The Christians and the Muhammadans, they offer vandanam. Although they do not worship the Deity, but they offer prayers to the Lord. That is also good. That is also bhakti.

Arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-ni... There are nine different processes. So you accept all of them or some of them or at least one. Then your life is successful. Spṛhayanti. Very selected words. You surrender to Him, but don't talk things which does not please Him. You don't say that "God is formless. God has no eyes, no leg, no head." These things are there. Just like in the Vedas it is said, apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā, that "He has no hand, but He can accept your offerings." But if He has no hand, then how He can offer your offerings, er, how He can accept your offerings? He has His hand, but not like our hand. He can extend His hand millions of miles. Just like Kṛṣṇa leaves His Goloka, Goloka Vṛndāvana. That planet is many millions and trillions of miles away. But He can accept what you offer. That is Kṛṣṇa's hand, not like Your hand, three feet, no. Therefore sometimes in the Vedas it is said that "God has no hand." That means He has no this material hand. But He can accept your offerings. That means He has got hand, but that is a different type. That is explained, sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1].

So in this way we have to study the science of God, the science of Kṛṣṇa. Then our life will be successful. And tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. And if we can understand Kṛṣṇa's activities, Kṛṣṇa's form, Kṛṣṇa's quality, then we become fit for going back to home, back to Godhead. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām e... [Bg. 4.9].

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741205SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.36

-

Bombay, December 5, 1974



Devotee: "Upon seeing the charming forms of the Lord, smiling and attractive, and hearing His very pleasing words, the pure devotee almost loses all other consciousness. His senses are freed from all other engagements, and he becomes absorbed in devotional service. Thus in spite of his unwillingness, he gets liberation without separate endeavor."



Prabhupāda:



tair darśanīyāvayavair udāra-

vilāsa-hāsekṣita-vāma-sūktaiḥ

hṛtātmano hṛta-prāṇāṁś ca bhaktir

anicchato me gatim aṇvīṁ prayuṅkte

[SB 3.25.36]



So śrī-vigraha-darśanam. This temple is situated to give people the facility as it is described here. Tair darśanīya avayavaiḥ udāra. We have to see the Deity beginning from the lotus feet, not jumping over the smiling face. That is the way. First of all you try to see. And when you are practiced... Try to see the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and when you are practiced to this habit, even after visiting the temple if you go home, if you are practice to see the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, that is meditation. So darśanīya avayavaiḥ: "Different limbs." First of all feet, then the thighs, then the belt, then the chest, then you reach the smiling face. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's form... If you meditate on Kṛṣṇa's form, that is Kṛṣṇa. So we associate with Kṛṣṇa, His smiling face, His flute, His hand, His dress, His consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, or any other, gopīs, surrounded by. In this way, practice this habit of observing the Supreme Lord. Therefore He has appeared, arcā-vigraha, so that we can see Him.



In our present eyes even Kṛṣṇa comes, but we have no eyes to see. Therefore for the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī... There are three kinds of devotees: kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, madhyama-adhikārī, and uttama-adhikārī. Uttama-adhikārī means first class, most advanced, and madhyama-adhikārī means in the middle stage, not very advanced, not very lower, and kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, just the neophyte, beginning. So for the beginners it is recommended that you see the Deity daily or always. Beginning from the lotus feet, as you are practiced, then go up to the smiling face. And hear also Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Simply if you try to see and if you don't hear, then it will not stay very much. Therefore we see practically in many temples, because there is no discussion about Kṛṣṇa, simply a Deity is there, people go for some time. Then gradually, especially those who are educated, so-called educated, they do not feel very much interested. And it has actually happened so. Many temples, they are not visited even by the devotees, because there must be also hearing about. Two things must go on: The Deity must be worshiped-this is called pāñcarātriki-vidhi-and to hear about the Supreme from Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Vedic literature, that is called bhāgavata-vidhi.

So the pāñcarātriki-vidhi and bhāgavata-vidhi must go parallel. Then one, even one is a neophyte, gradually he will come to the intermediate stage between the neophyte stage and to the advanced stage. And of course, it is very difficult to find out one in very advanced stage. But there are. There are many advanced stage. At least, the spiritual master is supposed to be in the advanced stage, but for preaching purpose he come down in that intermediate stage, for preaching work. Because the advanced stage, there is no discrimination that "Here is a devotee, and here is a nondevotee." Because advanced devotee sees that everyone is devotee except himself. The advanced devotee sees that he is not a devotee, but all others are devotees. This is advancement. But in the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, in the neophyte stage, they simply concentrate on the Deity. Arcāyām eva haraye yaḥ pūjāṁ śraddhayā īhate. That is required in the beginning. According to the prescribed duties as they are mentioned in the scriptures, one must take care of the Deity. But that unless a little farther advanced, he does not know who is a devotee and what is his function with others.

In the madhyama-adhikāra, when one still farther advances, he has got four kind of visions:

īśvare tad-adhīneṣu

bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca

prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā

yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ



Madhyama-adhikārī is not only interested in Deity worship, but he knows who is a devotee and who is innocent and who is Bhagavān. Īśvare tad-adhīneṣu bāliśeṣu. Bāliśa means innocent. There are many innocent men. They... Actually, they do not know what is to be done, who is God. They are innocent. They are not offender. But there are other others who are offenders, dviṣat. Dviṣat means envious. They are immediately envious as soon as they hear of a devotee of God. They are called envious, dviṣat. So madhyama-adhikārī, he knows God, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. So he wants to develop his love for Kṛṣṇa. Avyartha-kālaṁ vasati, nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. The madhyama-adhikārī, he wants to see that not a moment is wasted without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is madhyama-adhikārī. Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]. He's always careful that "Whether I am spoiling the valuable time of my life?" That is the first qualification of madhyama-adhikārī. Avyartha-kālatvam. Because we have got very short period, living period. We do not know when we shall die. There is no certainty. Foolish people may think that "I shall live forever," but that is foolishness. Life is very transient. At any moment we can die. Therefore those who are advanced devotee, they want to see that "I have got very short period of life at my disposal." Therefore, he is very anxious to utilize every moment for advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is madhyama-adhikārī. Avyartha-kālatvam.



And nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ: "And he has got special taste for chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." Nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. Vasati tad..., prītis tad-vasati sthale: [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19] "And he is very much anxious to live in such places like Vṛndāvana, Dvārakā, Mathurā, where Kṛṣṇa lived." Tad-vasati sthale. Vasati means residential. When Kṛṣṇa appears on this planet, He lives in Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, Dvārakā dhāma. So a devotee also, advanced devotee, they want to live in the residential places of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, God, has got His residential places everywhere. That's a fact. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. He is residing even within the atom. But still He has got special residential places like Vṛndāvana, Dvārakā, Mathurā. So a devotee is anxious to live in those places.

Prītis tad-vasati sthale, nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ, avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]. Their business is to increase love of God. To increase love of God means there is also process, how to increase. The process is given by Rūpa Gosvāmī:

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā

tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

[Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]



These are the gradual steps. Śraddhā. Śraddhā means faith. Faith is the beginning. Without faith, you cannot make..., there is no question of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Faith means that faith is created after reading Bhagavad-gītā. If you read Bhagavad-gītā carefully and if you actually understand Bhagavad-gītā as it is, then the faith will be created. Without reading Bhagavad-gītā, there is no question of faith in Kṛṣṇa. So what is that faith? That Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You give up all other engagements. You just surrender to Me, and I shall give you protection." So if we have got faith, if we believe in the words of Kṛṣṇa, that is called faith. If we don't believe in the words of Kṛṣṇa, if we study as a literary thesis and then throw it away, that is not faith.



The faith is explained by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī. He says, 'śraddhā'-śabde-viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya [Cc. Madhya 22.62]. Faith means one who has got firm faith in the words of Kṛṣṇa. That is called faith. "I am reading Bhagavad-gītā, but I do not accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead or He is a person, as He says in the Bhagavad-gītā..." He says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. Mattaḥ, when He says He's a person... So Kṛṣṇa says that "There is no more better personality or better superior existence than Myself." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. He says, "Me." Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Ahaṁ sarvasya... Aham, "Me," "I." He says everywhere. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa is person. Kṛṣṇa is not imperson. Kleśaḥ adhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām. It is said that "One who is impersonalist, he takes more trouble to come to Me. He will come later on, but it will take some time." The impersonal feature of understanding of the Supreme Absolute Truth, it is partial understanding.

Just like we have explained several times that we have got experience of the sunshine. Because sunshine is very easily approached. But that understanding of the sunshine is not real understanding of the sun globe or sun planet or the sun-god. That is not perfect understanding. It is partial understanding that you can understand the sun globe is full of heat and light. That's all. But how much heat, what is the temperature of heat, how much light is there, and where is the source of heat and light, that is not possible to understand. Everyone will admit this, that simply by seeing, because the sunshine is entering your room from the window, that does not mean you know everything of the sun. Similarly, this impersonal understanding of the Absolute Truth is like that. Just like sunshine is impersonal, but the sun-god is person. If sun-god is not person, how Kṛṣṇa says, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam: [Bg. 4.1] "This Bhagavad-gītā..." He says to Arjuna, that "This Bhagavad-gītā, science of Bhagavad-gītā, or this yoga system, bhakti-yoga system, I spoke to sun-god. Exactly like that, I am speaking to you."

So Arjuna is person, and Kṛṣṇa is person. Therefore the..., in the sun planet the predominating deity is a person. He is not imperson. So you cannot understand that person simply by seeing the sunshine. That requires better qualification, how to enter the sun planet, how to see the predominating deity. The impersonalists, they simply conclude that, the same way as we foolish persons conclude, that the sun planet is simply a fiery substance, and there is nothing, no... If there is nothing, if there is no sun-god, predominating deity or the president of the sun globe, then how Kṛṣṇa could speak with him? In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān. Just like we talk. We are talking with you. We are not talking in the sky, vacant. We are talking with persons. These are intelligent. These require intelligence. So how we can imagine that "How the sun-god can be person? It is a fiery, big fire substance, and how one can live?" This is also foolishness. "Because I cannot live in the fire, therefore nobody can live in the fire." That is my foolishness. My body is not so made. Just like you cannot live in the water. It does not mean that there is no living entity in the water. It requires intelligence. Similarly, if you cannot live in the fire, it does not mean that nobody lives there. Yes. There are living entities whose body is so made. Just like the fish and other aquatics, they live. Their body is so made. This is intelligent study. Otherwise, if you simply compare with my intelligence, my position, my circumstances, and we'll conclude all others like that, that is blindness. That is not... Blindness.

So similarly, impersonal realization of God, that is imperfect exactly like the understanding of the sunshine is not understanding of the sun globe and the sun-god. Everyone can understand. It is not very difficult. If you think that "Because I have seen sunshine, then I have seen everything. I have known everything of the sun..." No. You do not know even how big the sun globe is. And when you read books, when you read scientific books, you can understand it is fourteen hundred times bigger than this planet. So ultimately God is person. He is not imperson. Impersonal understanding is imperfect, partial understanding, that if God, Kṛṣṇa, is sac-cid-ānanda vigraha... Sat, cit, ānanda [Bs. 5.1]. So impersonal understanding of Kṛṣṇa means you understand only the sat portion. The two other portion, cit and ānanda, you do not know. You do not know.

So if you understand Kṛṣṇa, then you understand the impersonal Brahman realization and localized Paramātmā realization. That is stated in the Vedas. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. If you simply understand Kṛṣṇa, then you understand the other two features, because Kṛṣṇa is ānanda. You see Kṛṣṇa's feature. He is not thinking, taxing His brain, "How to do this? How to do that?" No. He is ānandamaya. Ānandamaya, He's playing on His flute, and Rādhārāṇī is there. He is in ecstatic ānanda, hlādinī-śakti. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktiḥ. It is the transaction of bliss, transcendental bliss, hlādinī-śakti. Kṛṣṇa has got many potencies. Out of that, one potency is hlādinī-śakti, pleasure-giving. He is ātmārāma. He is full in Himself. When He wants to enjoy, He expands Himself, His pleasure potency. So Rādhārāṇī is His pleasure potency, and the gopīs are expansion of Rādhārāṇī. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ. Nija-rūpa. The forms are Kṛṣṇa's, but ānanda-cinmaya-rasa, just to taste the mellow of transcendental bliss.

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.37]



This is a verse from the Brahma-saṁhitā.



So Kṛṣṇa is... We are seeing the form of Kṛṣṇa. That is the ultimate understanding of the Absolute Truth. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate.

vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



So sac-cid-ānanda. The Brahman realization is sat realization, Paramātmā realization is cit realization, and Bhagavān realization means ānanda realization. Sat, cit, ānanda. And in the Vedānta-sūtra it is said that the Absolute Truth is ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Ānandamaya. He's always ānandamaya. You read Kṛṣṇa's līlā-He's always full of transcendental bliss, especially in Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana, that is His original residence. There, simply ānanda. Kṛṣṇa is playing with His cowherds boys friends. Kṛṣṇa is dancing with the gopīs. Kṛṣṇa is stealing mother Yaśodā's butter. Kṛṣṇa is doing... All ānanda, transcendental bliss.



So here it is stated that if you begin your devotional service as it is prescribed here, simply see the Deity, then gradually realize how Kṛṣṇa is smiling, how Kṛṣṇa is playing on His flute, how Kṛṣṇa is enjoying the company of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī... We have to see simply. Simply by seeing. And if you hear about Kṛṣṇa, just you are hearing now, these two processes will increase in such a way that one time, anicchato me gatim aṇvīṁ prayuṅkte, you automatically become a great devotee, simply if you come to this temple, or any temple where Deity is very nicely worshiped. These are all scientific. It is not imagination. Just like people think that "They are worshiping idol and imagining something." No, they are stated in this all śāstra. It is the prescribed method for developing your God consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is a science, vijñāna-samanvitam.

jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me

yad vijñāna-samanvitam

sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca

gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā



When Kṛṣṇa advised Brahmā after creation, then He said, jñānaṁ me... This is called catuḥ-śloki-bhāgavata, the four ślokas which is the basic principle of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36]. Jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me. The knowledge of Kṛṣṇa is very confidential, guhyam. Guhyād guhyatamam. In the Bhagavad-gītā is said, "My dear Arjuna, I have spoken to you so many things, but now, because you are My very dear friend and devotee, therefore I am disclosing the most confidential knowledge." What is that? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam: [Bg. 18.66] "Just surrender unto Me. That's all. This is the confidential knowledge. Don't try to understand many things, or if you have heard, if you could not understand Me here, then I tell you. This is the most confidential part of knowledge, that sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]." Before this verse... Guhyād guhyatamam. Guhyād guhyatamam. Guhya means very confidential. So this guhya, this Brahman realization, is also very confidential. But Paramātmā realization is guhyatara, still more confidential. And to understand Kṛṣṇa is guhyatama, superlative degree. Guhyād guhyatamam.



So to understand Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa has explained in so many ways. Simply to understand Kṛṣṇa makes you liberated. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. So therefore this is the process of understanding Kṛṣṇa. These Kṛṣṇa consciousness centers are being opened all over the world just to give the people the chance how to become liberated simply by seeing the Deity and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. This is the opportunity. But fools and rascals, they think that "It is nuisance." But actually it's not. This is a science. So by following this process, then what will be the...? Hṛtātmano hṛta-prāṇāṁś ca: "Then gradually, your mind will be fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, mind and senses." Hṛtātmanaḥ and hṛta-prāṇa. Prāṇa, we our prāṇa, life, is at the senses. So if your mind and senses are fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is called bhakti. That is called bhakti. It is not sentiment; it is a practical science when your mind and senses are fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. The senses are engaged in serving Kṛṣṇa and mind is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. Just like Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, he was a great devotee, and his business was, although he was a king, very responsible king and ruling over the world, but his mind was always absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. This is possible. This is possible. That example is given, that a woman or a lady is always busy in his (her) household affairs, but she also takes care of her bunch of hair, how to set it up and very nicely comb it. She does not forget. In spite of her being engaged in so many household affairs, she does not forget to take care of the bunch of hair. Similarly, one who is actually devotee, he may be engaged in so many things, but he does not forget Kṛṣṇa. That is the example, very good example.

So hṛtātmano hṛta-prāṇāṁś ca bhaktiḥ. This is the perfection. "This" means that the gross body and the subtle body becomes digested, no more existence of this gross body. Gross body means sense gratification, and subtle body means speculation, "God is like that, God is like that," speculation, subtle body. Mana-buddhy-ahaṅkāra. And gross body means the senses. So when the senses and the mind, everything, is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that means you are already liberated, already liberated. Therefore it is said, anicchato me gatim aṇvīṁ prayuṅkte. The liberated means that you have no more the activities of gross body and subtle body, but there are activities of the soul. This is wanted. The bhakti means the activities of the soul, not of the body, not of the mind. The Brahman realization means stopping the activities of the body. But the activities of the mind is going on, or they do not know. It is not perfect knowledge. Therefore I have said several times that the Brahman realization, those who are Brahman realized souls, they are not in perfect knowledge. Aviśuddha-buddhi. They have been described as aviśuddha. Viśuddha means very purified, and "a" means "not." Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Their intelligence is not yet perfectly purified. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa. They are thinking that "Now we have become liberated." No. That is not liberation. Here is liberation. Why? Hṛtātmano hṛta-prāṇāṁś ca bhaktiḥ. When the mind and the senses are all absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, that is the bhakti state. Mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. The people think that bhakti is a sentiment thing. No. It is above liberation. Above liberation. Unless one is not liberated, he cannot stand on the platform of bhakti. That is bhakti. That is called parā-bhakti. Aparā-bhakti and parā-bhakti.

So any devotee who is serious about this Deity worship, hearing about Kṛṣṇa, chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, following the Vedic principle, or rejecting the sinful activities of life... In this way we can come to the platform of spiritual life, and if we act accordingly, that is called bhakti-yoga or the liberated stage.

Thank you very much. (end)



741206SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.37

-

Bombay, December 6, 1974



Devotee: "...yoga, nor does he desire to be elevated to the kingdom of God. Yet even without desiring them, the devotee enjoys, even in this life, all the offered benedictions."



Prabhupāda:



atho vibhūtiṁ mama māyāvinas tām

aiśvaryam aṣṭāṅgam anupravṛttam

śriyaṁ bhāgavatīṁ vāspṛhayanti bhadrāṁ

parasya me te 'śnuvate tu loke

[SB 3.25.37]



A pure devotee, as it is instructed by Caitanya Mahāprabhu, how to keep the position of pure devotee... There are many explanations. Rūpa Gosvāmī has also given the same idea in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. And Nārada Muni, he has given the same idea in the Nārada-pañcarātra. And Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has also given the same idea in the Bhagavad-gītā. From all Vedic scripture it is understood that a pure devotee, he does not want anything from the Lord. He does not want. Even he does not want liberation, what to speak of the material things-dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90].



The material position is one wants to become religious, dharma. Why? Now, he can get material opulence. Oh, why material opulences? Now, because he can gratify his senses, kāma. And when he is frustrated, then he wants mokṣa. Dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa. Generally, people are very much attached, those who are human being. Not the cats and dogs; they do not know anything. But those who are elevated in the living condition, they want to become religious or economically very prosperous, dharma artha, and good facilities for sense enjoyment. And then, after enjoying all these thing, either by frustration or by further development, they wants mukti.

But a devotee does not want any of these things, any of these things. He's not at all interested. Just like Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, the other day I told you the story. He says that muktir mukulitāñjali sevate asmāt: "My Lord, if I am fixed up in devotional service, then what to speak of mukti. Mukti is just like my maidservant. She's standing on door, 'What can I do for you?' " Muktir mukulitāñjali. Añjali, just like folded hands, "Sir, what can I do for you?" That is the position. Why a devotee shall want mukti? No. He doesn't want anything. Simply he wants to serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all. He wants this facility, no other thing.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu... That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy.

na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi

[Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]



Tvayi: "Unto You, let there be my devotion," ahaitukī, "without any motive." Everyone has got some motive. People become dharmika, go to the temples. That's very good. They are pious-to ask something: "O God, give us our daily bread." A bhakta, a pure bhakta, he does not ask anything. Why he should ask? A pure devotee is kept in the hand of Kṛṣṇa. Just like if you keep something very carefully, jewels, in your hand, you are very careful. Similarly, when Kṛṣṇa takes care of you, as He says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66], then you are just in the, at the care of... Just like if a big man, a very rich man, if he assures you, "Oh, don't bother, I'll take care of you for everything," just imagine what is your position, if a big man gives you assurance that "I'll take care of you. Don't bother. You haven't got to do anything. I shall take." So when Kṛṣṇa says, the Supreme Lord, who is the proprietor of all opulences... Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ. Ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa. Aiśvarya. Six kind of opulence. Kṛṣṇa has got full control over six kind of opulences. All riches. We can say, "I am millionaires. I am proprietor of crores." But I cannot say that "I am the owner of all the banks of the world." That is not possible. But Kṛṣṇa can say. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Not only the banks, but everything which contains the banks, all the planets. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram. So who can be richer than Kṛṣṇa? So if Kṛṣṇa says, "I'll take care of you," then where is the question of poverty?



But that is... People do not know. They want some opulence, material opulence, but he doesn't want Kṛṣṇa, the proprietor of all opulences. And that is our misfortune. The proprietor of all opulences, He said, "Just surrender to Me. I'll take care of you." "No, no. It is not possible. I shall have to take care of my business. That will maintain me. I will have to take care of my this and that, my country, and so many family, friends, and..." Kṛṣṇa says, "No, no. You simply surrender. I'll do everything for you." And He assures Arjuna in the Sixth Chap..., yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ: "You just do..., try to achieve that thing which achieving you will be no more aspiring for achieving anything more." That is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa. Just like Arjuna, he did it very conscientiously. Kṛṣṇa said that "This war, your fight, is family. I am connected with both the families. So I cannot take part in this war." But they insisted that "At least You take some part as You like." Then He said that "I divide Myself into two. So one side, all My soldiers, eighteen akṣauhiṇī soldiers, and one side, I am alone. Now you select. Which one you want?" So Duryodhana's thought that "What shall I do with Kṛṣṇa? He's one man. Let me take His soldiers." So he took all the soldiers. And Arjuna said, "No, Kṛṣṇa, I want You." Then Kṛṣṇa said, "No, I'll not fight." "No, You simply remain in my side." "All right, I shall become your chariot driver, that's all."

So this is intelligence. You just capture Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa, how He can be captured? Kṛṣṇa can be captured by your bhakti. Otherwise, He's very, very, crafty. You cannot capture Him. It is not possible. Ajita. If anyone wants to conquer over Kṛṣṇa, that is not possible. That is... Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Ajita. Nobody can conquer over. You find from the history Mahābhārata. Mahābhārata means the greater history of India. Mahā, mahā means greater. As you like "Greater Bombay," similarly, Mahābhārata means "Greater Bhārata." Don't think of this Bhārata, three-feet Bhārata. No. The whole planet was Bhāratavarṣa. That is called Mahābhārata, Greater Bhārata. Everyone was being controlled by the emperor in Hastināpura, the Pāṇḍavas. So in that history you find Kṛṣṇa has so many dealings in Mahābhārata, but He was never conquered by anyone. Therefore His name is Ajita. But you can conquer over this Ajita. Ajita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām. By whom? Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. Namanta. Namanta eva. This is the mission of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that don't try foolishly to speculate about God. Stop this foolishness. The same example: the frog in the well is thinking of the Atlantic Ocean. He has never seen Atlantic Ocean. He's speculating. Some friend told him, "My dear friend, frog in the well, I have seen a vast mass of water." "What is that?" "Now, Atlantic Ocean." "What is that Atlantic Ocean?" "Very great mass of water." "Oh? Bigger than this well? Maybe four feet or ten feet or...?" In this way, if you speculate, you will never understand what is God.

If you want to understand God, then try to understand from God Himself. He knows. Just like if you speculate of a big man, a neighbor, a friend, that "What is his wealth? Oh, he appears to be very rich man and very strong man, very influential man." And these are the opulences: very beautiful, very wise. So you can calculate. But if you make friendship with that gentleman and if he speaks about himself, then you can understand what he is. Then how you can understand God, Kṛṣṇa, by speculation? This is foolishness. Therefore, śāstra advises you that jñāne prayāsam udapāsya: "If you think that you are very learned scholar, you are very advanced in knowledge, and you can manufacture what is God, give up this foolishness first of all. Don't make this foolishness." Jñāne prayāsam. Oh, what is your knowledge? Limited. Kūpa-maṇḍūka, the frog in the well. How you can imagine? Simply by imagination? Is imagination God? Can you create? The Māyāvādīs say that "We can imagine God. God, it is so great that it is not possible to understand the Brahman, but we can imagine some form." This is Māyāvādī philosophy. This imagination will not... You cannot imagine God. God is fact. God is not subjected to your imagination. And your senses are imperfect. How long you will simply speculate? Give up this practice, foolishness. Don't... Jñāne prayāsam udapāsya nam... Just become submissive. Jñāne prayāsam udapā..., namanta eva: "Be submissive." That is bhakti-mārga. Bhakti-mārga is submissive.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Śaraṇaṁ vraja: "Be submissive, rascal. You are manufacturing so much, so many things. Give up this practice. Just surrender unto Me." This is wanted. If you do that, Caitanya Mahāprabhu advises... This is spoken by... Then sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatām. If you become very, very humble and submissive and pray to Kṛṣṇa sincerely, "Kṛṣṇa, it is not possible for me to know You. If You kindly please explain how can I know You, then it is possible. If You please, if You become, if You think I shall be able to understand You..." Just like Arjuna said, that "Kṛṣṇa, it is not possible to under... But if You kindly think that I am fit to understand of Your vibhūti, please tell me." This is submission. And Kṛṣṇa explained about His vibhūti. Then He concluded,

athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



"How long I shall go on speaking about Myself? Simply summarize." What is that? "Now, simply by one part of My opulence is maintaining the whole cosmic manifestation." Ekāṁśena sthito jagat: "Only one little portion of My opulence. You just understand. Otherwise how much?"



So a little of... There are innumerable universes. Athavā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna, ekāṁśena sthito jagat. Jagat means this universe. There is not one universe. We are only seeing one universe. There are millions of universes. All together that is called jagat. Gacchati iti jagat. So ekāṁśena sthitaḥ. This is also confirmed in many other Vedic literatures.

yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



Brahma-saṁhitā means the prayers offered by Lord Brahmā. This is accepted by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Brahma-saṁhitā was not available by Caitanya Mahāprabhu when He was touring in South India, so He collected one Brahma-saṁhitā, handwritten in the palm leaves, and He copied it. Formerly there was no press. These important śāstras, Vedic literature, were kept in handwriting. I copy from your book; my other friend copies from my book... In this way, those who were interested... The literatures were not so cheap. Only highly qualified brāhmaṇas, they used to keep handwritten... And it was worshiped in the temple as Deity, śāstra, not that it is available everywhere. It has become... Now press has made it very cheaper. But we should always understand that granthas, or the scriptures, should be worshiped as God. That is sound incarnation of God. It should not be neglected. Don't neglect Bhagavad-gītā or Bhāgavata as ordinary books. You must be very careful. As you take care of the Deities, you should take care of the books also.



So this Brahma-saṁhitā was copied by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu from one Keśava mandira in South India, and He gave it to His disciple, that "Here is the summary of Vedānta and Bhāgavatam." Therefore we quote from Brahma-saṁhitā. It is authorized. It is authorized by the Supreme Person, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So in that Brahma-saṁhitā it is said about Kṛṣṇa in so many ways that here, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, ekāṁśena sthito jagat: [Bg. 10.42] "Only by one of My portion, the whole material creation is resting." So in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is explained in many places, one of the places, that yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48]. Loma-vilajā: "The pores on Your body, from that pores and from the breathing process, the universes are coming out." Universes are coming out. Yasyaika, the loka, yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48].

Jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ means... Jagad-aṇḍa means universe. In each universe there is a nātha, or the supervisor, or the manager, or the supreme person. Just like for management we are. Similarly, in each universe there is Lord Brahmā. He is the supreme creature, manager. So these managers live only to that period when Mahā-Viṣṇu exhales. When the niśvasita-kālam. Just like we exhale and inhale, so... But exhaling the all these universes are created, and at His inhale they go into the Mahā-Viṣṇu, in the... The coming and going. So many universes, and the Brahmā, whose duration of life is also described in the Bhagavad-gītā, sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ... [Bg. 8.17]. Brahmā's duration of life is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, sahasra-yuga. We know yugas. The yuga, the four yugas make one divya-yuga, that Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, Kali. Satya-yuga, eighteen lakhs of years duration; and Dvāpara-yuga, twelve lakhs of years; and Tretā-yuga, eight lakhs of years; and Kali-yuga, four lakhs of years. So altogether it comes to forty-three lakhs of years. This is yuga. And multiply it by one thousand. That means forty-three lakhs plus three zeros, how much it comes to? Huh? Some crores of years. That is Brahmā's twelve hours. Sahasra...

If you take Bhagavad-gītā, if you believe, if you read Bhagavad-gītā as it is, then you can understand. And if you say, "It is fictitious, something imaginary," that is another thing. But unless you believe it, you have no authority to touch Bhagavad-gītā! That is nonsense. We are creating so many nonsense who do not believe in the Bhagavad-gītā, and they become commentator and scholar and so many things. Mūḍha. We are not in favor of this business. We are preaching all over the world that if you read Bhagavad-gītā, you read it as it is and accept it as it is. Otherwise don't create foolish anymore. We have produced many foolish person but misguiding them by misinterpreting this Bhagavad-gītā. Stop this business. And if you believe, you have to believe like this. You cannot interpret, that is not possible. Why you should interpret? It is a fact that Brahmā's āyuḥ, his duration of life, is very, very big. Not only Brahmā's āyuḥ, even if you go higher planetary system... You are going to the moon planet. There are living entities. I do not know why they say there is no living being. Where they are going? But if we believe our śāstra, the moon planet is one of the heavenly planets, and the duration of life in the moon planet is ten thousands of years. And their year means our six months equal to their one day. That is called divya. In this way that high... Not only... As you go more and more to the higher planetary system, you become more and more opulent. Just like here in this material world also, if you go Europe, America, you become more opulent automatically. Automatically. I am giving some example. Similarly, if you can go to the heavenly planet, you become more opulent.

Therefore they are aspiring after going to the higher planetary system. Karma-kāṇḍīya. They perform yajñas and pious activities to go to the heavenly planets. Oh, what is the idea? The idea is that we shall be able to enjoy more, more, more duration of life, more opulence, more money, more beautiful woman, more nice garden. Actually, that is a fact. That is a fact. But a devotee is not interested in all these things. A devotee is not interested because he accepts Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he is not interested. Kṛṣṇa says, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] "My dear Arjuna, even if you are promoted to the Brahmaloka, or the planet where Brahmā lives, where the duration of life already I have explained, and opulence, and very, very great powerful, but still you have to fall down from there."

So why a devotee should be interested in such thing? No. A devotee wants Kṛṣṇa, the supreme eternal. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). That is the Vedic version. The Supreme Lord is the supreme leader of the nityas. We are all nityas, eternal. He guides. Therefore Kṛṣṇa plays with the living entities, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, in the spiritual world. There Kṛṣṇa and the devotees become His friend, cowherd boy. They play with Kṛṣṇa. They want that thing. They do not want to go to the Brahmaloka or the Candraloka or this loka or that loka, because that will be finished. That will be finished. Because that is māyāvinas tām. Māyā will finish. It may be... Just like here we see. A germ lives for a few seconds, or a worm at night... There is clogging together, so many millions and millions, and by the morning, they are all dead. So their duration of life comparative. Similarly, Brahmā also. It may be millions of year, but he'll die. Kṛṣṇa has said in the Bhagavad-gītā that ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. The birth and death, old age and disease, they are everywhere. Either you go to the Brahmā planet or this lower planet or this Brahmā life or human life or cat's life, dog's life, tree's life-everything is finishable.

Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. Kṛṣṇa is ultimately present Himself to the atheist as mṛtyu, as He appeared before Hiraṇyakaśipu. Hiraṇyakaśipu was declining. His son was asking his father, "My dear father, why you are disbelieving God?" And he was becoming angry: "No, I am God. Who is else God? I am God. You see? All the demigods, they are afraid of me. I am so powerful." But Prahlāda will not agree. He will say, "No, no. You are not God. God is Nārāyaṇa." This was the father and son. So he did not believe in God. He was thinking, "I am God." Therefore, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham. Those who are atheists, who do not believe in God, the God comes before them as death and takes away everything, all his power, all his opulence, all his money, all his..., everything taken away. Mṛtyuḥ sarva...

So that is the atheist class realization of God. And theist class, they believe in God. They worship in God while living, and their business is: in this life they are serving God, Kṛṣṇa, and even after death, they will do the same business. Nitya-yuktā upāsate. So there is no difference between going to Vaikuṇṭha and in this temple, for a devotee, because the business is the same. So why they should aspire even going to Vaikuṇṭha? Why they aspire? Therefore it is said... What is said? Śriyaṁ bhāgavatīṁ vāspṛhayanti. Because Vaikuṇṭha, if you go to the spiritual world or Vaikuṇṭha, you get equal opulence like Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa. Sāyujya, sārūpya, sārṣṭi [Cc. Madhya 6.266]. There are five kinds of mukti. So one of the mukti is sārṣṭi. Sārṣṭi means equally opulent with the Supreme Lord, equally. In the Vaikuṇṭha the devotees or the inhabitants, they are equally opulent. Everyone is like Nārāyaṇa, four-handed, equally opulent. Just like in Vṛndāvana also, Goloka Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa and the cowherds boy, they are equally opulent. The cowherds boys in Vṛndāvana, they do not know that Kṛṣṇa is God, Kṛṣṇa is greater than him. No. They think, "As Kṛṣṇa is, I am also." They are so opulent.

So that is the devotional position. Therefore it is said, atho vibhūtiṁ mama māyāvinas tām aiśvaryam aṣṭāṅgam anupravṛttam, śriyaṁ bhāgavatīṁ vāspṛhayanti bhadrām. The devotees do not aspire for all these opulences. Their only aspiration is, ambition is how to be engaged in the service of the Lord, how to be engaged. That is their... And in that way they get everything. There is no difference. When you worship Kṛṣṇa-man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], mām evaiṣyasi-so he has already gone. There is no difference, the worshiping of the Lord here and there. Just like in politics sometime. These are some of the examples, that in a foreign country, when you are staying in your ship, then you are not subjected to the rules of that country. You are subjected to the rules of your own country. Similarly, so long you are in devotional service, you are not subjected to the rules and regulation of this māyā. Māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Māyām etām... Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te. Anyone who is not devotee, who is not engaged in the service of the Lord, he is under the control of māyā. And anyone who has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa and is simply twenty-four hours engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, he is not under the control of māyā. Māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. Kṛṣṇa says.

So therefore a devotee is not aspiring of any so-called material opulence, even aṣṭāṅga-siddhi. Here it is said, aiśvaryam aṣṭāṅgam anupravṛttam. Aṣṭāṅga-siddhi. The yogis, those who are actually yogi, they get aṣṭāṅga-siddhi, not these cheap yogis, gymnastic. No. The āsana, gymnastic, that is all right. That is the process only to go to the yogic platform. But when one is actually on the yogic platform, he gets siddhis. Siddhis means perfection: aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, prāpti, īśitā, vaśitā, like that. He can become smaller than the smallest. That is aṇimā-siddhi. Some of the yogis, they can... You keep him within the room, locked up, and he'll come out. Because as soon as there is little let out, he'll come out. That is called aṇimā-siddhi. Laghimā-siddhi. You can walk... By achieving this la..., you can walk on the water. You become... You can fly in the air. You can go from one planet to another by flying. You can go to the moon planet or sun planet by capturing the beams. That is called mahimā-siddhi. There are so many siddhis. You can create even one universe. Not this magic, little gold, but you can create not universe, one planet. These are said. But a devotee is not anxious to do these things, this jugglery and magic. He wants the one juggler, Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Because he know that "If I gain Kṛṣṇa, I can achieve the favor of Kṛṣṇa, then all juggleries and magic are under my control. He will do that. Why shall I use?" Just like a rich man's son. He does not endeavor to get money. He knows, "My father is so rich, I can spend it as I like. If I am good son, father will give me money." This is the position of devotee. Therefore he is not after any vibhūti, nor even he is aspiring going back to home, back to Godhead. That is also aspiration. A devotee does not... Because his home is... He can create Vaikuṇṭha here.

It is, therefore... Temple is called nirguṇa. Temple is called nirguṇa. In the śāstra the forest is sattva-guṇa, and city is rajo-guṇa, and the places like these four sinful activities are going on-illicit sex, intoxication, gambling... There are places. Every one of us aware of it. So they are called tamo-guṇa. So to live in such places where illicit sex or prostitution is going on, the place where drinking is going on, the place where meat-eating, hotels, restaurant is going on, and gambling going on, these places are tamo-guṇa. And ordinary cities and towns, they are called rajo-guṇa. And forest... Therefore formerly those who were aspiring after spiritual under..., they left either city or these things, everything. They went to the forest. That is called vānaprastha. Vānaprastha. Vana means forest. Before taking sannyāsī, one leaves his family connection and goes to the forest. Vanaṁ gato yaḥ harim āśrayeta. Vanam, vanaṁ gato harim āśrayeta. Then why they used to go to the forest? To take shelter of Hari. Vanaṁ gato yaḥ harim āśrayeta. So that is sāttvika. And above all these thing-to live in the temple-that is nirguṇa, above sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Therefore those who are inhabitants of the temple, they are in Vaikuṇṭha.

But unfortunately, it is Kali-yuga. We are trying to create such Vaikuṇṭha in this Hare Kṛṣṇa Land, and the police commissioner says, "It is nuisance." This is our government.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741207SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.38

-

Bombay, December 7, 1974



Nitāi: "The Lord continued: My dear mother, devotees who receive such transcendental opulences are never bereft of them; neither weapons nor change of time can destroy such opulences. Because the devotees accept Me as their friend, their relative, their son, preceptor, benefactor and the Supreme Deity, they cannot be deprived of their possessions at any time."



Prabhupāda:



na karhicin mat-parāḥ śānta-rūpe

naṅkṣyanti no me 'nimiṣo leḍhi hetiḥ

yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca

sakhā guruḥ suhṛdo daivam iṣṭam

[SB 3.25.38]



So here is explained that how spiritual life is eternal and without any destruction. Here in the material world, whatever we have, it is destructible. It will be destroyed. Today one is my son, so tomorrow the son may be destroyed. But if you accept Kṛṣṇa as your son, He will never be destroyed. That is the difference. Here whatever opulence we have got... We may have family, friend, sons, daughters, and so many things we possess. We enjoy life in the varieties of representation. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Here we aspire after having good apartment, good house, gṛha, kṣetra, possession, property. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-suta, children; āpta, friend; vitta, riches. We possess here. But this possession is illusion, janasya moho 'yam, because it will not stay. This gṛha... Either the gṛha will be destroyed or-I am the inhabitant-I will be destroyed. There will be separation. Here nothing is permanent. Gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ. Therefore it is illusion. We do not understand it. We take this, permanent, and Kṛṣṇa, not permanent. But that is not the fact.



The fact is that Kṛṣṇa is permanent, but Kṛṣṇa's material energy is not permanent. Therefore it is said, śānta-rūpe, "My dear mother," na karhicin mat-parāḥ. Mat-parāḥ. Mat means Bhagavān. Bhagavān is speaking, mat-parāḥ. Whenever... As in the Bhagavad-gītā also there are many words, mat-parāḥ, or plural number, mat-parāḥ, the same thing. So here also, Kapiladeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, says, mat-parāḥ-means "My devotees. My devotees who have taken Me as his son, friend, lover, master..." There are so many rasas: śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, sākhya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa, mādhurya-rasa, in so many. Those rasas, or mellows, are represented here in the material world in a temporary way. Here we have got the same rasa: I love my son. I love my friend. I love my husband. There is love, but this is all temporary. But if you transfer this love to Kṛṣṇa either as your master or the Supreme or as friend or as your son or as your lover or husband, it will never be destroyed. That is permanent settlement. This is to be understood. But the Māyāvādīs, they cannot understand. They think that in the spiritual world there is no more such relationship as master, friend, or father and son, or beloved and the lover. There is no such thing.

But here in the śāstra we see that that is real life. This is not real life. It is shadow. In the Bhagavad-gītā in the Fifteenth Chapter it has been described as shadow. Ūrdhva-mūlam adhah-śākham aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam [Bg. 15.1]. Aśvattham. We have got experience of banyan tree. It is very durable. It stands for many, many hundreds of years. Therefore this material world has been compared with the aśvattham, aśvattham tree, very durable and very expansive. It goes on increasing, increasing. That is very nicely described in the Fifteenth Chapter. So it is called ūrdhva-mūlam. Ūrdhva-mūlam means... Here we have got experience: the tree has got its roots underneath, down. But this material world, which is compared with the aśvattha tree, the root is upside and the branches downside. That means it is shadow. We can experience of this tree, ūrdhva-mūlam. The root upside and the branches downside, we have got experience. Where it is? In the shadow. If you stand on the bank of a river or reservoir of water and if there is any tree by the side of that reservoir of water, you will find the shadow, ūrdhva-mūlam. The root upside and the branches downside. Exactly the same tree, but it is shadow. It has no fact; it is simply shadow. Many places it has been compared with the mirage, mirage in the desert. Just like in bright sunshine in the desert you will find that there is water. So the thirsty animal, they think there is water. They jump over it, and the animal runs after the water, and the water also goes away, goes away, goes away. Sometimes we have got also experience. In bright sunshine on the street we find exactly a shadow of water, but there is no water. Tejo-vāri-mṛt, amṛṣā. In the Bhāgavata it is stated: tejo-vāri-mṛt, amṛsā. Sometimes in the water we see land, and on land we can see water. This is called marīcikā, or mirage.

Similarly, actual life... Our life means we are enjoying some rasa, some relationship. I enjoy in the family with my children. There is some rasa. They are calling me "father." I am enjoying. Or somebody is calling me as "son." I am enjoying. Some woman is calling me "husband." I am enjoying. Some woman I am calling, "wife." Some person I am calling "servant," and he is calling me... These relationship we enjoy. But this enjoyment is shadow. This is not real enjoyment. We have no information. This enjoyment can be achieved in the similar way with Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa therefore comes in person just to teach us how you can enjoy with Kṛṣṇa the same relationship. You can-Kṛṣṇa-accept your master as the Supreme. You can accept Kṛṣṇa as your friend. You can accept Kṛṣṇa as your son, vātsalya-rasa, just like mother Yaśodā. Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja, Vasudeva or Devakī, they are all devotees. Nobody can become the father or mother of Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is not possible. He is the supreme father. Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā. He is everyone's father. Sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya [Bg. 14.4]. Therefore those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, those who do not know how our relationship can be established with Kṛṣṇa, they ask that "Who is the father of Kṛṣṇa? If Kṛṣṇa is the father of everyone, then who is the father of Kṛṣṇa?" That is natural question. Because we are thinking Kṛṣṇa like us. But the śāstra says that He is the father of everyone, but nobody is His father. Anādir ādiḥ, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Anādi. Anādi means He has no beginning. Just like we have beginning from our father. Our life begins from our father. The father begets the child, and the birth is the beginning of our life. Similarly, we think that Kṛṣṇa is also child of Vasudeva and Devakī; therefore He has the beginning.

But Kṛṣṇa is not like that. In the Bhāgavata it is described about the Kṛṣṇa's birth. Kṛṣṇa appeared as Nārāyaṇa, Catur-bhuja, before Vasudeva and Devakī. But Devakī, because previously her seven sons were killed by Kaṁsa, so Devakī immediately prayed to the Lord that "This time You have appeared as the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu. Now immediately Kaṁsa will kill You. Formerly my so many sons appeared as human child. They were killed. And Kaṁsa is searching after killing God, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. Now You have appeared, exactly four-handed Nārāyaṇa. Immediately You will be killed." That is affection. That is called yoga-māyā affection. "So kindly You appear as ordinary human child." This is the description in the Bhāgavatam about Kṛṣṇa's birth. So He did not appear immediately as a human child. He appeared first of all as the four-handed Nārāyaṇa. Then, on the request of the father and mother, He became a child. This picture we have got in our Kṛṣṇa book.

So that is the position of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the father of everyone. That is said in Bhagavad-gītā.

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



The material world, the material nature is the mother of living entities. Just like to give birth to a child there is necessity of father and mother. So Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the bīja-pradaḥ pitā." So He is everyone's father. But we may ask, "Then who is His father?" His father is devotee. When He accepts anyone as His father, that father is His devotee. That is said here that karhicin mat-parāḥ, yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is loved by the devotee as their son, as his son. Sutaś ca. Somebody loves Kṛṣṇa as his son.



The Vasudeva and Devakī, in their previous life they underwent severe austerities. After their marriage, they immediately were not anxious to beget child. They went to the forest and began practicing austerity and penances, severe, some hundreds of years. Then Kṛṣṇa appeared that "What do you want? Why you are undergoing so much severe...?" "No, we want a son like You. Then we enter into the family life." So Kṛṣṇa said that "Where is another Kṛṣṇa?" Because God is one. "So if you want a son like Me, then I will have to become your son. There is no competitor." God has no competitor. God is one. Ekaṁ brahma dvitīyaṁ nāsti. This is the... Kṛṣṇa therefore says, mām ekam. Mām ekam. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa is one, but Kṛṣṇa can expand. That is Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādī philosophers say that "If Kṛṣṇa has become everything, then where is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is finished." This is Māyāvādī philosophy. That is materialistic idea. Just like you take a big piece of paper and you tear it into small pieces and throw it; then the paper has no existence. The paper is finished. But Kṛṣṇa is not like that. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33]. He has expansion, many, many thousands, many, many millions. Just like Kṛṣṇa says, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart, and there are many millions and trillions of heart. Not only human being, there are animals, there are trees, plants, aquatics, fishes, so many. Anantyāya, sa anantyāya kalpate. There is no counting of the living entities. They are so... And the Paramātmā, Kṛṣṇa's another feature, He is everywhere. That does not mean the same materialistic idea that "If Kṛṣṇa has entered so many millions of heart, then where is existence of Kṛṣṇa?" This is called Māyāvāda, nirviśeṣa, "Now Kṛṣṇa is finished." No. Kṛṣṇa is not finished. Kṛṣṇa still remains. That is the Vedic injunction. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. We read this Vedic mantra; still, we think Kṛṣṇa is finished. "Because He has entered so many hearts of living entity, therefore Kṛṣṇa is finished. There is no more." That is nirākāravāda.

But that is not the Vedic version. Vedic version is that not only Kṛṣṇa's incarnation, but even if Kṛṣṇa, the full, cent percent God, if He is distributed or if He distributes Himself in many millions of form, still, He is there in the same strength. Just like if you take some blood, my energy, out of my body, then after taking some quantity, my body becomes weak. Because so much energy is taken away. But the Vedas says, pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. The balance is pūrṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa. You take full strength. Kṛṣṇa is ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa, almighty. So you take Almighty, and in millions and millions of units-still the Almighty. That is Kṛṣṇa. So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa in that way. And if we can understand Kṛṣṇa... Janma karma ca me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. This tattva you will understand from the Vedic literature, what is tattva. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam [SB 1.2.11]. So Kṛṣṇa is never diminished.

There is a little story, very interesting. So one poor boy, he was student in a school, and the teacher's annual ceremony of father's death would be held. So he requested all his student, "What you will give me, contribution?" Formerly the teacher was not taking any salary. But whatever he wanted, the students will bring either from parents' house or by begging. That was the system. The teacher would not charge anything. A brāhmaṇa cannot be..., charge anything. Generally, the brāhmaṇas were teachers. That is one of the profession of the brāhmaṇa. Everyone must have livelihood. So brāhmaṇa livelihood is paṭhana pāṭhana. He must become a learned scholar, and he will make others also learned scholar. That is brāhmaṇa's business. Paṭhana pāṭhana yajana yājana dāna pratigrahaḥ. Ṣaṭ-karma. Six kinds of profession for the brāhmaṇas. And kṣatriya's profession is to give protection to the citizen and levy some tax, twenty-five percent, not more than that. Whatever is income your, give twenty-five percent to the kṣatriya king. That's all. That includes sales tax, this tax, that tax, so many tax, income tax. All finished. You give twenty-five percent. And if you have no income, no tax. Not like that even you have no income, "No, last year you gave so much tax. You must give it. Otherwise your property will be sold." Not like that. So that is kṣatriya's income. Similarly, vaiśya's income, kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyam [Bg. 18.44], agriculture, cow protection, and if there is excess foodstuff, then he can sell, make trade. And śūdras, they will simply help.

So this teacher, the original story, the teacher asked the student for... Somebody said, "I will contribute this cloth," somebody said, "I'll rice," somebody said something, something, something. There was one poor student, he had no means. He was very poor. So when he was asked, so he replied that "I cannot say anything without asking my mother." "All right, you ask your mother and tell me tomorrow." So he asked, "My dear mother, all my class friend has promised the teacher to contribute this, that, this, that. So my turn is there. What shall I promise?" The mother said, "My dear son, we are so poor, we cannot give anything. But if Kṛṣṇa gives, He is dīna-bandhu, the friend of the poor. So if He gives something to you, you can promise." "Oh, where is Kṛṣṇa? What is His name?" "Now, His name is Dīnabandhu, friend of the poor." "Where He is?" "I understand that He is in the forest." So he went to the forest and called, "Dīnabandhu brother, Dīnabandhu brother, where You?" He began to cry. So Kṛṣṇa came. When a devotee is very much eager to see Him, Kṛṣṇa comes. He very is kind. So "Why you are asking?" "My mother... You are Dīnabandhu?" "Yes." "So this is my condition, sir. What can I promise?" So He said that "You promise that you will supply yogurt, dahi. You will supply dahi." So he was very much satisfied. And he came to the teacher that "My Dīnabandhu brother, dādā, He will supply dahi, or yogurt, for whatever you require." "Oh, that's nice. Very good."

So on the day of ceremony, so he went to the forest again and called Dīnabandhu dādā, and He gave him a small pot of dahi, yogurt, a small pot. Oh, he was a child. He did not know. And the..., he brought it to the teacher, "Now, this is my contribution. My Dīnabandhu brother has given. So you take." "The hundreds and thousands of people will be given foodstuff and this much dahi?" He became very angry. He became angry, he did not care, and the pot fell down, and the yogurt also fell down. But after some time, when he came, he saw that although the yogurt has fallen down, the pot is full. Then he again dropped it; again it is full. He dropped it; again it is full. Then he could understand it is spiritual. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. You take the whole thing; still, the whole thing is there. That is Kṛṣṇa. Not that because you have taken something, one minus one equal to zero. No. In the spiritual world, one minus one equal to one. And one plus one equal to one. That is called advaya-jñāna. There is no duality. Plus and minus, they are two things. But in the spiritual world, either plus or minus, the same. That is to be understood. That is called Absolute, advaya-jñāna.

So if you love Kṛṣṇa, there will be no destruction like the material things. Either you love Him as your master... Here master, so long you are serving, the master is pleased. And the servant is pleased so long you are paying. But in the spiritual world there is no such thing. If I cannot serve under certain condition, then master is pleased. And the servant also-the master does not pay-he is also pleased. That is called oneness, Absolute. That is... This example is here. There are so many students in this institution. We are not paying anything, but they will do everything for me. This is spiritual relationship. That paṇḍita Jawaharlal Nehru, when he was in London, his father gave him, the Motilal Nehru, three hundred rupees for keeping a servant. Then once he went to London, so he saw that the servant is not there. The paṇḍita says, "Where is your servant?" He says, "What is the use of servant? I have no, nothing to do. I do it personally." "No, no. I wanted that an Englishman should be your servant." So he has to pay for it. This is an example. I have got hundreds and thousands of servants who I haven't got to pay. This is spiritual relationship. This is spiritual relationship. They are serving not for being paid. What I have got? I am poor Indian. What can I pay? But the servant is out of love, spiritual love. And I am also teaching them without any salary. This is spiritual. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya [Īśo Invocation]. Everything is full.

So if you accept Kṛṣṇa as your son, as your friend, as your lover, you will never be cheated. So try to accept Kṛṣṇa. Give up this false illusory servant or son or father or lover. You'll be cheated. You'll be cheated. If you love your son with your heart and soul, that very son will may be someday your most veritable enemy. Yes. This is the world. The wife you love so much, but the wife may be someday so great enemy that she can kill you for her own interest. There are so many instances. So if you want to have real... The Māyāvādī philosophers, they are afraid of having such relationship again. Because they have got bitter experience of this material world, they want to make it zero-no more relationship, no more son, no more daughter, no more lover, no more master. "Because we have got very bitter experience of these things, I am disgusted with these things. I will make it zero." But that is not the fact. The fact is that if you make the same relationship with Kṛṣṇa, it will never become zero; it will be enthusiastic more and more. Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam, it is said. Ambudhi, ambudhi means sea. This morning we were walking. The sea cannot come, overflood, under certain extent, limitation. That is called... We have no experience the sea is increasing. No. But in the spiritual world, ānandāmbudhi, the ocean of spiritual bliss, is increasing. Here the ānandāmbudhi-I have got some relationship with my father, with my wife, with my husband, with my master, but it will decrease by and by. The relationship is personal interest. "If you pay me, I will serve you." "If you serve me, then I will pay you." This is relative term, duality. But in the absolute world it is something different.

Therefore here it is said that na karhicin mat-parāḥ śānta-rūpe, yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca sakhā guruḥ. You can establish your relationship in so many way. There is no question of making it zero. Because that is reality. Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā, Fifteenth Chapter, it is stated, "the shadow of the tree." The shadow of the tree has got the branches, fruit, leaves. Everything is there. But it is nonreality. The real reality is up in the spiritual world. And that is shadow. Ūrdhva-mūlam adhah-śākham [Bg. 15.1]. That is very practical example in the world. Ūrdhva-mūlam. The real mūla is up. Therefore we sometimes find that the lowest abominable thing is the highest there. Because the opposite. You see the upside of the tree down, but the upside is there. Therefore the rasas, there are so many mellows, and the parakīyā-rasa... Parakīyā-rasa means love without marriage. That is called parakīyā-rasa. Therefore you will find the parakīyā-rasa... Kṛṣṇa's loving affairs with the gopīs without marriage, that is called parakīyā-rasa. Parakīyā-rasa is the highest, topmost relishable spiritual bliss. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā. Kṛṣṇa displayed everything so to attract us, that "You are captivated by this material jaḍa-rasa, material rasa." There is rasa; otherwise why a man is working so hard to maintain the family? Unless there is some ānanda, why he is taking? Nobody is taking so much hard responsibility for others. But children, wife, family, they take. There is... Unless there is some ānanda, how he can take? So the relationship has got ānanda. But this ānanda is flickering, illusion. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. This is moha. It will not stay; it is temporary, illusion.

So don't be attached to this illusion. Tamasi mā. Tamasi means ignorance. In ignorance, if you accept somebody as son or wife or friend, that is darkness. It is not actual fact. It is ignorance. Tamasi mā jyotir gama: "Go to the light." Have real friendship, real fatherhood, real lover, real beloved, real son. So if... And another point is that a devotee, real devotee, he doesn't want to be the son of God. He wants to be the father of God. Why? The father means he will simply give to the son. And son means he will simply take. So just like in the Christian philosophy it is said, "O God, give us our daily bread." This is one philosophy. That's a fact. God is giving. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. God is feeding everyone. That's a fact. But a devotee does not want to take anything from God. He does not worship God for his daily bread. One who asks daily bread from God, they are pious, but they are not devotees.

catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

[Bg. 7.16]



Kṛṣṇa says there are four kinds of beginners of devotional service, four kinds. What are..., who are they? Ārtaḥ. Ārtaḥ means one who is distressed; artha-arthī, one who is in want of money; ārto ar...jijñāsuḥ, one who is searching after knowledge; and jñānī, and wise man. So out of these, ārto and arthārthī, they are low-grade worshiper. Those who are jñānī and jijñāsuḥ, they are higher grade. Generally, they are lower grade. But they are not pure devotees.



Pure devotees, as we have explained yesterday, they do not want anything from God. Even liberation they do not want, what to speak of this material... Therefore the philosophy of becoming the father of Kṛṣṇa is very perfect. Because one hasn't got to ask like the son asks from the father, "Father, give me this, give me this." Because devotee want..., doesn't want to ask anything from. Then how he can become son? Son business is to ask from father. Therefore they do not aspire to become the son of Godhead, but they aspire to be father of God. This is perfection-Nanda Mahārāja, father, Vasudeva, father. Kṛṣṇa will always ask. Just like Kṛṣṇa is always asking to suck the breast of mother Yaśodā. Always demanding. And if she refuses, He'll create disturbance. And mother Yaśodā is always thinking that "If I do not feed Kṛṣṇa nicely, He'll die." This is love. This is love. Therefore it is said that yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca. The devotee accept Kṛṣṇa as suta, as son, not as father. Father means exacting.

So in this way, if we actually establish... Establish means reestablish. It is already established. We have got different types of relationship. That is called svarūpa-siddhi. Svarūpa-siddhi. When you are perfect in spiritual life, you will understand what is your relationship with Kṛṣṇa automatically. That is called svarūpa-siddhi. You have got original relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Caitanya-caritāmṛta. That is a... Just like you are son of some gentleman. That is a fact. It is not that the son becomes father or father becomes son. No. The son is son; the father is father. Similarly, we have got an eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa, either as father, or as lover, or as servant, like that. So that is self-realization. When you will be perfect in love, in loving Kṛṣṇa, then in what status of life you will love, that you will under... That will be revealed. That is called svarūpa-siddhi. So svarūpa-siddhi is not something artificial. When one becomes perfectly spiritually realized, then he understands what is his relationship with Kṛṣṇa and he begins his service in that relationship as father, as friend, as guru, or as servant, like that.

So this relationship is eternal. So instead of being attached to this temporary relationship... Somebody thinking that "I have to serve my father and mother. That is my first duty." That's all right. First of all you select who is your father and mother. Now we have got a certain living entity as your father. Again, as you change body, your father may be somebody else. Today you have got a father, human being, and tomorrow you may have a father who may not be human being. You have to accept a dog as your father, or a cat as your father. So your father is changing with the change of your body. So first of all select who is your father. This dog is your father? The man is your father? The cat is your father? Who is your father? The tree is here. The seed is your father? Then you become devotee of father. But that we cannot do. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam: [Bg. 18.66] "You accept Me as your son, as your friend, as your master. Then you will be happy."

Thank you very much. (end)



741208SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.39-40

-

Bombay, December 8, 1974



Nitāi: "(Thus the devotee who worships Me, the all-pervading Lord of the universe, in unflinching devotional service, gives up all aspirations to be promoted to heavenly planets) or to become happy in this world with wealth, children, cattle, home or anything in relationship with the body. I take him to the other side of birth and death."



Prabhupāda:



imaṁ lokaṁ tathaivāmum

ātmānam ubhayāyinam

ātmānam anu ye ceha

ye rāyaḥ paśavo gṛhāḥ



visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca

mām evaṁ viśvato-mukham

bhajanty ananyayā bhaktyā

tān mṛtyor atipāraye

[SB 3.25.39-40]



So Kapiladeva is describing bhakti-yoga. Yesterday, last night, we have already discussed the previous verse. Then bhaktas yeṣām ahaṁ priya. Bhakta means who takes Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the most dears, dearest of everything. And ātmā sutaś ca sakhā guruḥ suhṛdo daivam iṣṭam. Everything. "Kṛṣṇa is my guru. Kṛṣṇa is my ātmā because I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa." Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. "So Kṛṣṇa is origin; I am part and parcel. Then Kṛṣṇa is my..." One who wants to love Kṛṣṇa as son... We have described already. Kṛṣṇa is prepared to become your son because we love sons. We offer respect to guru. We offer respect to devatā. So everything should be Kṛṣṇa. Yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca sakhā, friend. Just like Arjuna. He accepted Kṛṣṇa as his friend.



So everyone can accept Kṛṣṇa in so many ways. So

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



So you can love Kṛṣṇa as sakhā, as Arjuna did. And similarly, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he simply heard about Kṛṣṇa, śravaṇam. These are the nine processes. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ: "Of Viṣṇu, of Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu-the same. Not anyone else. You cannot say that "I am hearing about Mr. such and such, a great politician, śravaṇam." No, that will not help you. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. Smaraṇam, "also always thinking of Me."



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

[Bg. 18.65]



That is śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam [SB 7.5.23], always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Simply if you... Meditation, that is meditation. If you meditate about Kṛṣṇa always, then you become the first-class yogi. That is said in the Bhagavad-gītā in the Sixth Chapter, yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā [Bg. 6.47].



So this movement is teaching everyone always to be Kṛṣṇa conscious, to become first-class yogi, and take Kṛṣṇa as everything-priya, suta, sakhā, guru, everything. That is called bhakta. So in this way, visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca. Visṛjya means giving up completely. If you want a son, all right, Kṛṣṇa is prepared to become your son. If you want a lover, all right, Kṛṣṇa is prepared to become your lover. If you want a friend, Kṛṣṇa is prepared to become your friend. Everything Kṛṣṇa is prepared, and that relationship is going on in this material world. Somebody... I love somebody as my son. I love somebody as my friend. I love somebody as my lover. I love somebody as my father. Or in this relationship, sākhyam. There is the mellows, the sākhya-bhāva, vātsalya-bhāva, vātsalyam, mādhuryam, means loving platform, loving propensities. Kṛṣṇa is prepared.

So if actually, if we want to become free from the clutches of this janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi... [Bg. 13.9]. That is our problem. Here... We have discussed many times that we, as spirit soul, we are not this body. I am not this body. You are not this body. I am Brahman, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. You are also Brahman, or spirit soul. But I am not Parabrahman. That is mistake. Neither you are Parabrahman. There are two words in the scriptures: Brahman and Parabrahman, ātmā and Paramātmā, īśvara and Parameśvara. The Māyāvādīs, they think there is no difference. No, there is difference. Otherwise why the word is used, "parama"? So I may be īśvara, you may be īśvara, but you are not Parameśvara. You are ātmā; I am ātmā. But I am not Paramātmā; you are not Paramātmā. So in this way the Paramātmā, Parameśvara, that is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is said, visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca mām (sic:) eva. Bhagavān says, Kapiladeva... Kapiladeva is also Kṛṣṇa. He says, mam eva, "Only unto Me. And what is the difference between you and Me? No, I am viśvato-mukham. I am all-pervading. You are not all-pervading." That is the difference. You are sitting here. You are not at your home. But Kṛṣṇa is here, being worshiped in this temple, but He is present in many, many millions of temples. Viśvato-mukham. He is accepting devotional services from the devotee in many thousands of temples. Not only that. As Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that, what is that? I forget now. Now I am becoming old, I am forgetting.

Anyway, Kṛṣṇa is Paramātmā. He is present everywhere. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. That is viśvato-mukham. He is living in everyone's heart. That is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and me. Kṛṣṇa and me, that is the difference. Aham. Here it is said, mām eva viśvato-mukham. Mām eva. Kṛṣṇa or Bhagavān, He says mām eva, but what is the mām eva? He is not a person like me or you. He is viśvato-mukham. He, Kṛṣṇa, says in the Bhagavad-gītā that this body is the field of, kṣetra, field of activities. Idaṁ śarīraṁ kṣetram ity abhidhīyate. Kṣetra-kṣetrajña. And the owner of the body or the occupier of the body, not owner... We are not actually owner of this body. Because as soon as there will be order that "You vacate this body," you have to immediately vacate. Therefore we are not owner; we are occupier. This is a machine given by Kṛṣṇa.

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



This is a yantra, machine. I am not this machine, but this machine has been given to me to move. Just like you get a car to move. Especially mentioned, yantra. Yantra, just like a car is machine, but you are not the car. Suppose if you want a car to move. Your father gives you a car, maybe costly or not. That depends on the father's condition or your condition. But the father or the..., you purchase. But here it is said that the..., because we want to move in this material world under difference desires, so Kṛṣṇa gives us different types of bodies, 8,400,000 different species of yantra. They are just like machine, yantrārūḍhāni, and that machine is made by māyā, this material energy. That is not spiritual energy. I am spiritual energy; you are spiritual energy. But this vehicle, or the car, or the moving machine, that is not spiritual. That is material. Yantrārūḍhāni māyayā [Bg. 18.61]. It is given by māyā. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ... [Bg. 3.27]. We are in a machine made by māyā. And so long we are on this machine, the machine will be old and you will have to change it for another machine. That is going on. That is called janma-mṛtyu. That is called birth and death. Otherwise you and me, we have no birth and death. Na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit. The soul, or the Brahman, he does not take birth or dies. Simply we change this machine, body. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. You are driving one car. If the car is broken or it is smashed, that does not mean you are smashed. You may have some accident, but you are not finished; the car may be finished. Similarly, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Similarly, this body being finished, we are not finished. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13], we get another car, another body, just like we are getting different bodies in this life.



So the question is that if I am nityaḥ śāśvataḥ, na hanyate han... and my position is I never die, never take birth, so why I have been put into this condition, accepting this machine? That is real problem. That is real problem. Then what is the cause? That cause is that because I want to enjoy this material world. What is that material world? Here it is said, rāyaḥ paśavo gṛhāḥ. Rāyaḥ means wealth. Formerly a man was considered to be wealthy-now also it is... Dhānyena dhanavān, gavayā dhanavān. If you have got many number of cows, then you are considered to be rich man, not papers. Nowadays, if you have got bunch of paper written "one thousand dollar," but they are paper only. You are dhanavān. Formerly, practical. Not dhanavān by the papers, by the currency notes, but by how many cows you possess, because that is life. You get milk. And dhānyena, if you have got food grains, then you are rich, not by possessing some paper. No. Therefore it it said here, rāyaḥ paśavo gṛhāḥ. So these are the material possession.

So, so long we are after this material possession, then we cannot get out of this circle of birth and death. But if we give up this material possession and you take Kṛṣṇa and the Supreme Personality of Godhead and worship Him in bhakti-yoga, as it is said here, bhajanty ananyayā bhaktyā... Ananyayā bhaktyā. Ananyayā bhaktyā means pure, not mixed. You should not mix bhakti with jñāna and karma. That is pure bhakti. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11]. To... Just like there are many bhaktas. They are not pure bhaktas. Chanting, they are also chanting, but they are aspiring after mukti. So they are not pure bhaktas; they are adulterated bhaktas. A bhakta does not want mukti. We have discussed all things. Bhakta wants nothing from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He simply wants to serve Him. That's all. And serve Him ānukūlyena, not whimsically, "I want to serve You as I like." No. Ānukūlyena. Just like Arjuna did. Arjuna served Kṛṣṇa not whimsically, but as Kṛṣṇa desired. Kṛṣṇa... Arjuna was not willing to fight. He said, "No, Kṛṣṇa, the other side, my friends and relatives, I cannot." That is whimsical. But when he decided after hearing Bhagavad-gītā, kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73]: "Yes, I shall do what You are asking, to fight. I shall kill my grandfather. That's all." That is anukūla. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. You cannot serve Kṛṣṇa by your whims. Ānukūlyena. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam, ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Brs. 1.1.11]. You have to serve Kṛṣṇa as He says. If I want a glass of water, you must give me a glass of water. You cannot say, "Prabhupāda, milk is better than water. Why don't you take one glass of milk?" That is not anukūla. You must supply me what I want. That is anukūla. That is favorable. I want to drink water. Why should you give me milk? That is anukūla. That is bhakti. That is ananyayā... You don't manufacture your own trademark of bhakti. No, that is not bhakti. It is not that...

Sometimes people say, some so-called bhaktas, they say that "I can worship the Lord in my own way." No, that you cannot do. You have to... But because you have no connection with the Supreme Lord, you simply think a fiction, an idea, imagination, kalpana. The Māyāvādīs, they say kalpana. Brahma-rūpa-kalpanaḥ: "Brahma has no rūpa, but you imagine some rūpa, or form." That is Māyāvāda. That is not. Kṛṣṇa has got rūpa. Kṛṣṇa is present here with His original rūpa, as it is described in the Vedic literature.

veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ

barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam

kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.30]



His form. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Paramaḥ. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ. We may be īśvara; you may is īśvara. That's all right. But you are not Parameśvara; I am not Parameśvara. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. The Parameśvara is Kṛṣṇa. Paramātmā is Kṛṣṇa. We are not. Kṣetra-kṣetrajña. Kṣetrajña means one who knows about the kṣetra. We are acting with this body. I am also acting, you are also acting, the dog is also acting, cat is also acting, the tree is also acting-according to the body. But within the body, dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanam..., tathā dehā... [Bg. 2.13], the owner, or the occupier of the body, is within.



So Kṛṣṇa says, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi: "You are kṣetrajña. You are owner of this body. But I am also kṣetrajña. So I am kṣetrajña. I am the real proprietor. You are simply occupier. You are not the proprietor." Yantrārūḍhāni māyayā [Bg. 18.61]. He gives you. You wanted a body like this, oh, you have got, "Now take this body." Kṛṣṇa is giving all facilities to enjoy this material world. Sometimes you want the body of a devatā like Brahmā, Indra, Candra. "All right." Yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25]. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, yānti deva-vratāḥ. If you want to become devatā, so you act like that. You qualify yourself, and you will go there, and you will get a body. You can get a body like Brahmā or you can get the body of the worm in the stool, as you like. Now it is... "Or if you like a body like Me," Kṛṣṇa says, yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām. And if you want to get a body like Kṛṣṇa, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]-that is our body, real body, sat, cit, ānanda-then you can get it.

So our intelligence will be proved when we want to go back to home, back to Kṛṣṇa. Mad-yājī mām... He gives you freedom, free pass. If you want to go to the demigod's planet... Yānti deva...what is that? Deva-yajña. Huh?

Devotee: Pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ.



Prabhupāda: Pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ.



Devotee: Bhūtāni...



Prabhupāda: Bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā mad-yājino 'pi yā... Now it is your choice. It is your choice, where you want to go. You have to go somewhere. You can remain here in this material world, you can remain to the higher planets, or you can go beyond these higher planets. Avyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ, paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. There is another nature. This is material nature, and there is another nature, spiritual nature. You can go there also, as you like. You are given full freedom. So here it is said... But wherever you go, it is said, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Kṣīṇe puṇye punar martya-lokaṁ viśanti. You can go to the Svarga-loka, the heavenly planets, by your pious activities, but kṣīṇe puṇye, when your puṇya, pious acti..., resultant action of pious activities will be finished, then you have to come back again. Kṣīṇe puṇye punar martya-lokam...



But Kṛṣṇa says, yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama: [Bg. 15.6] "If you, some way or other, you go to that place where I live..." Kṛṣṇa lives everywhere. Kṛṣṇa, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61], but He has got a special home. Just like the governor or the president, he can move many places, but still, he has got his own place, the rāja-bhavan, like that. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's place is Goloka Vṛndāvana. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu sura... [Bs. 5.29]. But goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is Kṛṣṇa. He can live in Goloka Vṛndāvana like you see here Kṛṣṇa, His Goloka Vṛndāvana. He is enjoying the company of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Rādhārāṇī. So goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ. That is viśvato-mukham. Here it is said, visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca mām evaṁ viśvato-mukham.

So if you concentrate your devotion, your mind, your activities by this bhakti-yoga, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam... Bhakti-yoga means first of all to hear. Without hearing, how you can become bhakta? You must know about Kṛṣṇa. If you want to make friendship with somebody or make some transaction, we have got already our relationship, eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. But some way or other, we have forgotten it now. Therefore in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said, anādi-bahirmukha jīva, kṛṣṇa bhuli' gelā. Some way or other, from long, long time, we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa bhuli' gelā. Ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa kailā: "Therefore Kṛṣṇa has made all these Vedas and Purāṇas and śāstra, everything, Mahābhārata." Kṛṣṇa comes there. This is... Because when we forget. Now this age is going on, Kali-yuga, forgetfulness. People are forgetting more and more Kṛṣṇa. They are not interested anymore. But Kṛṣṇa is interested. Kṛṣṇa, because we are sons of Kṛṣṇa... Just like a mad son, he is no more interested in home, or father, mother, but still, the father and mother is interested, that "This boy has gone out of home and is simply suffering." Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. "He has accepted one type of body and again giving it up, again accepting another body. In this way he is traveling," ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ, "all the planets, all the species of life. So let Me try to rescue him." Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7].

So we are falsely engaged in this material world, illusion. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. This material world, it is not our home. How we can say it is home? I am living in this body, in this home, say, for fifty, sixty, or hundred years, again get out. So how I can say it is my home? I am nitya. I must have an eternal home. Why I am this temporary? This is knowledge. This is knowledge. Unless one is not awakened to this knowledge, then he is a fool, rascal. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. One who is thinking, "This is my body. This is I am," sa eva go-kharaḥ: he is no better than animals. There are dog thinking.

So if a man thinks that "I am this body," then what is this position? He is no better than a dog. You should not be that. This human form of life is meant for this inquiry, athāto brahma-jijñāsā. "If I am Brahman, then what is...? Brahman means eternal. So why I am busy with these bodily affairs?" This is called brahma-jijñāsā. And if you become very learned scholar in the Vedānta and busy with these bodily affairs, that is another foolishness. If you actually Vedantist, then you should be inquiring that "I am eternal. Why I am put into this temporary body, and on account of this body, I am subjected to so many miserable condition of material life? Why I should remain in this condition? How I can get released from this condition?" That is human life. That is human life. And tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. If you actually very much eager to inquire about it, then you require a guru. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] "One who is inquisitive about spiritual life, about spiritual identity," tasmāt, "therefore," guruṁ prapadyeta, "you must seek out a bona fide guru."

So who can be better guru than Kṛṣṇa? He is the original guru. Here it is stated, guruḥ. In the previous verse, yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca sakhā guruḥ. Guruḥ. So you don't accept anyone guru, but accept guru, Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa is instructing Bhagavad-gītā as guru. Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. Arjuna says, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, I am accepting as my guru. I am Your śiṣya." So everyone should become like that, accept Kṛṣṇa as guru. Or Kṛṣṇa's representative. You can say, "Where is Kṛṣṇa? I don't find." But Kṛṣṇa's representative is there. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



So one who knows Kṛṣṇa perfectly, he is Kṛṣṇa's representative. And to know Kṛṣṇa is very difficult task? No. Everything is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. But if you, like a rascal, interpret in a different way, then you are not a guru. You are a goru, then you are animal. You are guru so long you take Bhagavad-gītā as it is.



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



741209SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.41

-

Bombay, December 9, 1974



Nitāi: "(The terrible fear of birth and death can never be) forsaken by anyone who resorts to any shelter other than Myself, for I am the almighty Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original source of all creation, and also the Supreme Soul of all souls."



Prabhupāda:



nānyatra mad bhagavataḥ

pradhāna-puruṣeśvarāt

ātmanaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

bhayaṁ tīvraṁ nivartate

[SB 3.25.41]



So bhayaṁ tīvram. We have become so much dull or foolish that we do not know what is bhayaṁ tīvram. Tīvram means very fierce, and bhayam, fierce fearfulness, very strong. And we are entangled in this very strong fearfulness, but we have become so dull by the spell of māyā that we don't care for it. Just imagine. At the time of death there are so many troubles, very fierceful. Sometimes a person is dying, he is attacked with coma, and he is lying unconscious. Big, big politicians, "Mr. such and such," prime minister, and this and that, but he is lying unconscious in coma for seven days. And we do not know, but he is going very fierceful test. He is dreaming so many things that sometimes he is crying. He cannot express. Especially those who are very sinful, they die in that way. So this is not finished. Then, after death, you have to enter in the womb of the mother. That is another fierceful stage. You become packed up in a bag, and the bag is filled up or surrounded by stool, urine, worms. And you have to remain there, airtight packed, for ten months.



This is actual fact. We have forgotten. Therefore we are not afraid of. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that your real trouble is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. You have to accept your birth within the womb of your mother in a packed-up condition, body developing. The germs, the worms within the urine, stool, biting very delicate skin. You cannot make any adjustment, simply moving. And if one is little pious, he can pray to God, "Please get me relief from this condition. Now I shall worship You." This is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, this consciousness. There is consciousness. After seven months, there is consciousness. Then, some way or other, you get out of the womb of your mother. Then there are so many troubles, crying. The child is crying, crying, almost dependent on mother's mercy. The mother sometime cannot understand what the child wants. Some ant is biting, and mother is thinking that she is hungry. But actually it is not hungry, but it cannot say that "One ant is biting on my back," and he is crying. There are worms, there are mosquitoes, and there are bugs, and lying in the stool, in urine, cannot say.

So these things you have to pass. And again disease, again old age, and again death, and again birth. This is bhayaṁ tīvram. But the... We have become... By the spell of māyā, by illusion, we are thinking, "Now we are making very much progress." What progress you have made? Have you stopped birth, death, old age, and disease? These troubles are awaiting. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. You should always think that "I am waiting for the miserable condition." It is already miserable condition. Even in living time there are threefold miseries. Even you sit down peacefully, then the mosquito will bite you, bugs will bite you, and you will get some letter from some enemy. So even if you cannot sit down peacefully... If you think, "Now I am sitting at my home very peacefully," so many things will disturb you one after another. That is called tīvram, bhayaṁ tīvram.

But we are so bold that we are not afraid of it. That is foolishness. If we become overbold, "I don't care for these things," that is foolishness. Mūḍha. Therefore they are called mūḍhas. There are... He is awaiting so many troubles in birth, death, old age, and disease. Therefore, the atheist class, they want to forget this. They think that there is no life after death. Just like I have given several times the example: The rabbit, when there is some enemy, it will immediately kill him, and he closes the eyes so that there is no enemy. So similarly, we are... we have become so foolish about this birth, cycle of birth and death, and we do not ever think that how to get out of this birth and death and threefold misery of this material world. That means the whole subject matter of suffering is this material body. Because we are accepting this body, therefore there are so many troubles. Therefore the solution is how to stop this acceptance of material body again and again. That is intelligence. That is intelligence.

That you cannot get by material adjustment, by your so-called scientific education, advancement of civilization. It is not possible. Therefore here it is said, nānyatra mad bhagavataḥ pradhāna-puruṣeśvarāt: "Without coming under My shelter, there is no possibility." There is no possibility. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, out of compassion, He comes when we completely become dull and rascal, we forget the sufferings of this material life, and we think that we are very nicely situated. "I have got so much bank balance and I will live very happily. I have got so nice wife and so many children. How my problem is solved." No, sir, your problem is not solved. (chuckling) Real problem is not solved. This temporary, you may have some facilities. This is called māyā. Māyayāpahṛta-jñāna. The real business of human life is to, as we have several times discussed, is to discuss about the problems of life and inquire about the Brahman. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. That is real business of life. But we are not interested. Mūḍha. We are thinking that "We are very happy. Now things will go on like this. I will never die." Śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti kim āścaryam ataḥ param. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was asked by Dharmarāja, "What is the most wonderful thing in this world?" He replied, "This is the most wonderful thing." What is that? Now,

ahany ahani bhūtāni

gacchantīha yamālayam

śeṣāḥ sthāvaram icchanti

kim āścaryam ataḥ param



"Every minute, every second, they are going to Yamarāja, means dying. But those who are living, they are thinking, 'This death will not happen to me. He is simply dying. My friend is dying. My father is dying. That's all right. But I am eternal. I will not die.' " He thinks like that. Otherwise you should have been prepared, "Oh, I will have to die. Then what is the after death?"



So the atheist class, they try to forget, that "After death, there is no life." This is atheism. There is life, sir. Kṛṣṇa says, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. How you can say there is no life? There is life, but you do not know. Kṛṣṇa says that after this human life... He does not say that you get such and such life. He simply says, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ: "You will get another body." Now, He does not say what kind of body. The question should be, "All right, then what kind of body I am going to get?" That depends on your work. You can see in your front, there are so many dogs. They are barking day and night. They have no food. They have no shelter. And anyone sees, he beats him with a stick or some stone. There is no shelter, no food. You can get a life like that also. You can get a life like a tree, standing before you for five hundred years. Or you can get a life even like a demigod if you are pious.

So that will depend on your karma. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa deho...jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. That will depend. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu [Bg. 13.22]. Everything is there is the śāstra. You can get a nice body or you can get a very bad body, not comfortable, cats' and dogs' body. But in every body the living entity thinks that he is very happy. This is called illusion. In any body, any kind, either in cat's body or dog's body or tree's body or ant's body or Brahmā's body or demigod's body or human body, he thinks, "Oh, now I am very happy." This is called prakṣepātmika-śakti. Sometimes Indra became a hog, being cursed by Bṛhaspati. So Brahmā, after some time, came to receive him, that "Indra, now you have suffered very much. Now come with me to your heavenly kingdom." He said, "Where shall I go?" "Now, in the heaven." "No, no, no. I have got my family. I have got my children. How can I go?" The hog is thinking that he has got family, he has got his children, so he cannot give up this responsibility and go to heaven. No. It is not possible. So this is called māyā. Even in hog's life, dog's life, germ's life, stool's life, everyone is thinking, "I am very happy." But he does not know that there is tīvraṁ bhayam, very fierceful condition. But he forgets.

But one who is actually wise, intelligent, he can understand that "Actually, I am not happy. I am suffering." That is intelligence. That is intelligence, when one comes to the understanding that "I am not happy actually. I am simply suffering." The Sanātana Gosvāmī, he was the finance minister in the government of Nawab Hussain Shah. So he is our guru in the disciplic succession. He inquired this question from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "I have come to You to ask that people call me, I am very learned man." Grāmya-vyavahāre paṇḍita, tāi satya māni. "By this ordinary relationship, they call me, I am very learned man. But I am such a learned man that I do not know what I am..., why I am suffering." This is intelligence. So we should know how to... Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛttiḥ. Everyone is suffering. Temporary, superficially, one may think that he is very happy, or I may think that "He is happy; I am not happy," but nobody is happy in this material world, because the four things is inevitable for everyone, the prime minister or the man in the street, everyone: janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. And there is so much trouble in the matter of birth and death and old age and disease. We are forgetting. That is called tīvraṁ bhayam.

So if one is intelligent enough, he will understand by association of sādhus that this material life is not happy at all, but we want happiness. That is a fact. Every one of us, we are searching after happiness. Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛttiḥ. Duḥkha means unhappiness, and nivṛtti means decreasing or completely avoiding. But that is not possible. Everyone... T his morning I was talking that everyone who have come on this beach just to mitigate some trouble. So many people are exercising, throwing the hand, throwing the leg or something, but because there is some trouble. Because there is some trouble. Not that because they have come in car, very rich man... But still, he is throwing his hands and legs and something like that. So we have to study like that. We should be intelligent, that there is nobody happy in this material world. Nobody happy in this material... But by the illusion of māyā he is thinking, "I am happy." That is called māyā. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. By foolishness, being spelled by māyā, he's think that "I have got my home, very nice home, gṛha. I have got my property," gṛha-kṣetra, ato gṛha-kṣetra-suta, "I have got very nice children, sons and daughters," ato gṛha-kṣetra-suta-āpta, "I have got my relatives, my friends, so nice, and vitta, so much bank balance, so much money. Then I am the most happy man." But this is moha. Janasya moho 'yam. This is illusion. This illusion, why? He is forgetting the real business of his life, entrapped by this so-called happiness, gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ [SB 5.5.8]. Therefore last, in the last verse, last night, it was discussed,

visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca

mām evaṁ viśvato-mukham

bhajanty ananyayā bhaktyā

tān mṛtyor atipāraye



So we have to give up this. "Give up this" means not that you have to become a sannyāsī or give up your... But you must know your position. At least, you must understand. You don't foolishly accept that you are very happy. Don't be fool. Be intelligent. That is śāstra. The śāstra means... A person goes to school, college, to become intelligent. Therefore there are so many śāstras, Veda, Vedas. Why Vedic literatures are there? To make us intelligent. Kṛṣṇa bhuliyā jīva... Anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gelā, ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa kailā [Cc. Madhya 20.117]. We are so foolish rascals that we have forgotten. We are suffering every moment, and still, we are thinking we are very happy. Therefore it is our misfortune that human life is meant for understanding, "What is the position of my life? Why I am suffering?" So for that understanding Kṛṣṇa has given us so many Vedic literature: four Vedas and the Purāṇas and the Upaniṣad and Vedānta-sūtra, Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata. We have got enough source of knowledge, treasure house of knowledge, but we are reluctant. We are busy with the newspaper. We have got time to waste our time to read the newspaper, bunch of newspaper, but we have no time to read Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Vedānta-sūtra, the books of actual knowledge. This is our misfortune.



So one has to visṛjya... As it is said by Kapiladeva, visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca mām evaṁ viśvato-mukham, bhajanty ananyayā. We have to forget all these so-called sources of happiness. This is misleading. Māyā. So who can, I mean to say, understand that this is illusion, māyā? Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. When one becomes a devotee, then he can understand that "The position which I am now taking for granted, that 'It is very happy,' that is mistake. That is māyā." Kṛṣṇa says that it is duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. Kṛṣṇa says. How you can take it as very nice place? Kṛṣṇa says, the supreme authority says, duḥkhālayam: "It is the place of suffering." And that is the fact. We are simply suffering. On account of this body, we are simply suffering.

Therefore our main business is how to stop the cycle of birth and death-no more accepting the body. That is answered here, as Kapiladeva said, na anyatra mad bhagavataḥ pradhāna-puruṣeśvarāt: "You cannot get it without taking shelter at My lotus feet. You cannot get out of this fear."

nānyatra mad bhāgavataḥ

pradhāna-puruṣeśvarāt

ātmanaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

bhayaṁ tīvraṁ nivartate



Tīvraṁ bhayam. What you are accepting, spelled by māyā, as very position, good position... I have told you many times. It is published in now..., that therefore, the rascal class of men, they want to..., they do not want to accept that there is life after death. "Everything is finished." Therefore in Western countries there is killing even grown-up child within the womb. They are killing, abortion. They think there is no life. Unless it comes out of the womb, there is no life. It's all nonsense theory. All nonsense theory, simply committing sinful life one after another and becoming entangled. The result will be that he will have to enter again into the womb of mother and he will be killed. He will be killed not once. He will be killed again when he enters the womb of the mother; again he will be killed. For many, many years he will not be allowed to see the light of the sun.



Therefore na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. People are becoming so narādhama, so sinful and mūḍha, that there is no rescue unless one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There is no rescue. The whole world is going just like the flies. When there is fire, open fire, they come from long distance, and "Fut! Fut! Fut! Fut! Fut!" being captivated by the beauty of the fire. Similarly, this whole civilization, this so-called civilization, human civilization, is falling in the fire of illusory māyā, "Fut! Fut! Fut! Fut! Fut!" and again and again. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. Once takes birth, one again dies, again suffers. But we have no brain, mūḍha. Therefore is called mūḍha. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is so kind and His devotees are so kind that they... Kṛṣṇa comes. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjā... [Bg. 4.7]. He comes. He is very unhappy by seeing our unhappiness in this material world because we are sons of Kṛṣṇa. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7].

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



He is the father. So as father is very unhappy, seeing the unhappy condition of the sons, although the son does not know, but father is unhappy, so Kṛṣṇa is unhappy. Therefore He comes. He canvasses that "Why you are captivated by this false, so-called happiness? You give up this." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. "I will give you relief. You come to Me. You will live happily, eternally, blissful life, without any scarcity, without any trouble."



So the Kṛṣṇa's business-He comes here. He has no business to come here because His agent, prakṛti, is doing everything. But still, out of compassion, He comes in His original form, Kṛṣṇa, or in His incarnation as Kapiladeva, and He says the same thing, "My dear sons, My dear rascal sons, you are suffering so much on account of this material contact. Please come to Me. Take shelter of Me, and you will be happy." This is going on. And Kṛṣṇa's representative says the same thing, that "You rascal, you take shelter of Kṛṣṇa and be happy." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are going from door to door of all rascals. I tell it, declare it publicly. Anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is a rascal number one. I declare it. Come, any intelligent man. I shall talk with him. I shall prove that he is rascal number one if he has no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That's a fact.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is meant for the rascal number one, and we always canvassing, soliciting, "Please take to this." Not that we have invented something. As Kṛṣṇa said to Arjuna that "This philosophy, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness philosophy..."

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



"I explained this philosophy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness many, many millions of years ago to the sun-god." When He says, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam... [Bg. 4.1] Vivasvān, the name of the sun-god... At the present moment his name is Vivasvān. People do not know what is the sun planet, but we know the president of the sun planet. His name is Vivasvān. How do you know? We understand from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore our knowledge is perfect. You can say, "Have you gone to the sun planet?" No, there is no need of going there. Here is the authority. Kṛṣṇa says, so we accept it, that's all. Our business is finished. Kṛṣṇa is perfect. Whatever He says, it is perfect. Therefore... I am not perfect; that's a fact. But because I am speaking of the words coming from the perfect, therefore it is perfect. It is not speculation. It is very easy for us-because we accept the words of the perfect. Therefore, whatever we say, it is perfect. You may challenge, "Are you perfect?" I am not perfect. Because I am not speaking my words, I am speaking the words of the perfect, therefore, whatever I speak, it is perfect.



So this knowledge, Kṛṣṇa is canvassing. He comes there occasionally. He comes once in the day of Brahmā, and the Brahmā's days is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. It means four, forty-three lakhs of years, add three zeros, some crores of years after, Kṛṣṇa comes once in Brahmā's days. Yadā yadā hi... That is just like the sun rises early in the morning, say, after twelve years, er, twelve hours. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's coming here, there is calculation in the śāstra. He comes once in a day of Brahmā. Means some crores of years after He comes. So things deteriorate. And not only He comes as Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, He comes at a certain period, and still, the His incarnations also come to educate these foolish people who are thinking that "We are living very happily," to canvass them, to say the same thing. Similarly, Kapiladeva also, He is propounding the Sāṅkhya philosophy. This is Sāṅkhya philosophy. What Kapiladeva is saying, Sāṅkhya philosophy, means unalloyed devotion to the Lord. That is Sāṅkhya philosophy. There is another Sāṅkhya philosophy. He also imitated the name of Kapila, but he is atheist Sāṅkhya philosophy. But here we should remember Sāṅkhya philosophy originally propounded by Kapiladeva, the son of Devahūti.

The Kapiladeva, the son of Devahūti, explained to His mother. The mother wanted to know from the son. His father left home, and the mother was kept by the, at the care of his son, grown-up son. That is Vedic system, that when the son is grown up, the mother should be left at the care of the grown-up son, and the father should leave. He should become vānaprastha or sannyāsa, no more connection with wife. This is Vedic system. So Kapiladeva's father, Kardama Muni, he left home, and he kept his wife under the care of Kapiladeva, and He is propounding this Sāṅkhya philosophy. And today's verse is na anyatra mad bhagavataḥ: "Without Him, without taking shelter of bhagavataḥ, Bhagavān..." Bhagavān means ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa, almighty Lord. Nobody can give you protection. Just like when one is condemned to death by the justice, so there is no other way to save him than by the mercy of the king or the president-he can save-similarly, we are all condemned. We are suffering this material condition of life, constantly a chain of body, and suffering the threefold miseries. Tīvraṁ bhayam. This is very fierceful, but we do not understand. We are living in such condition. But by the spell of māyā we are thinking we are very happy. But that is not actual fact. It is tīvraṁ bhayam.

But if you want to get relief, then you must have to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He says, and revive your old connection. Revive your... What is that old connection? That we are eternal servant of God. Don't foolishly... Don't become rascal, that you are one with God or equal to God, that you have become God. This is all rascaldom, simply rascaldom. You are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya... [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. That is the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. That is the beginning of teaching. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa. That is the beginning of knowledge, when we can understand that we are eternal, we are sons of Kṛṣṇa, eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Just like by nature a son and servant, there is no different. Son also gives service to the father, and the servant also gives service to the master. So there is affection, either as master or servant or son and father, but it is the duty of the servant or son to give service to the Supreme. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has defined that real svarūpa... Svarūpa means original identification, not artificially. Artificially you can think, "I have become God. I have become Bhagavān. I am this. I am that," all rascaldom. The real position is that eternal servitude. That is not this servitude. We sometimes shudder, "Oh, I have to become servant?" No, you do not know how much happy life is that servitude. That we do not know. We compare with this because materially, we are infected. We are thinking to become servant of God is like servant of... No. There, in the spiritual world, the servant of God and servant is the same.

Therefore guru, guru is servant of Kṛṣṇa, but he is accepted as Kṛṣṇa. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. This is the verdict of all śāstra. Guru never says that "I am Kṛṣṇa. I am God. I am Bhagavān." No. He never says. He is not guru then. He will say, "I am the most humble servant of the servant of the servant of God, not direct servant-servant, servant, servant, servant, hundred times down [Cc. Madhya 13.80]." Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's words. Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ. The more you become servant, servant, you are perfect servant. Don't try to become direct servant. That is not possible. You cannot become direct servant. You first of all become servant of the servant. The guru is the servant of Kṛṣṇa, and you become his servant. Then you, you are bona fide servant. That is our real position.

So therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu offers His prayer, ayi nanda-tanuja patitaṁ kiṅkaraṁ mām. Kiṅkaram. Kiṅkara means servant. He is offering prayer, "My dear Lord, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa..." Kṛṣṇa accepted the sonhood of mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja, so He is very much pleased if anyone addresses Kṛṣṇa as the son of Vasudeva, or Vāsudeva. Vāsudeva means "the son of Vasudeva." And if someone addresses Him, Yaśodā-nandana, yaśodā-nandana braja-jana-rañjana, He is very happy. Because when you address Kṛṣṇa in relationship with pure devotee, He is very ni..., He is very happy. Therefore we address, "Yaśodā-nandana," "Nanda-nandana," "Vasudeva-nandana," "Rādhikā-ramaṇa," like that. So therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu addresses Kṛṣṇa, ayi nanda-tanuja: "O the son of Nanda Mahārāja." Ayi nanda-tanuja patitaṁ kiṅkaraṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau: "Now I am Your eternal servant. Some way or other, I have fallen down in this ocean of birth and death." Bhavāmbudhau. Bhava. Bhava means you become and again vanish. That is bhava. And that is ambudhi. Ambudhi means a sea. You do not know how long you are taking this business, accepting one body and again dying, again accepting, and... Not only here, throughout the whole universe, many planets, many species of life, this is going on.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



In this way we are wandering one life after another, one planet to another, in this way, millions, millions of years. We don't care for it because we are not afraid. We are so proud and, I mean to say, brave that tīvraṁ bhayam, we don't care for it. Tīvraṁ bhayam. That is tīvram. Just like after a few years I will enter again the tīvraṁ bhayam, but we are careless. This is foolishness. This is a fool's... "Where angels dare not, fools rush in." That means we are so...



Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, mūḍha. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhaḥ prapadyante narādhamaḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, not surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, their categories have been explained that sinful, duṣkṛtina. Duṣkṛtina means duṣkārya. And kṛti, kṛti means very meritorious. But duṣkṛti: merit is being misused for some nonsense activities. Therefore duṣkṛti. There are two kinds of activities: sukṛti and duṣkṛti. Sukṛti means for some good purpose, and duṣkṛti, for some bad purpose. That is called... So we are all engaged, always engaged to engage our brain to manufacture something, will be very facilitious(?) for committing sinful activities. That is science, advancement of science. So many things, just like contraceptive now advertised by the scientist: "Now, here is a very nice contraceptive. Use it." That means people will take of the scientific advancement and entangle him in sinful activities. That's all. Duṣkṛtina: meritorious, but it is used for sinful activities. That is called duṣkṛtina.

So this class of men-those who have got merit, but it is not being used for useful purposes, for some sinful activities-they are called duṣkṛtina. This class of men, atheist class of men, they will never surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narā... Mūḍha [Bg. 7.15], and they do not understand that he has to face so much trouble in birth and death and old age and he has no knowledge how to stop it. Therefore they are mūḍha, rascal. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. And lowest of the... Human mind, human brain, can understand that "I am suffering," but because he is not understanding, therefore he is the lowest of the humankind, narādhamāḥ. These things are described in the Bhagavad-gītā. "No, they have passed M.A. degree, or Phd, M.A." Now, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. The knowledge has no value because it is māyā. He is thinking... He is employing for temporary happiness, māyā, māyā happiness. Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. He has learned engineering and planning very high skyscraper building, but he does not know how long he will live in that skyscraper building. Say, twenty-five years, fifty years, that's all. Māyā-sukhāya, temporary happiness. He is engaging his brain in so stupendous, horrible work, ugra-karma. Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. Real business he has neglected, how to get out of these clutches of birth and death, and he's engages his brain for manufacturing a skyscraper building, and he is thinking, "Now advancement of knowledge, advancement of education." This is going on.

Therefore, if we want to save ourself from the fierceful condition of this material life, then we must take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the verdict of the all śāstras, and Kṛṣṇa comes for this purpose, and Kṛṣṇa's devotees work day and night for this purpose, and that is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness... (end)



741210SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.42

-

Bombay, December 10, 1974



Nitāi: "(It is because of My supremacy that the wind blows, out of fear of Me; the sun shines out of fear of Me, and the lord of the) clouds, Indra, sends forth showers out of fear of Me. The fire burns out of fear of Me, and death goes about taking its toll out of fear of Me."



Prabhupāda:



mad-bhayād vāti vāto 'yaṁ

sūryas tapati mad-bhayāt

varṣatīndro dahaty agnir

mṛtyuś carati mad-bhayāt

[SB 3.25.42]



The ultimate, mṛtyuś carati mad-bhayāt . So bhaya, bhaya means fearfulness. Bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt. In the previous verse the Lord Kapiladeva said that "If anyone wants to get out of this fearful situation..." Bhayaṁ tīvraṁ nivartate. Ātmanaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ bhayaṁ tīvraṁ nivartate. We are always fearful. Material life is not very happy life because we are always fearful. That's a fact. Nobody can say, "No, I am not afraid of anything." That is false. Everyone is afraid of something, everyone-bird, beast, human being, everyone, bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt-because we have got absorption in the second category of life. Second category means this bodily conception of life, dvitīya abhiniveśa. I am thinking at the present moment that "I am this body." Everyone is thinking. Therefore, when there is fear of destruction of this body, we become very much afraid, perplexed. We have seen in Los Angeles. There was earthquake, and all the neighborhood, women especially, began to scream, fearful, "Now death is coming."



So everyone is afraid. This is the material nature, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna, four things, material wants: eating, sleeping, fearing, and defending. So Kṛṣṇa said that if you want... Kapiladeva and Kṛṣṇa the same. Kṛṣṇa has many form. Kapiladeva is one of the form, āveśāvatāra. There are many incarnation. Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there is a list of different avatāras, and the conclusion... Lord Buddha's also name is there. Kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati, sura-dviṣām. So Lord Buddha's name is there, and Jayadeva has also given his poem Daśa-vidha, Daśāvatāra-stotra. In that Daśāvatāra also, Lord Buddha's name is there: keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. So Vaiṣṇavas, they know, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, how many avatāras are there. They do not accept therefore any bogus avatāra. Some rascal will say that "I am avatāra." The Vaiṣṇava will not accept. Tasmāt śāstra-vidhānoktam. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that śāstra-vidhānoktam, kāryākārya. We have to accept and reject according to the śāstra, not that any bogus man comes and says that "I am avatāra." That is not acceptable. The Vaiṣṇava will not accept. A foolish man may accept; that is a different thing. So certainly, the Supreme Personality has got many avatāra, but each avatāra has, has been mentioned in the śāstras, different avatāras. So Kapiladeva is avatāra. Therefore He is saying, "Me," mad-bhayāt . Mad-bhayāt .

So mad-bhayād vāti vāto 'yam. These are the very strong sources of fearfulness. If there is cyclone, it is very fearful. It is going on very nicely, but if it is a big cyclone, then it is fearful. So there is necessity of cyclone also. There is necessity of scorching heat. There is necessity of rainfall. So there are different directors and officers, and they are all servant of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta says, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. The only master, supreme master, is Kṛṣṇa, and all others, they are bhṛtya, servant. The demigods, the demigods, they are all servants of Kṛṣṇa. Demigods there are: Sūrya, Candra, Vāyu, Varuṇa, and Bṛhaspati, so many, thirty-three crores of demigods. They have got different planets. But all of them are servants of Kṛṣṇa. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. The modern so-called scientists, they say, "There is no demigod. There is no God. This is all natural function." That's all right. Nature is working. But nature is matter. Matter cannot work without the direction of the living being. You cannot say matter works independently. That is not possible. Everything is...

Just like here it is said... Now we have got experience in the beach. There is always big, big waves. That water is also dull matter, and the air pushing the dull matter, water, and there is big, big waves, and it is dashing on the earth. These things are going on. So they say it is nature's work. But nature is not independent. We get this information from authoritative śāstra. Here Kapiladeva says that... There is high wind. That is due to the command, mad-bhayāt vāti vātaḥ. High wind is there. Sometimes there is breezy, very nice, sometimes very high wind. So there is direction. You cannot say that it is automatically happening, no. There is direction. Kṛṣṇa says that mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "Under My superintendence, prakṛti, nature..." The scientists, they say nature is working wonderfully, but after all, nature is not under your control. That you have to accept. You may defy Kṛṣṇa, or God, but you cannot defy the natural, nature's activities. You are subordinate. But because we do not know the background of nature, therefore we think that "Nature is working. There is no God."

But that is not fact. Nature is working under the direction. This is theism. One who knows. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that these natural, I mean to say, ingredients, prakṛti, jaḍa-prakṛti, or material nature, five elements, kṣitiḥ, āpam, tejas, marut, vyoma, this marut, vāyu, and tejas, this sunshine, kṣitiḥ, āpam, tejas, and water, the seas and oceans, the land, vast land, kṣitiḥ, āpam, tejas, marut, vyoma, then sky-they are different manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's external energy. They are not independent. There are many śāstras. Therefore one has to consult the śāstras. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is also said, "The material nature is very powerful." Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā: [Bs. 5.44] "The material nature is so powerful that it can create, sṛṣṭi, sthiti, it can maintain, and it can destroy also." Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana: "It is so powerful, it can do that."

Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā.

But how the material nature is working? Chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. The material nature is working just like shadow. Shadow. If you have got this real hand and there is shadow, if you move your hand, the shadow of the hand also moves. Similarly, this material nature is working in touch with the spirit soul. Just like big pilot is flying in the sky-we have got experience-but it is not independently flying. There is the pilot. He is pushing the button, and it is flying. A big car, big machine, big factory-without touch of spiritual touch, there is no question of moving. We have got this practical experience. Where is the evidence that, without the touch of spirit soul, that machine is moving? Is there any evidence? Then how you can say that without God, the whole universe is moving? There is no evidence. We have no such experience. Then how you can say that without the direction of God, the material nature can move? There is no such experience. And from the evidences of śāstra... Here it is said, "The wind is blowing, the water is moving, the sun is giving scorching heat, everything, all under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Not only that, direction, but it is said, bhayāt . Bhayāt . Bhayāt means if the respective directors or agent of different material elements, if they do not work properly, then he is punished as the master punishes the servant. Mayādhyakṣeṇa [Bg. 9.10].

When Kṛṣṇa was present, there was Giridhārī. Giridhārī, He lifted the mountain, Govardhana Hill. Govardhana-dhārī. So Nanda Mahārāja was arranging to worship the Indra, Indra-yajña. There are different kinds of yajña. But Indradeva was little proud that he is all in all. Everyone thinks... If he is in power, then he tries to give some trouble to others. Similarly, all the demigods, they are, if they are not satisfied, they will give you trouble. Similarly, the Indra-yajña was there, but Kṛṣṇa said to His father, "My dear father, there is no need of Indra-yajña. You better worship Govardhana Hill. He is symbolic representation of God because the cows, they get their food, grasses. So better you make this Govardhana-yajña." So first of all, Nanda Mahārāja was not willing, but out of the affection of Kṛṣṇa... That is devotee, that Kṛṣṇa... Devotees of Kṛṣṇa, they are acting always in love for Kṛṣṇa. So Nanda Mahārāja changed his idea of worshiping Indra. Rather, on the contrary, all the ingredients he collected, he worshiped the Govardhana Hill and stopped Indra-yajña. So Indra became very much angry, and he sent the vicious cloud, and whole Vṛndāvana was inundated by flood. And Kṛṣṇa showed that "Your power is not even competent to compare with the finger of My hand." Therefore He lifted the Govardhana Hill with the finger of His left hand and saved all the people of Vṛndāvana. Then Indra came to worship Him. These things are there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

So everyone is servant. Everyone is servant. You do not... You, you can perform yajñas for ordinarily, but if you keeps, if you be simply under the shelter of Kṛṣṇa, you do not require to perform different demigod yajñas, deva-yajña. That is not required. The example is given that if you pour water in the root of the tree, you do not require to pour water in the branches, in the twigs, in the flowers, in the fruits. It is automatically done. If you supply food to the stomach, then you do not require to feed the eyes, hands, legs, separately. There is no need; neither it is possible to give separate, I mean to say, food, materials for nourishing the different parts of the body. One place is sufficient. Similarly, if we worship Kṛṣṇa, the source of everything, the root of everything... Aham ādir hi yajñānām, devānām, deva-yajña.

So Kṛṣṇa says that you don't require to perform different yajñas. That is not possible in this age especially. It requires large amount of wealth to perform such yajñas. Nowadays people are suffering for want of sufficient food grains, and in the yajña tons and thousands of mounds of food grains are offered in the fire. That is good. But there is no food grains; there is no ghee. That is not possible in this age. Therefore yajña is not possible. The... You can perform very easily the saṅkīrtana-yajña. Then everything will be performed. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Those who are intelligent person, they can perform yajña, saṅkīrtana-yajña.

This is recommended in this age. Other yajñas is not possible. Kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ [SB 12.3.52]. Tretāyām. Yajña performance was very prominent in the Tretā-yuga, at that time. But at present moment it is not possible. Dhyāna-yajña, dravya-yajña, jñāna-yajña, and saṅkīrtana-yajña. So in this age, saṅkīrtana-yajña is recommended. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Sumedhasaḥ means those who have got good brain. And it is so easy, anywhere you can perform. Any part of the world, you assemble together. Saṅkīrtana means bahubhir militvā, by intermingling various persons. Just like we are doing here saṅkīrtana-kīrtana and saṅkīrtana. Kīrtana means alone, and saṅkīrtana means in the assembly of many others. That is called saṅkīrtana. So that is recommended, that many persons, you sit together. There is no need of even instrument, but because Lord Caitanya introduced this khol, karatāla. Otherwise this clapping is sufficient. So it is very easy, saṅkīrtana-yajña. You sit down familywise, all the family members. If you perform saṅkīrtana, Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, with the clapping of hands, that is saṅkīrtana-yajña, very easy to perform. But people will not do that. Instead of performing saṅkīrtana-yajña in the evening to become free from all fears of life, they will go to the restaurant, to the cinema and other places, talking unnecessarily in clubs, societies, waste their time. This is going on. This is modern education. This is modern civilization. They are not aware of the tīvraṁ bhayam, the most fierceful situation of birth, death, old age, and disease. This is the opportunity, the human life, how to get out of it. The means are there. But we are so fools. We are so foolishly educated in the name of modern civilization that we neglect all these things and we place ourself in the waves of the material nature. Māyār bośe, jāccho bhese', Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi. We are being carried away by the waves of this material nature, and we have submitted to the laws of material nature. And therefore we are subjected to birth, death, old age, and disease. And not only birth-there is no guarantee what kind of birth next life.

So we should not misuse this... Labdhvā sudurlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte mānuṣyam [SB 11.9.29]. We should not waste our this valuable life, human form of life. We begin our this evolution. First of all, the world is covered with water. Pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedam **. Now, still, three-fourth of this earthly planet is covered with water. In the beginning, the whole earthly planet was covered with water. Gradually, the water is drying up, and the land is coming. Then we are calculating, "This is Asia. This is America. This is Europe." Land is coming out. And gradually land, land, land, land-there will be only land, no water. That means destruction. When there will be no water and scorching heat, the whole earthly planet will be ablaze and everything will be burned into ashes. Then again there will be rainfall, and everything will be mixed up, and then again there will destruction. This is going on. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. And similarly, our position with this body. This will be also dissolved again. This nice form you have got, I have got, but when it will be finished, this is finished forever. We are not going to get any more. You will get different body, not exactly this body. It is bubble. One bubble lost, that is lost forever. That is lost forever. But we are so foolish, we are thinking, "This is permanent settlement, permanent settlement." This is called ignorance. There is no question of permanent settlement. Temporary under the... Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Under the laws of nature we are getting different types of bodies, different types of opportunities. And it is going on. But we are spirit soul; we are not this material body.

So we must have sense and take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to save ourself from this material condition of life, repetition of birth, death, old age, and disease. And if you think, when Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me. I will give you protection"... So because we are foolish, we think Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. Because we are mūḍhas, rascals, we think that Kṛṣṇa is a person like us. Mānuṣīm. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. He comes to be visible by us exactly in the same way as we are. Mānuṣīṁ tanum. But we think, when Kṛṣṇa comes, "Oh, He is a man. He is a man like us. God is different." Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ. Because we are mūḍhas. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ.

So they do not know what is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore when Kṛṣṇa demands, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], we foolish people, we think, "Oh, it is too much. Kṛṣṇa is so proud that He is commanding us that 'You surrender unto Me.' Oh, I am not so fool. I am not going to do that." This is the position. Mūḍha. Because mūḍha, they are taking Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. Because He is so kind He comes as human being and gives you the right information, right instruction. But we are so rascal that we do not accept it, do not accept it. That is our misfortune. Those who are fortunate enough, they accept Kṛṣṇa. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. That fortune comes not so easily-after struggling, after associating with Vaiṣṇavas, with devotees, after cultivating knowledge for many, many births.

So we should take this chance. We should not be foolish. Don't be foolish, mūḍha. Just surrender to Kṛṣṇa and execute Kṛṣṇa's service, what Kṛṣṇa says. Do that; you will be saved. You will be saved from these clutches of māyā, repetition of birth and death. Even if you fall down, if you do not be able to execute devotional service fully, still, you will get next change as a human being. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. You will get again chance of this human body. But if you don't take Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then there is no guarantee. You can become next life a cat, dog, tree, or anything, according to the infection and quality. But if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious and if you give even little service to Kṛṣṇa, your next life as human being is guaranteed. And that is not ordinary human life, but śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe. Tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi [SB 1.5.17]. Nārada Muni said that "If one engages himself in devotional service out of sentiment, it doesn't matter. Still, if he does some service to Kṛṣṇa, then he is gainer. And one who is very practical, does not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and take to material activities and thinks that he is very advanced, there is no gain." He is under karma. According karma, he will get body.

But a Kṛṣṇa conscious human being, even though he is unable to execute properly, even if he falls down, his human life is guaranteed. His human life is guaranteed. And that life in a rich family and in very nice purified family, śucīnām. Śucīnām means purified family, nice brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava family. Or śrīmatām. Śrī means opulence, those who are possessing opulence, means big mercantile family, big rich family, or big nice brāhmaṇa Vaiṣṇava family. You get again chance. Just like the children of these Kṛṣṇa conscious members, from childhood they are getting. Our this boy, Mr. West, he is getting chance to worship Kṛṣṇa. So this is śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe [Bg. 6.41]. And how he is satisfied. There are so many children in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. From the very beginning of life they have got chance for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, attending maṅgala-ārātrika, taking prasādam, and reading the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. Life is successful. Just see.

So we are after giving chance to the bewildered persons, mislead person, materialistic person, to take up this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and their success is guaranteed. Because Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. If you think Kṛṣṇa is ordinary person, how? Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that "Don't think Me that I am ordinary person. Under My direction the wind is blowing, the sea is working, the sun it heating, and the so many things are going on." Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ [Bg. 9.10]. "Don't take Me so slightly." Everything is explained. Now it is our business to accept it or not accept it.

Thank you very much. (end)



741211SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.43

-

Bombay, December 11, 1974



Nitāi: "(The yogis, equipped with) transcendental knowledge and renunciation and engaged in devotional service for their eternal benefit, take shelter of My lotus feet, and since I am the Lord, they are thus eligible to enter into the kingdom of Godhead without fear."



Prabhupāda:



jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena

bhakti-yogena yoginaḥ

kṣemāya pāda-mūlaṁ me

praviśanty akuto-bhayam

[SB 3.25.43]



Akuto-bhayam. Here in this material world-simply bhayam, only fearfulness. Nobody is safe here. At any moment the life may be finished. Nobody can guarantee. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. In the śāstra it is said that here in this material world there is danger in every step. You are walking very nicely, and sometimes suppose there is a skin of plantain, and you slip, and your leg may be broken. Padaṁ padam. Even walking, even sitting-heart failure.



So there is no guarantee. Any moment, we can die. And it is therefore called mṛtyu-loka, "The place where death is," I mean to say, "sure." "As sure as death." People give surety example: "As sure as death." As nobody can avoid death, it is sure. You may be very strong and stout in your health and go on exercising on the beach daily, but you can die any moment. There is no guarantee. But everyone wants akuto-bhayam: "There may not be... I must be very safe and sound in every respect, in my social position, so far my health is concerned, anything." Everyone wants that security. But there is no security. That is called struggle for existence. There is no security, and the rascals are struggling to get security. How it is possible? If this place is meant for that purpose, padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām, then how you can get security? This is foolishness, mūḍha. There is no possibility of security; still, they are making security in this way, that way, this way, that way, that way.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ: [Bg. 15.7] "All these living entities..." Kṛṣṇa does not say that "I am for the Hindu living entities or the Indian living entities." Where it is in Bhagavad-gītā? Why the foolish men take it that Kṛṣṇa Hindu, Kṛṣṇa Indian? Kṛṣṇa says that suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām: "I am friend of all living entities," sarva-bhūtānām. Not only human society, but animal society, the plant society, the aquatic society, there are so many living entities. Ananta-koṭi. Sa anantyāya kalpate. The living entities, there is no limit. There are so many quantities. And Kṛṣṇa says that suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati: "When one understands that I, Kṛṣṇa, is the friend of everyone..." Kṛṣṇa, when says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], He does not say to Arjuna. He says to all living entities, without any exception. Sarva-bhūtānām. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. This is position of Kṛṣṇa.

So by giving up Kṛṣṇa... We have now given up Kṛṣṇa. We are canvassing. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are canvassing everyone, every door, "Please come to Kṛṣṇa." This is our business. But they will not come. They have forgotten Kṛṣṇa or they have rejected Kṛṣṇa. This is the position. Therefore they are always in fearfulness position, always fearful. Bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt. This is certain(?). When there is fear? When one understands there is something else than Kṛṣṇa, then he is fearful. Then he is fearful. Dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ. Dvitīya means forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa. "I am Kṛṣṇa's eternal servant. I am Kṛṣṇa's eternal part and parcel, son, or most intimate relationship." Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā, Kṛṣṇa says. Sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya [Bg. 14.4], Kṛṣṇa says. There are so many forms of life, 8,400,000. But Kṛṣṇa claims ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā, "I am the seed-giving father of everyone." So where is Kṛṣṇa Hindu or Indian? Where it is stated? Why people take like that? That is not fact. Therefore they are in the fearful condition of life, always afraid, "What will happen next?" Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. Asad-grahāt. People have taken something which is asat. The Vedic instruction is asato mā sad gama: "Don't remain in the asat, in the untruth. Come to the Truth." So at the material world we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, and we are situated in the asat, which is not truth. Therefore there is bhaya, fearfulness. Just like a child, if he is forlorn by the father and mother, then he is always in fearful condition, crying on the street, "Where is my father? Where is my mother?" This is our position.

So if you want to be not fearfulness, no more fear, abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ, if you become out of fearfulness then you have to take shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is begging. Because we are Kṛṣṇa's sons or we have got very intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa and we have given Him up and we have forgotten Him, therefore we are suffering. So Kṛṣṇa, being father, Kṛṣṇa, being friend of everyone, He comes, and He canvasses, and at last He says, "You rascal," sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... [Bg. 18.66], ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyaḥ. "You are rotting here by repeatedly committing sinful life. Therefore you are changing from one body to another, and this is your material condition." Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. "You are thinking... When you are a human being or American, you are thinking, 'Now I am in very good position,' but next moment you can become a dog, you can become an insect." Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. But the rascals, they do not know. They, he's thinking, "I am secure." And although he is fearful, he is thinking secure. This is called māyā. He is always fearful. Still, he is thinking that he is secure. This is called māyā.

So actually, if you want to become secure, then you have to take to this yoga system, jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena. It is said, jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena bhakti-yogena yoginaḥ. Yogis. Yogis means bhakti-yogī, not these gymnastic yogi. Therefore the yogis... Of course, to concentrate the mind under some mechanical process... Therefore, those who are under too much under the concept of bodily concept of life, for them, this haṭha-yoga is recommended, because they know simply this body. "So all right, you make exercise in this way. You practice this āsana. You sit down like this. You see like this. You think like this." In this way there is a mechanical process to control the mind and senses. That is gymnastic part of the yoga system. But real process is to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. The yogi's business is, by controlling the mind, focus it toward Kṛṣṇa or Lord Viṣṇu. That is real yoga system.

So as soon as you focus your mind upon Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu, that is bhakti-yoga. Either you do it by meditation or do it twenty-four hours by practical application of your activities for Kṛṣṇa, that is called bhakti-yoga. And that is called samādhi. Even if you are going to some place for Kṛṣṇa's business, to see the police commissioner or going to the court for some degree or..., because you are doing-you are concentrating your mind on Kṛṣṇa-that is called yoga, bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is so, so easy. Yat karoṣi yaj juhoṣi yad aśnāsi, yat tapasyasi kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam [Bg. 9.27]. The result should be given to Kṛṣṇa. After working so hard day and night... People are working so hard day and night, but the result, they are enjoying. And a bhakti-yogī, the same thing-they are also working day and night, but the result is for Kṛṣṇa. This is the difference between bhakti-yogī and ordinary karmīs. Therefore ordinary karmīs, they cannot understand that the bhaktas are on the transcendental platform. They think, "They are like us. By sentiment, they are chanting and dancing." No. That is not. It is bhakti-yoga. And that is based on jñāna and vairāgya.

One cannot be bhakti-yogī without jñāna and vairāgya. It is not a sentimental thing; it is based on pure knowledge. What is that pure knowledge? Pure knowledge means "I do not belong to this material world. I am spirit soul. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. Therefore my business is to serve the Supreme Brahman, or Parabrahman." Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. Arjuna agreed to serve Kṛṣṇa. Why? Because he understood Kṛṣṇa, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, śāśvataṁ puruṣam: puruṣam [Bg. 10.12], the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not impersonal. Impersonal feature is one of the features of Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa factually is the Supreme Person, vekti.(?) That is called jñāna. And without this knowledge, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15], by studying all the Vedas and Vedāntas, if one cannot understand what is the nature of Kṛṣṇa, what is actually Kṛṣṇa, then he is not in perfect knowledge. Ajñāna.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. Who surrenders to Kṛṣṇa? Unless one is fully in knowledge, "What is Absolute Truth, what I am, what is my relationship with the Absolute Truth..." That is called knowledge. And if one understands that "Kṛṣṇa is my eternal master. He is my eternal father. I am not this body. I am also the same thing as Kṛṣṇa, spiritual..." Mamaivāṁśaḥ. "I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. If Kṛṣṇa is gold, then I am also gold. But Kṛṣṇa is gold mine; I am gold earring, that's all." This is knowledge. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena. And when one comes to this knowledge, then he becomes reluctant to this material attachment. That is called vairāgya. Just like you boys and girls who have joined this movement. You have understood to some extent that "We didn't require this material opulence. We want Kṛṣṇa." So the idea that we don't want this material opulence, that is called vairāgya. And why you want Kṛṣṇa? Because Kṛṣṇa is your eternal master, eternal father. That is called jñāna. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena. Not sentimental. We must know very clearly what is Kṛṣṇa-that is jñāna-what is my relationship with Kṛṣṇa-that is jñāna-and what is my duty to Kṛṣṇa-that is jñāna. And as soon as you know all these things-what is Kṛṣṇa, what you are, what is your relationship, and what is your duty-then naturally you become reluctant to these material activities. That is called vairāgya.

So jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena bhakti-yogena [SB 3.25.18]. How this jñāna and vairāgya can be awakened? The jñāna is there, but it is now covered. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya. It is stated in the Caitanya..., that my relationship with Kṛṣṇa is nitya-siddha. Nitya-siddha means it is eternal; it is not artificial, not that we accept Kṛṣṇa as my master or father or like this, artificially. This is eternal fact. But by forgetting Kṛṣṇa, I am suffering. This is your fact. So if we want to be free from this fearfulness, sadā samudvigna-dhiyām... That is the Prahlāda Mahārāja's advices. Prahlāda Mahārāja was asked by his father, "My dear boy, what best thing you have learned from your teachers?" So he said,

tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

[SB 7.5.5]



That is the best thing. He said tat sādhu manye asura-varya dehinām. Anyone who has accept this material body... This is asat. It will not stay. But we have accepted this body. But we are so foolish that we do not know that "I am not this body; I am separate from this body. Somehow or other, I am not entrapped or encaged in this body." Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja said, tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehinām. Dehinām. Dehī means... Dehinām means one who has accepted this material body. And Vaiṣṇava is suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām [SB 3.25.21]. Kapiladeva has said. A Vaiṣṇava who is in connection with Kṛṣṇa, his business is to go door to door and canvass everyone, "My dear sir, you are not this body. You are wasting your time only under the concept of body. You are Kṛṣṇa's. You become Kṛṣṇa's servant." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. "My dear sir, you are not this body. You are not American. You are not Indian. You are not brāhmaṇa. You are not śūdra. You are not cat. You are not dog. You are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and you serve Kṛṣṇa." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That's all.



This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's advice. Yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. It is not very difficult. You haven't got to become very learned scholar to become guru. Guru's business is to give the right information. That is guru. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, āmāra ājñāya guru hañā: "Every one of you become guru." "Oh, I am not a learned man," or "I am this, I am that, how can I become guru?" Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "No, it is very easy thing."

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



Yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa. "You become guru simply by advising everyone the instruction which Kṛṣṇa has given." That's all. You become guru. It is not at all difficult thing. But if you want to cheat others that you are Bhagavān, you are this and that, you are yogi, you are very powerful, and "I am God," then you will cheat, because you are neither God. You are less than a dog. You are falsely claiming that you are God. That is not your position. You are servant of God, that is your position. That is real jñāna. Therefore Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that don't talk all nonsense thing. Simply say the real thing.



And what is the real thing? That is explained by Kṛṣṇa: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. You take this mission, "My dear sir, you give up everything nonsense. You simply surrender to Kṛṣṇa." Then you become guru. Is it very difficult to become guru? No. But we shall not take this business. We shall talk all nonsense and become guru and incarnation and God and so on, so on, and cheat others and cheat oneself. This is going on. Otherwise, to become guru is not at all difficult. Simply you surrender yourself to Kṛṣṇa. You become abhayaṁ sattva-śuddhiḥ. You become fearless, "Yes, I am now under the protection of Kṛṣṇa. I have no more fear. I don't care for anyone. I simply take to Kṛṣṇa." Akuto-bhayam. Akuto-bhayam. This is said by Kapiladeva also, all śāstra says like that, and Kṛṣṇa also says the same thing in the Bhagavad-gītā. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] "If you want to know Me, then it is through bhakti, not your so-called jñāna and karma and yoga." You will never be able to understand. You will never be able to understand. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā [Bg. 7.25]. You will be simply covered by yoga-māyā. This is not possible. Bhakti means surrender.

So without surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, you cannot understand. Kṛṣṇa reserves the right not being exposed to the fools and rascals. He is simply for the devotees. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. He never said, "By jñāna mām abhijānāti, by karma mām abhijānāti, by yoga mām abhi...," no. He rather says,

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



"He's the first-class yogi who is always thinking of Me.' And who always thinks of Kṛṣṇa unless he is a devotee? Therefore you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa without becoming a devotee. In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā He says to Arjuna, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me: [Bg. 4.3] "I am talking to you the same old system of yoga, Bhagavad-gītā, because you are My devotee." So if you actually want liberation or fearlessness, no more fear, and if you want actually to become immortal, no more birth, death, old age, and disease, then you have to accept the words of Kṛṣṇa. As He says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is bhakti. That is bhakti. So you have to take.



Here it is, same thing is said: jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena bhakti-yogena. Unless you have got full knowledge, jñāna, and vairāgya, full renunciation... "No more material life." This is called renunciation. And no more sense gratification. Material life means sense gratification. Everyone is working so hard day and night. Why? For sense gratification. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Gṛhamedhi, those who have accepted this body or the society or the family or the nation, all this gṛha... It is called gṛha. Or gṛhamedhi, those who are attached to all these things, gṛhamedhi. Their only happiness: yan maithunādi, sexual intercourse, that's all. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham. Very insignificant, very abominable combination of man and woman. And they are working so hard day and night. That is the only pleasure. So vairāgya means when you will be detestful to this sex pleasure. That is called vairāgya. "No more." Yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde. That is possible only when you are perfectly Kṛṣṇa conscious. Otherwise it is not possible.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Madana-mohana, and the material is madana-dahana. In the material world everyone is suffering by the piercing arrow of Cupid, man or woman. The Madana, Cupid, is piercing the arrow to man and woman, and the woman is mad after man, and man is mad after woman. But when you see Kṛṣṇa actually, then you see Madana-mohana. Then there will be no more suffering of the piercing arrow of the Cupid. That is called akuto-bhayam, no more fear. No more fear. Now you become fearless. And when... If you want to become fearless, akuto-bhayam, then Kṛṣṇa says that, Kapiladeva says, praviśanty akuto-bhayam. He enters, bhakti-yogena, when one is actually in bhakti-yoga, full knowledge, and vairāgya, renunciation of the material world, then he is able to enter. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad, tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā.

In this way, when one understand what is Kṛṣṇa in truth, that is called knowledge. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena [SB 3.25.18]. Tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā viśate tad-anantaram. He is allowed to enter into the spiritual kingdom, not before that. Not before that, without bhakti. And bhakti, by bhakti, you will automatically attain the stage of jñāna-vairāgya. Just like if you take one very nice digestive pill, so whatever you have eaten, even stone, it will be digested. It will be digested. Similarly, as soon as you take to bhakti immediately your gross and subtle body is digested. You will live in the spiritual body. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. Brahma-bhūyāya means that spiritual body. We are already Brahman-ahaṁ brahmāsmi-but it is covered by the material body, the gross body, kṣitir āpaṁ tejo marud vyoma: fire, water, earth, air, like that, and mano buddhiḥ ahaṅkāra, the subtle body, mind, intelligence, and ego. So we are covered by this subtle body and gross body. This is our impediment. But the... By karma-yoga you try to get out of this gross body. By jñāna-yoga you try to get out of this subtle body. But bhakti-yoga-you directly you cross over this subtle body and gross body. You are immediately situated in the spiritual body. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān [Bg. 14.26].

So long you are in the subtle body and gross body, then you are suffering under the three modes of material nature. The body is created by the three modes of material nature according to... Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu [Bg. 13.22]. We get different types of body on account of association with these material modes of nature, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. But if you are situated in the devotional service of the Lord, you immediately become on the platform of brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54], immediately. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi-this is simply theoretical. That is theoretical knowledge, that "I am brahma." But when you are actually in devotional service, then that is practical. You are no more in the material platform. You are on the Brahman platform.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



So by situated, being situated on the spiritual platform, automatically you achieve your original status, constitutional position, brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. Then you are able to enter into the kingdom of God, or the spiritual world. Tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā. Here also it is said, praviśanty akuto-bhayam. Praviśanti. You have to enter. You are not destroyed. Just like we are praviśanti in different types of body in material existence, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13], so when you are free from this material contamination, then you praviśanti in the spiritual world. The praviśanti is there. In the material world you are praviśanti from one body to another, and you are suffering.



So long you get this body, you must suffer. Either you get the king's body or the cobbler's body or ant's body or dog's body, to accept material body means suffering. There cannot be akuto-bhayam. Unless you enter in the spiritual world with your spiritual body, there is no question of akuto-bhayam. So that akuto-bhayam is possible when you are practiced to bhakti-yogam.

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



If you engage yourself in the devotional service of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya, if you enter, then vāsudeve bhagavati. Vāsudeva means the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ [SB 1.2.7]. If you apply yourself, engage yourself in bhakti-yoga, then janayaty āśu vairāgyam, cause and effect. As soon as you engage yourself in devotional service of Vāsudeva under the direction of śāstra and spiritual master, then janayaty āśu vairāgyam. As you are practically experiencing that since you have come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement you have no more interest material activities no more interest, that is vairāgya. You are simply meant for service of Kṛṣṇa. That is jñāna. In this way, if you want actually to be fearless and enter into the spiritual life, or spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead, then you have to accept this bhakti-yoga process, and it is very easy, and then you become fearless, and your life is successful.



Thank you very much. (end)



741212SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.44

-

Bombay, December 12, 1974



Nitāi: "Therefore persons whose minds are fixed on the Lord engage in the intensive practice of devotional service. That is the only means for attainment of the final perfection of life."



Prabhupāda:



etāvān eva loke 'smin

puṁsāṁ niḥśreyasodayaḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

mano mayy arpitaṁ sthiram

[SB 3.25.44]



This is the conclusion of bhakti-yoga. Kapiladeva has explained bhakti-yoga. In the last verse we have discussed jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena bhakti-yogena [SB 3.25.43]. Bhakti-yoga is not the business of the foolish or ignorant. One who is advanced in jñāna-vairāgya, knowledge and renunciation... Another name of bhakti-yoga is renunciation. Vairāgya-vidyā. Bhakti-yoga means the education of renouncement. Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, he explained bhakti-yoga, vairāgya-vidyā. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Yes. The bhakti-yoga begins when we accept Kṛṣṇa's instruction, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. We have to renounce all nonsense engagement. That is called sarva-dharmān. We have accepted everything as dharma, saṁsāra-dharma, gṛhastha-dharma, rāja-dharma, samājika-dharma. There are so many we have created. And we are still going on. Dharma means function, characteristic.



So we are planning, one after another, various plans to be very happy in this material world. But they will not make us happy-that's a fact-because this place is certified by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam: [Bg. 8.15] "This is a place for misery." This material world is a place for misery. This body is meant for suffering miseries, and the land is meant for suffering miseries. That we do not understand. But we are placed in a miserable condition all round. That is material life. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. But we have got attachment for this material happiness, even it is duḥkhālayam, it is very much painful, miserable, and we are making plans how to become happy here. This is called struggle for existence. It is going on perpetually. We are making some plan to be happy, and it is dismantled by the laws of nature. You study the whole history of the world: it is simply struggling. We are making some plan to be out of miserable condition, but it is causing another miserable condition. Therefore it is called daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. This is māyā. We are simply planning to overcome some problem, some difficulties, but it is becoming more difficult. This is the fact.

Therefore our determination should be to renounce this association of this world. That is called mukti. Renounce this material association and come to the spiritual platform. Because we are spirit soul, our real place is spiritual platform. Our activities should be on the spiritual platform. Then we will be happy. The same example, as I have given many times, that we are animals of the land, so if we are put into the water, then however expert swimmer I may be or you may be, it is simply struggle for existence. There cannot be any happiness in the water. But if you are taken out of the water and put again into the land, then you get relief. So that is the position. We have come to this material world for sense gratification. The more expertly we make plan for our sense gratification, it will never be successful. So we have to come out of these material activities and act on the platform of spiritual life. That will make us.

Therefore it is said, etāvān eva loka 'smin puṁsāṁ niḥśreyasa udayaḥ. Udayaḥ means rising. Just like sūryodayaḥ. In the darkness... At night, we are in the darkness. In the morning there will be sūryodayaḥ, and then there will be light. So this is conclusion, that in this material world we are simply struggling for existence with a hope, future hope, that "We shall be happy by this plan." But it will never be possible. Simply you will be bewildered. Just like the animal goes to the desert, and he sees mirage, a shadow of water in the desert. He is thirsty. He goes to the water, and the water goes again, farther away. And he jumps over, jumps over. In this way, being thirsty and in the hot sand, he dies. This is called māyā-marīcikā. Our struggle for existence is like that. We are thinking, "Let me go little farther, and we shall be happy." But actually, where is the water? There is no water in the desert. But those who are less intelligent, like animal, they seek happiness here in this material world. Just like the animal running after water in the desert. Māyā-marīcikā.

So these attachments, this false attachment, has to be given up. And that is possible when we engage ourself in the bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga.

etāvān eva loke 'smin

puṁsāṁ niḥśreyasodayaḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

mano mayy arpitaṁ sthiram

[SB 3.25.44]



Tīvreṇa means very seriously, not superficially. Tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena. Kṛṣṇa wants to see that "Whether he has finished his all material desires?" Then He is very much pleased. He says, sarva-dharmān paritya... Sarva-dharmān means we have created so many dharmas. That is not dharma; that is... Dharma, we generally become so-called religious for artha, for money. Dharma-artha. Artha, money, is required. Why? For sense gratification, kāma. And when we are dissatisfied, then we want mokṣa. Therefore, we are actually busy with four kinds of activities: Dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. And above these, when we go above these, then bhakti begins. That is the beginning of bhakti. That wanted.



Niḥśreyasa. Śreya. Śreya means ultimate good. There are two things: preya and śreya. Śreya means ultimate good. If you act in such a way that ultimately you actually become happy, that is called śreya. And if you want immediately some happiness-never mind what it will be in future-that is called preya. So less intelligent person or children, they want preya. They do not want śreya. A child is playing whole day. He likes it. That is preya. And if you want to send him to school to be educated, he doesn't like. That is śreya, ultimate good. So nobody is interested. Still, the śāstra gives us instruction that "You try for this śreya. Don't be captivated by the preya." Preya and śreya. And this śreya, the supreme śreya, is bhakti-yoga. Therefore it is said that etāvān eva loke 'smin puṁsāṁ niḥśreyasa udayaḥ. śreyasa and niḥśreyasa. Niḥśreyasa means ultimate. Niḥśreyasa udayaḥ. As soon as you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then your ultimate good or ultimate perfection begins immediately.

And the bhakti-yoga means

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



These are the nine different processes of bhakti-yoga, of which the most important thing is śravaṇam, hearing. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. And about whom? About Viṣṇu, not for anyone else. That is śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. Everything bhakti means devotional service, loving devotional service, for Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. That is not any other service. That is not bhakti. Bhakti, the word, can be used only in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It cannot be... If you say, "I am deśa-bhakta. I am very devotee of my country, and of my society, of my family, of my cat, of my dog," that is not applicable. Bhakti is not applicable anywhere except in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is bhakti. Therefore śāstra particularly says, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, not any other śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. If you say that "I am hearing about my country's welfare, about my society's welfare, about humanity's welfare, and I am preaching this," that is not bhakti. That is māyā. It is very difficult to understand.



But if you talk about Kṛṣṇa and hear about Kṛṣṇa, then your other services will include. It is all-pervading. Just like one is interested in the flower of the tree. If he wants... If he says that "I shall water the flower because I am interested with the flower," or "I shall water the fruit," but that will not help you. If you water on the fruit or on the flower because you are interested, the fruit also will dry and the flower also will dry. But if you water on the root of the tree, which carries the fruit and flower, your fruit and flower automatically will live. Similarly, if you render service to Kṛṣṇa, bhakti, then your so-called social service, country's service, family's service-everything will be performed perfect. You don't have to endeavor separately for social service or any other service. Therefore it is said, tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena, without any deviation. You don't think that "If I simply become devotee of Kṛṣṇa and worship in the temple, then what will happen to my country? What will happen to my family? What will happen to my so many other things?" That will be automatically served. If you serve here Kṛṣṇa, then you'll give the best service to your family, to your society.

There are many instances. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja was giving service to the Lord, and his father was very angry, and there was very much misunderstanding between the father and mother, er, the father and the son. Ultimately, the father was killed by Nṛsiṁhadeva. And Prahlāda Mahārāja saw it. But does it mean...? Superficially, it appeared that Prahlāda Mahārāja did wrong because his father was killed before him. Suppose if your father is killed before you and if you stand only, if you don't speak any protest to protect the father, who will agree with your endeavor? Nobody. Everyone will say, "You are such a coward that your father was killed before you. You did not protest. You did not try to give any protection?" This is superficial. But actually, the son, Prahlāda Mahārāja, was giving the best service to his father, best service. Because in the śāstra it is said that if a person, if a demon, is killed by God, he immediately is liberated. Even though he was not liberated, thinking that he was very, very sinful... Of course, he was liberated. But Prahlāda Mahārāja was thinking that "My father was so sinful, so much against God consciousness. He might not be liberated."

So therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja, when he was requested, when he was, rather, offered any benediction he wanted to take from Nṛsiṁhadeva, he refused: "My dear Lord, please do not induce me in that way. I am born in a family, demonic family. To gain some material profit is my natural propensity. And You are the offerer. You are offering me. I can take anything from You. But this is not my business. Because I have rendered service to You, it does not mean that I will take some remuneration for You. This is business." Vaṇik. Sa vai vaṇik: "This is mercantile man's... But I am Your eternal servant. I do not expect any reward from You." But that Prahlāda Mahārāja, later on he asked Nṛsiṁhadeva, "My dear Lord, one thing I may ask from You." "What is that?" "Now, my father was atheist number one, and he has committed so many offenses at Your lotus feet. Now he is killed. So I want that he may be excused and given liberation." So he was already liberated. Still, as affection son, he was anxious to know, "Whether my father will be liberated or not?" So this was confirmed by the Lord: "Not only your father, his father's father, his father, his father, up to fourteen generations, everyone is liberated-because a Vaiṣṇava son like you is born in this family."

So my point is: by serving the Supreme Lord, one gives the best service to the family, because if one becomes a Vaiṣṇava, pure Vaiṣṇava, the whole family, up to fourteen generations, they become liberated. Therefore tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena. We should not divert our attention for any other service. We should simply concentrate for rendering service to the Supreme Lord. This is the conclusion. Tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena mano mayy arpitam. Mayi, "unto Me, the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, mayi. That will help. Tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena. Always... That is also advised in Bhagavad-gītā: man-manā, mad-bh... Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. Your mind should be engaged always in Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa or Rāma, which form ever you like-Viṣṇu form, or Lord Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa, Kapiladeva. There are innumerable forms of God. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. So Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Varāha, Kṛṣṇa, Kapiladeva, Balarāma-there are so many forms. So any one of Them, whichever you like... Everyone is... Just like Hanumān. He liked Rāmacandra forms, and Arjuna liked Kṛṣṇa's form. But there is no difference between Rāma and Kṛṣṇa. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu [Bs. 5.39].

Sometimes foolish people question us that "You are worshiping Kṛṣṇa. Why you do not worship Rāma?" Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, there is no difference. But anyone has got his liking. Just like Hanumān has liking to worship Lord Rāmacandra, and the gopīs had the liking to worship Kṛṣṇa. That does not make any difference. It is like... Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. Kṛṣṇa, the Lord, appears in different way. Sometimes the gopīs... The Kṛṣṇa went away from the gopīs, and the gopīs were searching out Kṛṣṇa. So in some place Kṛṣṇa was sitting in the Viṣṇu form. So the gopīs passed through that Deity, and they did not offer much respect. "Oh, He is Viṣṇu. All right, namaskāra." Because they wanted to see Kṛṣṇa. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu, but every devotee has got some inclination, love Kṛṣṇa. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan [Bs. 5.39]. So therefore Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading in different mūrtis. Therefore in the Vaiṣṇava-sampradāya some of them, they worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and some of them worship Sītā-Rāma. And some of them worship Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa. Some of them worship Rukmiṇī-Kṛṣṇa. There are so many devotees. But all of them are the same, Vaiṣṇava. All of them are the... But not demigods. Viṣṇu. So chanting, bhakti-yoga means to chant Viṣṇu. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. And Viṣṇu has got so many forms. So either you chant Hare Rāma or you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, it is the same. There is no difference. Sometimes they first of all place "Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare." And sometimes they place "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa..." There is no difference. Sometimes they say, "No, it should be Hare Rāma first." Sometimes they..., "No, Hare Kṛṣṇa." But that is not very important, childish. Any, either you say Hare Rāma or Hare Kṛṣṇa, the same. So this is to be done. Tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena.

So bhakti-yoga begins with hearing, śravaṇam, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. And if you have heard from the right source and if you are convinced, then automatically you will try to perform kīrtana. Kīrtana means glorifying. If you have attained like... Or to preach. Anyone who has listened from right person, authority, about Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, about Kṛṣṇa or about Rāma, he would like to preach that. That is automatic, glorifying. That preaching is equal. That is called kīrtana. Kīrtana... Simply preaching, glorifying, or speaking about the Lord, that is also kīrtana. And performing kīrtana as we do here in the temple, with mṛdaṅga and karatāla, chanting, that is also kīrtana. Śukadeva Gosvāmī explained the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to Parīkṣit Mahārāja. So... And Parīkṣit Mahārāja simply listened to him carefully. This is śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. The Parīkṣit Mahārāja is hearing, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī is performing kīrtana, describing all the glories of the Lord. That is kīrtana. So śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣit, how one devotee became liberated by performing one item only. There are nine items of devotional service:

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



So Parīkṣit Mahārāja simply listened, śravaṇam. He did not do other things. Still, he was liberated. And Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he simply chanted or described the glories of the Lord. He also became liberated. Śrī-viṣṇoḥ śravaṇe parīkṣid abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane. Similarly, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam. Pṛthu, Pṛthu Mahārāja, he was simply remembering. No, pṛthuḥ pūjane. And pāda-sevanam. Lakṣmī-devī, She simply gave massage to the Viṣṇu's lotus feet. And Arjuna, simply he made friendship. And Hanumānjī, he simply served the order of Lord Rāmacandra. Dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam. Ātma-nivedanam, offering everything. Bali Mahārāja, whatever he had, he gave to Vāmanadeva everything. Whatever he possessed, even his body, he gave to Vāmana. Sarvātma-snapane, abhavad bali... Bali Mahārāja. So there are different examples.



So if you simply... At the present moment in this Kali-yuga, if you simply hear about Kṛṣṇa, śravaṇam, you don't require any education. You don't require to be a Ph.D. and M.S.C. God has given you the ear. You go to a person, realized soul, and hear from him. Simply hear from him. That is recommended in this age, because people are very, very fallen. They have no education. They have no inclination how to make perfect life. They do not know what is perfection of life. They think, "If I can eat sumptuously, that is perfection of life." Udaraṁ bharita. Svārtham udaraṁ bharita. In this age, if one man can eat very voraciously, he thinks, "My all interest are finished." He thinks. Because people are so, I mean, hungry, that they think, "If I can get a sumptuous food, that is perfection of life." This is Kali-yuga. Kali-yuga. Svārtham udaraṁ bharita. That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. One will feel that "My all interest is now fulfilled because I am voraciously eating."

So we are hearing. This is wanted. Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended this process, that whatever condition you are, it does not matter. You simply search out a devotee and hear from him. That is recommended. Ihā haya. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. Sthāne sthitāḥ. You, whatever you are, there is no need of change, because it is very difficult to change position. Better remain your position, but you hear about Kṛṣṇa. That is our movement. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to give chance people to hear about Kṛṣṇa. So many ways. Then, even Kṛṣṇa is Ajita-nobody can conquer Him-simply by hearing, you will conquer Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will be very, very intimate friend of you, simply by hearing. That is said also in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavata: śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Śṛṇvatām. Śṛṇvatām means hearing. Kṛṣṇa is within everyone's heart. As soon as He sees that "This man is hearing about Me," śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ... Kṛṣṇa is the subject, nominative. Śṛṇvatām. When He sees that a person is interested in hearing, then He takes care of him. Because that is the beginning of bhakti. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Even if we do not understand, if we do not understand the philosophy, what Kṛṣṇa says, still, if we hear, then you will be purified. You will be purified. That is the process of hari-saṅkīrtana. It doesn't require anybody to understand what is this Hare Kṛṣṇa. But if he's simply given the chance of hearing, he becomes purified.

That is wanted, because without being purified, nobody can understand, "What is God, what is my relationship with God, who is God, what does He do, what is His name...," nothing interest.(?) Dirty things within the heart, they cannot understand, dirty things, on account of sinful life. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. We are so much in this age engaged in sinful activities. The sinful activities are generally... The four pillars of sinful activities are illicit sex life, meat-eating, intoxication, and gambling. So this whole world is now full of all this business. There is regular gambling house, there is regulation intoxication centers, regular slaughterhouse, and regular prostitution. This is the whole world. Which are sinful life-illicit sex life, meat eating, intoxication, and gambling-that is prevalent all over the world. You will find organized by government. This is going on. And within this dangerous condition of the human society we have to push on Kṛṣṇa consciousness. How difficult it is! Just imagine. But still, it is going on. But so many obstacles. So many obstacles. But we do not care for these obstacles. We must push on. This is our determination. Therefore it is called tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena. Tīvreṇa. There may be so many obstacles, but you must push on your movement. Tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena. That is our duty.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 3.26: Lectures





741213SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.26.1

-

Bombay, December 13, 197



Nitāi: "The Personality of Godhead, Kapila, continued: My dear mother, now I shall describe unto you the different categories of the Absolute Truth, knowing which any person can be released from the influence of the modes of material nature."



Prabhupāda:



atha te sampravakṣyāmi

tattvānāṁ lakṣaṇaṁ pṛthak

yad viditvā vimucyeta

puruṣaḥ prākṛtair guṇaiḥ

[SB 3.26.1]



This is the disease. This is called material disease. One is infected by the prākṛta-guṇa. The prākṛta-guṇa... Guṇa means quality, mode. So prākṛta means this material prakṛti, and spiritual means aprākṛta. There are different stages of knowledge: pratyakṣa, parokṣa, aparokṣa, adhokṣaja, aprākṛta. One has to go step by step. General knowledge means pratyakṣa, whatever you perceive by the senses. That is called pratyakṣa. And the knowledge which you receive from authorities, that is parokṣa. Then aparokṣa, realization. Then adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja means knowledge which beyond your perception. But there is source of knowledge, adhokṣaja. Therefore God's another name is Adhokṣaja. Adhaḥ. Adhaḥ means subduing, bring under subjugation. Adhah-kṛta, akṣaja. Akṣaja means the knowledge directly perceived by the senses. Akṣa means eyes and akṣa means atukya(?). So any knowledge within the alphabets, ABCD, that is called akṣaja. And the knowledge which is beyond that, that is called adhokṣaja. And beyond the adhokṣaja knowledge there is aprākṛta. Aprākṛta knowledge.



So the prākṛta-guṇa. So long we are in this material world, infected by the material qualities, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa, that is prākṛta life, not aprākṛta. You have to go step by step. So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness is adhokṣaja, far beyond this prākṛta knowledge, prākṛta-guṇa. The highest position of prākṛta or material life is the standard of brahminical qualities. But that is also prākṛta. That is not aprākṛta. That is also not the Brahman realization. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. That is also the highest stage of prākṛta, glimpse of the light. But one has to become free from the prākṛta envelopment. Prākṛta-guṇaiḥ. Our present position is we are infected by the prākṛta-guṇa. Some of them are infected by the sattva-guṇa; some of them are infected by the rajo-guṇa; some of them are infected by tamo-guṇa. So long one is infected by the tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa, his position is very abominable, rajas-tamas. One has to become at least on the sattva-guṇa, the brahminical qualification. Then spiritual knowledge can be realized, prākṛta-guṇa.

So Kapiladeva proposes to His mother... Kapiladeva is Bhagavān. We have explained several times, bhaga means opulence and vān means one who possesses. So what is that opulence? Aiśvarya, richness. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya. One who is possession, one who has in his possession all the wealth. All the wealth... We have several times explained this. Nobody can claim... Except Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nobody can claim, "The all the wealth within this universe belongs to me." Nobody can say. But Kṛṣṇa can say. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram: [Bg. 5.29] "I am the proprietor of all the lokas, of all the planets." We become proprietor a few thousands of years, and there are so many difficulties. And He's the proprietor of the whole universe. That is also very little estimation, because Kṛṣṇa says,

athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



Kṛṣṇa says that "By My one plenary portion I'm possessing or controlling the innumerable universes." We have no information of one universe. Universe, that is also, we cannot estimate. But the innumerable universes are estimated to give us some glimpse of knowledge. In the Brahma-saṁhitā,



yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



There is one feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is called Mahā-Viṣṇu. That Mahā-Viṣṇu, that is the origin of this material creation. So Mahā-Viṣṇu is in sleeping condition. So in sleeping condition, with the breathing, universes are coming. And when it is inhaled the whole universe is annihilated, dissolved. So this is only one portion. There are many devidences(?).



So you cannot claim to become Bhagavān so cheaply. Bhagavān is different thing. One who is devotee of Bhagavān, he knows something about Bhagavān. And the other rascals, they claim Bhagavān-simply ludicrous. Only the rascals can accept another rascal as Bhagavān. It is not so easy.

yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



So that Bhagavān is speaking. Kapiladeva is that Bhagavān. Therefore He says that atha te sampravakṣyāmi. Sam means samyak. Samyak means complete. Unless one has got complete knowledge, how he can say things complete? It is not the so-called scientist: "Perhaps," "It may be." No, not that kind of knowledge, simply theorizing, "It may be like that." No. There is no question of "maybe." Exact knowledge. Exact knowledge. That is called Vedic knowledge. Just like in the Padma Purāṇa we can understand the calculation of the species of life. It is said, jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. There are aquatic living entities nine lakhs of. How many you have seen? Neither it is possible for you to go within the water and see how many different forms of fishes and aquatics are there. But in the śāstra it is said, jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi. It doesn't says "about nava-lakṣāṇi," "about nine lakhs," more or less. No. Exactly. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. Sthāvarāḥ means those plants and trees which cannot move, two millions, lakṣa-viṁśati, or twenty lakhs.



So that is Vedic knowledge. You get the exact knowledge. Therefore Vedic knowledge is called apauruṣeya. It is not spoken by ordinary human being by speculation: "It may be," "Perhaps." No. It is not like that. That is Bhagavān. Whatever He'll say exact, that is Vedic knowledge. Therefore it is safer to take knowledge from Bhagavān, especially the knowledge of Bhagavān. Bhagavān is not so cheap thing. If you want to know Bhagavān... If you do not be so fool to accept another fool as Bhagavān, then you have to hear about Bhagavān about Bhagavān. That is the process. Therefore the Vedic instruction is, to get perfect knowledge, you have to approach a person who is guru. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. And who's guru? Guru means representative of Bhagavān. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ **. Guru... Because the real guru, he's representative of Kṛṣṇa, sākṣāt-hari. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. In all scriptures it is described that guru is as good as Bhagavān. Means he knows from the right source. Therefore he may be, not maybe exactly, but as good, sākṣād-dharitvena. Why? Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. Guru is servant, servant God. The master God and the servant God. Kṛṣṇa is the master God and guru is the servant God. Although he's respected as Kṛṣṇa, still, kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya; He does not claim that "I've become Kṛṣṇa." No. He's very dear to Kṛṣṇa. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya. Priya. Priya means dear. Why he's so dear? Because he preaches the master's message. Therefore he's pure. If he preaches his own message, manufactured, then he's not good; he's deceit. That now there are so many rascal, they say like that, that "Kṛṣṇa was Bhagavān. That is past now. He's dead and gone. Now I am Kṛṣṇa." There are many rascals they say like that. But these rascals are accepted by other rascals. God is never dead. God... How He can get...? Even the ordinary living being, he's not dead. Na jāyate na mriyate. Even we, living entities, never die or never born. How the Supreme Lord can be dead or born? That is not the fact.

So therefore if we discuss Bhagavān, there are so many things to be understood about Bhagavān.

aiśvaryasya samagrasya

vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva

ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itiṅgaṇa

(Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47)



One who possesses the full opulence of richness. One who possesses all the powers, all the influence, all beauty, all knowledge, all renunciation, that is Bhagavān. So you haven't got to think very ser... You take the formula given in the Vedas. That is perfect knowledge. You understand everything. Therefore the intelligent man, they follow the Vedic injunction. Then the knowledge is perfect. It is already there.



So bhagavān uvāca. So when Bhagavān is speaking-atha te sampravakṣyāmi tattvānām-of the truth, lakṣaṇam, characteristic... Everyone has to understand anything by the characteristic. Just like in the chemical laboratory... If you send something just for chemical analysis just to see whether it is pure, so they have got in their authorized book, Pharmacopeia, the characteristics. The soda bicarb, its characteristic is like this; its taste is like this; it is formed like this, granules or powder or so many things. They analyze. And when the characteristics are accumulated, then they examine: "Yes. It is this." Similarly, you have to accept God from the characteristics, by analysis. Not that any rascal comes and says, "I'm Bhagavān." You must know, have to analyze Bhagavān. That is there in the śāstra. This word Bhagavān is used not loosely. It has got many characteristics.

Just like Kṛṣṇa said when he was present, He said, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "Nobody's superior than Me." He proved it. So long Kṛṣṇa was on the planet, he proved it, that no one superior. Even from ordinary life as gṛhastha... Kṛṣṇa was gṛhastha, householder. Now he married 16,108 wives. So who has got this potency to marry sixteen thousand? One wife... It is very difficult to maintain one wife. One lady in America, she had a grown-up son. So I asked her, "Why don't you get your son married?" "I have no objection if he can maintain wife here. I have no objection." Then I understood that it is very difficult to maintain wife here. And actually it is difficult to... Even from material point of view, Kṛṣṇa, as far as we can calculate, we cannot conceive even at the present moment to maintain more than one wife or two wife. But He was maintaining sixteen thousand wives, 16,108.

But, because we have no conception of God, we take it, "This is all fictitious. God..." When God gives His reality, identification, and it is recorded in the śāstra, not by any loafer class writer but like Vyāsadeva, and we take it fictitious. Just see our position-Vyāsadeva has bothered his brain to write something fictitious! Just see how low-grade persons we are! We don't believe writing of Vyāsadeva. Or sometimes we say, "No, no, this was not written by Vyāsadeva. It is interpretation." If it is interpretation, then why the ācāryas have accepted? They're also fools-Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Viṣṇu Svāmī... They have made commentary on the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and they mention, they have accepted, "Yes. Kṛṣṇa has sixteen thousand wives." So Vyāsadeva has written and the ācāryas have accepted. Then I have become such a great scholar that I say it is fictitious. And we have to believe these rascals.

So don't go to rascal. If you want real knowledge, take it from Bhagavān. bhagavān uvāca. Then your knowledge is perfect. That is our process. We, we have taken Bhagavad-gītā as it is, and we are preaching. We don't preach anything else which Bhagavān does not say. Bhagavān says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī mām... [Bg. 18.65]. We are canvassing, "My dear sir, you just become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. You always think of Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. We say, "You just think of Kṛṣṇa." The same thing. There is no change. We do not interpret any way, "This man-manāḥ means this, and mad-bhaktaḥ means that." No. We don't do that. We present as it is. Therefore if Kṛṣṇa sees that "One is presenting My message as I have given," then He is pleased. Therefore, it is said, kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. He has become very dear because he does not, nonsensically, he does not nonsensically change the meaning, that "This meaning's that, this meaning's that." Why? When Kṛṣṇa has said, that is everything perfect. Why should I change it? That is guru-priya. Suppose if you say something and if somebody takes it as it is and behaves like that, then you become pleased. And if you say to your son or to your servant something and he misunderstand and talks something else, then he becomes angry: "What this nonsense has understood?" Similarly, a guru does not change the word of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he's called Bhagavān, servant Bhagavān. Kṛṣṇa is the master Bhagavān, master God, and the guru, who is serving Kṛṣṇa sincerely, he's the servant God. Therefore śāstra says, sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ **. In the morning also these boys, they sing Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, āra nā koriho mane āśā. If you have got a pure, bona fide guru, then whatever he says, you do it. You don't think of anything else, āra nā koriho mane āśā. No more. That is all right.

So we have to receive knowledge from Bhagavān or from a person who is servant of Bhagavān, not that another imitation Bhagavān. Then you'll spoil your life. That will not help you. Bhagavān says, atha te sampravakṣyāmi. Sam means samyak, in full, full knowledge, not partial. Atha te sampravakṣyāmi. Pra means prakṛṣṭa-rūpe. Vakṣyāmi. Vakṣyāmi means "I shall speak." Tattvānām. Tattvānām, tattva is one. Absolute Truth, it cannot be two; but there are different phases of understanding the Absolute Truth. Therefore here it is plural number, tattvānām. Tattva is one. That is explained in another place. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam [SB 1.2.11]. Although tattva is realized in different phases, three phases, brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Brahman, impersonal feature, brahmeti paramātmā. First localized feature, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. That is Paramātmā. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham.

eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.35]



The Govinda is within the atom, Paramātmā. So that is another feature, all-pervading. And another feature is impersonal jyoti. And the original feature is Bhagavān. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7]. Finished. When you have come to this platform to understand Bhagavān, then your knowledge is perfect. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is perfect knowledge. If you do not understand what is Bhagavān, then your knowledge is imperfect. You have to learn again for many births. Then you'll come to the point of understanding what is Kṛṣṇa.



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



When you'll understand tattva, that Kṛṣṇa is the original and the Paramātmā is secondary and the Brahman, impersonal, the third status.



Therefore even if you are Brahman status, you are not still aprākṛta. You are aparokṣa. Aparokṣa status, not even adhokṣaja. As I told you, there are different stages of knowledge, so the brahma-jñāna is parokṣa-jñāna. And the spiritual planets, Vaikuṇṭha knowledge, that is adhokṣaja. And the knowledge about Kṛṣṇa and His planet, Goloka Vṛndāvana, that is aprākṛta. So we have to transcend from this prākṛta status of life. It is a very, very high grade status, aprākṛta. Aprākṛta status.

prākṛta kariyā māne viṣṇu kalevara

viṣṇu-nindā āra nāhi ihāra upara



Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "Any rascal who thinks that the body of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu is prākṛta, material, this is the greatest offense." The Māyāvādī philosophers, they think like that, that the Absolute Truth, (is) imperson; but when He comes in form He accepts a material body. This is the greatest offense, aparādha nāhi yāra ihāra rūpa.(?) Therefore they cannot understand very well because they're aparādhī. Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, māyāvādī kṛṣṇe aparādhī. The Māyāvādīs, they're offenders to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, offenders. Kṛṣṇa is not exposed to the offenders. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. So the Māyāvādīs, they cannot see Kṛṣṇa. They cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. They'll avoid Kṛṣṇa. They'll speak so many things, spiritual knowledge, but avoid Kṛṣṇa's figure, Kṛṣṇa's form. They think it is māyā. It is māyā. But it is not māyā. That is the original form. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. Because Kṛṣṇa has got the form exactly, the dvibhuja-muralī-līlā, two hands with flute. That is Kṛṣṇa's original form.



veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ

barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam

kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.30]



So we have to understand Bhagavān and we have to hear from Him. And He's speaking perfectly in the Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And if you take it yad viditvā, if you are fortunate enough to understand the words of Kṛṣṇa and Kapiladeva, then the result will be vimucyeta: immediately become liberated. If you are fortunate enough, if you are intelligent enough to understand the words of Kapiladeva or Kṛṣṇa or Ṛṣabhadeva-there are so many incarnations-then puruṣaḥ prākṛtair vimucyeta. Vimucyeta means become free, uncontaminated. What is that contamination? Prākṛta-guṇa, these material infection that "I'm brāhmaṇa," "I'm kṣatriya," "I'm vaiśya," "I'm śūdra," "I'm American," "I'm Indian," "I'm this," "I'm that." These are all prakṛti. Prakṛti, material qualifications. Even if you are perfect brāhmaṇa, that is also material qualification. But in the platform of pure brāhmaṇa you can have the chance of understanding the aprākṛta, adhokṣaja. Therefore you have to become brāhmaṇa, qualified brāhmaṇa. Then there is chance.



So in this age it is very difficult to become exactly Vedic brāhmaṇa. That's very, very difficult because everyone has become śūdra. Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In the Kali-yuga you cannot find out exactly a qualified brāhmaṇa. Very rare, very rare. Therefore Vedic brāhmaṇa is not possible. It is... Our movement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is creating pāñcarātriki-vidhi. Pāñcarātriki-vidhi-brāhmaṇa means there is no evidence of, there is no certainty whether one is brāhmaṇa or son of brāhmaṇa because so many things are lacking. But, if he has got little taste of Kṛṣṇa understanding, he should be encouraged. That is pāñcarātriki. Just like if there is little fire you fan it-fan it and it will come out a big blazing fire. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to do that, and it is easier because in the śāstra it is said by Śukadeva Gosvāmī that there is one opportunity. "My dear King, Parīkṣit, I've described to you about the faulty nature of this Kali-yuga, but there is a very good opportunity for the people, fallen conditioned souls, of this Kali-yuga." "What is that?" Kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ: "The, in the Kali-yuga, it is like the ocean of fault. But still there is one very good opportunity." "What is that?" Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet: [SB 12.3.51] "You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and become liberated and go to back to home, back to Godhead."

Thank you very much. (end)



741214SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.26.2

-

Bombay, December 14, 1974



Nitāi: "Knowledge is the ultimate perfection of self-realization. I shall explain that knowledge unto you by which the knots of attachment to the material world are cut."



Prabhupāda:



jñānaṁ niḥśreyasārthāya

puruṣasyātma-darśanam

yad āhur varṇaye tat te

hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam

[SB 3.26.2]



What is jñāna, knowledge? We have got... Jñāna means consciousness or living symptoms. That is jñāna. Cetana. Cetana, ce..., nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). Nitya and cetana. Cetana means consciousness. Two things we find, generally, conscious and unconscious. Just like this table is unconscious, but a small ant, it is conscious. That ant is coming this side, you try to stop it, it will struggle, it will resist. Because it is conscious. But the table, you take it and throw it away, it will not protest, because it is unconscious. So, this consciousness is the symptom of life, and that develops one after another.



Just like within the earth you have seen, you go to the beach, you'll find within the sand, there are so many living entities. But they are inferior, and the plants on the sand, we have seen there are many green plants, herbs, they are better. They have improved their consciousness. But better than these plants and herbs are the crawling insects, snakes, snail, because they can move. The herbs, they cannot move, and within the sands there are living entities, they cannot sprout. So in this way, this is called evolution, one after another. So the insects, the reptiles, they are better than the standing herbs and plants, and these insects, the worms, they grow wings at the end of their life. In this way they are elevated to the bird's life. In this life they could not attain the bird's life, but on account of very strong willingness they grow the wings, and next life they become small birds, they fly. So they are better, the small birds, they are better than these insects. Then there are birds, big, big birds, the eagle birds, they can fly very high. In this way, beast life, that is better. In this way, beast life, then human life, uncivilized life, that is better. And then civilized life, that is better. Then civilized life, those who are organized, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, they are better. And amongst the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, the brāhmaṇa is the best, because they are on the platform of spiritual realization. This is the evolution. Evolution, we are coming in that evolution. Bahu-sambhavānte. Bahu-sambhavam, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19], bahu-sambhavānte.

So this human life is after many, many evolutionary process. We have forgotten that. So this life is meant for jñānam, ultimate knowledge. In the lower grade of life, there is jñānam, there is consciousness, there is knowledge. A mosquito bug, mosquito knows where to bite. The knowledge is there. They will bite on the joints. Therefore there is mosquito, you have to eat(?) your hands and legs, the joints, but they know where to bite. This knowledge is there, for eating, sleeping and sex life. Nobody takes education for sex life. Nobody takes education for eating or sleeping. Where is the education that you shall eat like this, you shall sleep like this, you shall have sexual intercourse like this? That is automatically known. This knowledge is automatically known. So human civilization does not mean that scientifically you have to do this, do that, eating, sleeping, mating. That is going on, scientifically. Now this science of mating is that we shall have sex intercourse, but there will be no pregnancy. Contracept. So this is not knowledge. Knowledge is different thing.

Knowledge means jñānaṁ niḥśreyasārthāya puruṣasya ātma-darśanam, that is knowledge. Atma-darśanam, self-realization. That is jñānam. Otherwise this lower jñāna or knowledge, how to eat, how to sleep, how to perform sexual life, and how to defend, this knowledge is there even in the mosquito or small ant. And what to speak of other, higher grade living entities. That is jñānam, but that is not niḥśreyasāya. Śreya and preya, there are two things. Preya means to fulfill immediate necessities of life. That is called preya. And śreya means the knowledge, śreya means the goal of life. Niḥśreyasāya, niḥśreyasāya. Niḥśreyasāya means the ultimate benefit. That education is lacking. In the material world, the jñāna, especially in the present age, jñāna means technical knowledge. How to eat, how to sleep. Now they are Somebody was telling me that they have invented eating, eatables from petrol. (aside:) Who was speaking the other day?

Nitāi: Bhāgavata Dāsa.



Prabhupāda: Bhāgavata Dāsa. So they might be very advanced in scientific knowledge but the ultimate aim is how to eat. That's all, nothing more. How to eat, how to sleep, that's all. Tranquilizer pills, in USA, a large selling line. That means how to sleep. This is the advancement, scientific advancement. There is no sleeping? Without scientific knowledge, he was sleeping very nice. But with advancement, advancement of scientific knowledge he has lost his sleep, insomnia. So they are taking the advancement of knowledge in this way, but the Vedic scripture says that, jñānaṁ niḥśreyasārthāya, to achieve the highest perfection. That we are discussing in so many ways. And what is that highest perfection? Highest perfection is there, mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā, nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gataḥ. Highest perfection, saṁsiddhiṁ paramām. Param means the supreme, and saṁsiddhim means perfection.



mām upetya kaunteya

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramam gataḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



This is highest perfection, Kṛṣṇa says. All śāstra, it says like that, and the whole Vedic literature is meant for achieving the highest perfection of life. Vedic literature, you will get all kinds of knowledge. Veda means knowledge, and the Vedic literature is full of knowledge. Nigama-kalpa-taru. Nigama means Vedic knowledge and kalpa-taru means the tree from where you can get anything you desire. Whatever you desire. Generally we have got experience that a mango tree, if you desire mango, you can get from the mango tree. If you desire coconut, then you can get from the coconut tree. But you cannot get coconut from the mango tree, and mango from the coconut tree. But there are trees where you go, you can get both mango, and banana, and coconut, and everything you like. That is called kalpa-vṛkṣa. We have no experience in this material world, but there is a tree. That is not in this material world, that is in the spiritual world. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. So we have to take knowledge from Vedic, Vedic scripture. Then the description of the spiritual world is there, what is that? Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu. They have got houses, they are made of touchstone. Here it is made of bricks and stone, ordinary stone. But there is another stone which is called touchstone. If you touch it with the iron, the iron becomes gold. That is called touchstone, pareṣapatha (?). So the spiritual world, all the houses are made of this touchstone. You can take the Tata iron factory and touch it there. (laughter) It will be very profitable. (laughter) Yes. Or go there and bring some touchstone as these moon exploiters. They go and they have brought some stone, and some sand. But if you go to Kṛṣṇaloka you can bring some touchstone and make the whole Tata iron factory gold. (laughter) These informations are there. If you have got capacity, then you will go and bring it.



So in the spiritual world, the houses are made of touchstone cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu, cintāmaṇi, the touchstone. Sanskrit name is cintāmaṇi. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa [Bs. 5.29], and the trees, there are trees. But not like this, that you get coconut from coconut tree, and mango from mango tree. But cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa [Bs. 5.29]. There any fruit you require, or even kacaurī, you can get. (laughter) That is called kalpa-vṛkṣa. There are trees like that. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa [Bs. 5.29], and maybe one or two, no. Lakṣāvṛteṣu, there is a nice garden, or jungle you can say. There are many, many. Just like you have got experience here in this material world. If you go to the forest, you get so many trees, congested. In Africa I have seen. Very, very high, long trees and very congested, jungle. So prakara lakṣāvṛteṣu, similarly in the spiritual world, there are trees of this kalpa-vṛkṣa, where you can get anything you desire.

Lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr, and surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. There Kṛṣṇa is very fond of cows. There is Kṛṣṇa's another name is Gopāla. Gopāla means who tends cows. Go means cow and pāla means one who tends. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's another name is Gopāla. Govinda. Govinda means one who gives pleasure to the cows or Govinda means one who gives pleasure to the senses. So Kṛṣṇa's name are different. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. There Kṛṣṇa is tending this surabhī. <Surabhī cow means, that is also wonderful, spiritual. You can milk cow, milk from the cows, as many times as you like. Just like here in the, we have got experience, we can take milk from the cows morning and evening, not more than that. But there you can milk the cows whenever you like, and you can draw milk as much as you like. That is called surabhī cow. The trees are like that, the cows are like that, but there are houses, there are forests, jungle trees, cows, water, everything, but they are all spiritual. All spiritual, therefore there is one. Here is also one, because everything material. Whatever, either you take cow's body or your body, or tree's body, or any body, what it is made of? Kṣitir ap teja marut vyoma, the earth, water, air, fire, and sky, that's all. Here it is all one, but, and there also it is one, but there it is all spiritual, and here it is all material. That is the difference.

That spiritual and material, what is the difference? The material is dull, and spiritual is consciousness. That is the difference. How the tree gives you, a mango tree there gives you a coconut? Because it is conscious. Suppose if I ask from you, because you are a conscious being, that "Give me some coconut." You can give me. "Give me some mango." You can give. But when you are out of this body, then I ask the body, "Give me some milk or cow or...," no response. This is material and spiritual. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). So jñānam, real knowledge is that, when we understand that I am spiritual being, I am not this material, and I, my country, that is spiritual world. That is my place. That is jñānam, self-realization. Ātma-darśanam, ātma-darśanam. Suppose a foreigner is in America, an Indian is in America, or an American is in India, so he is conscious that "I am American," or "I do not belong to this country." Or Indian when he goes to America, he knows, "I am Indian. I do not belong to this country." Similarly when you realize, when you understand that you do not belong to this material world, you belong to the spiritual world, that is self-realization. Ātma-darśanam, that we discussed, ātma-darśanam.

Jñānaṁ niḥśreyasārthāya puruṣasya-ātma-darśanam. Puruṣa, puruṣa means enjoyer. And prakṛti means enjoyed. Something is being enjoyed and somebody is enjoyer. That is called prakṛti-puruṣa. So here it is said puruṣa. Puruṣa means the living entity, who is trying to enjoy. He is trying to enjoy. But he is trying to enjoy where? In the material world, therefore he is not satisfied. In the spiritual world, the puruṣa, the living entity, enjoys with Kṛṣṇa, not alone. Therefore you will find Kṛṣṇa is always accompanied by someone else. Either Rādhārāṇī or cowherds boy, or the gopīs, or Mother Yaśodā, or Nanda Mahārāja, or the cows and the calves, like that. Or even with the monkeys. Kṛṣṇa, you will never find alone. Therefore as soon as we speak Kṛṣṇa, you must know there are so many associates. Kṛṣṇa, just like if I say the president is coming, so one should know the president is not coming alone. He must be accompanied by his secretaries, by his military aide-de-camp, and so many other people, cabinet members. At least one dozen persons are coming with him, or with some soldiers, bodyguards. So similarly when you mean Kṛṣṇa or God, you should immediately know that He is not alone. He is not impersonal boy. He is full with opulence, full with associates. Therefore this description is of the spiritual world in the Brahma-saṁhitā, Vedic literature, cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. This is the trees, plants, and animals. Then lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. He is not only in this surrounding of cintāmaṇi bricks, houses, and desire trees, many, many cowherd, not only the cows, surabhī, and the river, but also many thousands of Lakṣmī, Goddess of fortune. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is the essence.

So one has to realize this. That is jñānam. Jñānam does not mean that because I am disgusted with this material world, to make this material world, not make, the material cannot be also made into zero, but we can imagine also something where there is no more these trees, and houses, and animals, and woman, and this and that, everything is finished. Nirākāra. Nirākāra, all kinds of ākāra, or forms, nirviśeṣa. Visesa means with varieties, and nirviśeṣa means without varieties. This is Māyāvāda philosophy. Finish this viśeṣa, the varieties. Simply realize "I am," ahaṁ brahmāsmi, so 'ham, like that. But that is not jñānam. That is not jñānam. That will be explained, one after another. Because nirviśeṣa, there is no possibility of nirviśeṣa. That I explained to you. As soon as you say Kṛṣṇa, immediately you have to think of Kṛṣṇa's paraphernalia. Not Kṛṣṇa alone. So everywhere Kṛṣṇa is there.

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmāyān sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi [Bs. 5.35]. He is everywhere. So how it can be impersonal? Therefore the jñānam, which considers of impersonality without any varieties, that is not jñānam. That is not niḥśreyasārthāya, that is simply a temporary appeasement. That because I am disgusted with this material varieties, let it be zero, void. That is a temporary solace. We cannot remain without varieties. That is not possible. If there is nobody here, and you sit down, make meditation, you can sit down for fifteen minutes or twenty minutes, then you will go away. This is not possible because the spirit soul, either the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Soul, or the living entity, he is also spirit, both of them are Brahman. Parabrahman and ordinary Brahman. We are ordinary Brahman and Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Brahman. So Brahman, either Supreme or ordinary is seeking after happiness. That is Brahman life. Seeking after happiness. Just like Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahman, but He is also seeking happiness with Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs and the cowherds boy and the cows and the calves.



So the ānanda, the spiritual happiness is not without varieties, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Spirit, Brahman, Parabrahman, is full of happiness, and how happiness can be possible without varieties? Variety is the mother of enjoyment. So therefore this nirviśeṣa, nirākāra, or without any varieties, or voidness, this is not perfect knowledge. That is not self-realization. Self-realization is to understand that I am spirit soul. I do not belong to this material world. I am Brahman, not matter, that is called so 'ham, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. But they have misinterpreted in a different way. So 'ham means, "I am the Supreme Lord." That is craziness. You are not Supreme Lord, but you are of the same quality. As Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, He is also seeking enjoyment and because you are also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, you are also seeking enjoyment. But you are seeking enjoyment in a field which is just opposite, in the material world.

What is that material world? Material world means forgetting Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is covered. Kṛṣṇa is there, Kṛṣṇa is aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu, but they have no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Whole world, you analyze, there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no (indistinct). Rather they are declining, "There is no God." "God is dead." "I am God." "You are..." Because they have no information, no information of, that is material world. That is the difference between material world and spiritual world. Spiritual world means there is full consciousness of the existence of God, and material world means to full forgetfulness of God. This is the difference between material world and the spiritual world. So if you bring, in the material world also, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then it is spiritual world. How it is possible? Yes, it is possible. Just like you put one iron rod in the fire. It will become gradually warm, warmer, warmer, then the iron rod will be red hot and if that redness you will touch anywhere, it will burn you. It is no more iron rod, it is fire. So you keep yourself always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then even if you possess this material body, you will be in the spiritual world. This is called jñānam. Jñānam ātma-darśanam, jñānaṁ niḥśreyasāya.

So we have to come to this platform, spiritual platform. We are suffering on account of being on the material platform. So by keeping yourself always in the fire of Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you are transferred to the spiritual world. Very nice example, this iron rod, red hot. You cannot use it for any other purpose. It is simply for burning. Similarly you can become Kṛṣṇized. That we have already discussed in the previous verses. The, anyone who is fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional service he is two kinds of external body, namely the gross body, material body, this gross body made of earth, water, fire, air and sky, and the subtle body made of mind, intelligence, and ego. These two kinds of body become dissolved. Just like if you eat something, put into your stomach, and if you have got good digestive function, then everything will be digested. Similarly if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, spiritualized, the material activities will have no effect. It is dissolved. Otherwise, any material things you will do, it will have repercussion or reaction. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. Yajñārthe, yajña means Kṛṣṇa, Yajña-puruṣa, Yajñeśvara. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Yajñeśvara. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasām [Bg. 5.29], Kṛṣṇa says. Yajña-tapasām, bhokta, so therefore there is Yajñeśvara. So whatever you do for Kṛṣṇa, it will have no reaction. Digest everything. And if you do not do for Kṛṣṇa, then it will take time to digest.

Therefore here it is said, jñānaṁ niḥśreyasārthāya puruṣasya ātma-darśanam. Puruṣa, puruṣa means the enjoyer. So, here in this material world, either the so-called man and so-called woman, everyone is hankering after sense enjoyment. Therefore all of them together has been described as puruṣa. A woman is not puruṣa, but by mentality she is puruṣa, because she also wants to enjoy. Although she has got the body of being enjoyed, but she has the mentality of enjoying. Therefore everyone is described, although by nature everyone is prakṛti, not puruṣa. Prakṛti means enjoyed. That is stated in the Bhāgavata, prakṛti me bhinnā aṣṭadhā. This material body is made of earth, water, fire, air, sky. That is prakṛti. Bhinnā, separated. Itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. There is another nature that is parā prakṛti. That is spiritual nature. And how I can understand? Na jīva-bhūta. You can understand that parā-prakṛti is the living entity, yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5], which is sustaining this material nature. So actually in the Bhagavad-gītā they, both of us are described as prakṛti, not puruṣa. Puruṣa is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Arjuna, when he realized after reading Bhagavad-gītā, he addresses Kṛṣṇa as Puruṣa. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, puruṣaṁ śāśvata [Bg. 10.12]. We are, not that you have become puruṣa now, but śāśvata, eternally.

Just like here, we are puruṣa. This birth I am puruṣa, next birth I may become stri or prakṛti. If I am too much fond of woman, and at the time of death, if I think of woman, then I get a woman's body. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajanty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. Therefore too much attachment for woman is not good, because, or too much attachment for anything in this material world, that is doomed. Therefore, here it is said, hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. Hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam, my attachment, my heart attraction is so strong, it is like granthi, knot. So ātma-darśanam means hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam, opening the knot. Hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam, that is ātma-darśanam. When I become free from all attachment of this material world, that is called hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. And how the hṛdaya-granthi, knot in the heart begins? That begins, puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etat tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ. We are in this material world, it is going on, puṁsaḥ, the man, and striyā, of the woman, attachment. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī, what is that attachment? Sex. Sex. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etat tayor, the desire is there, and as soon as they unite by marriage or by agreement, by any way, then hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ. Then the attachment becomes more and more. There are thousands and millions of women, but the woman with whom I have got my bodily relation, I cannot forget her, and she cannot forget me. Hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ. The attachment increases. And as soon as they are united the, that is hṛdaya-granthi, knot between heart to heart. "You my dear, you my heart." So then, "We must find out an apartment." There was no need of apartment, but as soon as there is hṛdaya-granthi, there is need of a...

Ataḥ gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This hṛdaya-granthi increases, develops. Now there is a need of attachment, apartment, gṛha. Now there is need of land for getting food grains. Now there is, they have gotten, what is called? Service, go to the office fifty miles away and you will get your food grains. Formerly this was not possible, therefore one must possess some land to produce food grains. Now, if you can get some money, you can purchase eight rupees kilo food grains. That is... But formerly even that was not possible. And formerly you must have land. Parjanyād anna sambhavaḥ, annād bhavanti bhūtāni [Bg. 3.14], you have to produce. People are not interested now producing food grains. They, somehow or other, if they can get that paper currency, they can purchase. Therefore everyone has got this printed paper. The value is increasing. Competition. I can pay two rupees kilo. The other says, "No, I can pay three rupees." What is this rupees? This paper. You, somehow or other you gather this paper, and there will be competition and the price will increase. This is the economy. Because they have got false money, therefore there is false increment of price. Bad money. Gresham's theory: "Bad money drives away good money." As soon as there is bad money, this paper currency, the coin, gold coins and silver coins, they are finished, they are no more.

So hṛdaya-granthi, we are, how we are becoming tied up between so-called one heart to another. Ataḥ gṛha, first of all attachment for man and woman, then attachment for the apartment, gṛha, then land, gṛha-kṣetra, then suta, children, then āpta, friends, society, friendship, love. Suta, āpta, then vitta, money. In this way we increase our, the knot, one after another. One knot, two knots, three knots, fourth knot, it is going on. And self-realization means opening the knots, opening the knots. The knots began like that. Janasya moho yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. And here it is said, hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. Bhedanam means separate them. Separate them. That is self-realization. Self-realization means that "I am spirit soul," ahaṁ brahmāsmi. So 'ham, "I am as good as the Supreme Spirit, Kṛṣṇa. Somehow or other I am now in contact with this material attachment." This is called ātma-darśana. And that is clearly explained, ātma-darśana means hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. Ātma-darśanam does not mean hṛdaya-granthi vṛddhi or increasing. Therefore, real ātma-darśana, real liberation, real consciousness is separation from this material attachment. Voluntarily, forcefully, or by knowledge, that is required.

Therefore you will find, India, Vedic civilization is meant for this unknotting, the hṛdaya-granthi. Therefore sannyāsa is compulsory. Vānaprastha is compulsory. If you really follow Vedic principle you become student, brahmacārī, you learn everything. What is this life, what is this world, what is Kṛṣṇa, what is God, what is your relationship with Him. These studies, that is complete study. But still, if you want to be knotted by hṛdaya-granthi, gṛhastha, a concession, all right. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithuna. Mithuna, that concession is for sex life. Gṛhastha life is a concession given for enjoying sex life. Otherwise, there is no need of gṛhastha life. Therefore there were many brahmacārīs, akhanda-brahmacārī, never married in life, many. But that is not possible at the present. But there is training. The brahmacārī is taught that this is the position: "Don't be knotted with this material world." But still, if he cannot do that, then with the permission of the spiritual master, he accepts a wife. That is gṛhastha life. But that also not for many years. Say for 25 years. After 25 years he will remain a student brahmacārī, then you accept one wife according to religious ritualistic ceremony, but no illicit sex. That is not allowed. Bachelor daddy is not allowed. That is very dangerous.

So kāmām, dharma-viruddho kāmām aham asmi, Kṛṣṇa says. Even without wife and everything. Then you take sannyāsa. That is the stage of hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. Hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. Not that up to the last point of death you are attached to a family and wife and children. That is animal life. That is not human life. Human life, you must try to unknot this hṛdaya-granthi, man and woman. Hṛdaya-granthi-bhedanam. That is self-realization. So this Sāṅkhya philosophy described by Kapiladeva is very scientifically described and if we try to assimilate it then our life will be successful.

Thank you very much. (end)
