#+title: Lect1 2 1 1



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Puṣṭa Kṛṣṇa: Are there any questions? You might have some questions about Śrīla Prabhupāda's lecture. (pause)



Prabhupāda: Chant. (end)





721020SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.9

-

Vṛndāvana, October 20, 1972



Pradyumna: Translation: "All occupational engagements, or dharmas, are certainly meant for ultimate liberation. They should never be performed for material gain. Furthermore, one who is engaged in the ultimate occupational service, or dharma, should never use material gain to cultivate sense gratification." [SB 1.2.9]



Prabhupāda: So Sūta Gosvāmī is describing the purpose of religiosity. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Dharma, to accept a system of religion means to accept the path of liberation. Āpavargyasya. This apavarga is very significant word. Pavarga and apavarga. Pavarga means pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. In grammatical ways, ka, kha, ga, gha, ka-varga, ca-varga, ṭa-varga, ta-varga, and pa-varga. Five vargas. Vargīya varṇas. And there are antaḥ-stha varṇas. This is grammatical.



So dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. "A" means negation, negation of pavarga. Pa means pariśrama, labor. Here, in this material world, the sense gratificatory platform is not very easy. You have to work very hard. Karma. Even Arjuna was advised, śarīra-yātrāpi ca te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ: "My dear Arjuna, you are denying to fight, but you do not know that without fighting, you cannot live even. You cannot maintain your body." Śarīra-yātrāpi. Just see how hard they are laboring. Even just like an ass. In big cities, we have seen, human beings are pulling on rickshaws, ṭhelās. What for? Simply for maintaining this body. In the Kali Yuga, the working will be more harder and harder. Just like an ass. Ass, the example is given always, ass. How much hard work it carries on. Tons of cloth, carrying on the back, going to the ghāṭa. What for? Simply little grass. That's all. Therefore it is called ass. The ass is working simply for a morsel of grass. Grass, there are so many. You can get. But it is because it is ass, he's thinking that "The washerman is my master. He'll give me the grass." Just see.

This is ignorance. It is a very good example of foolishness. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa has provided everything. Kṛṣṇa is giving food to the elephant. In Africa, there are millions of elephants, and each elephant is eating at least eighty-two pounds at a time. But who is supplying the food? They have no economic problem. They have no bank balance. How they are eating? This is to be studied. This is called nature's study. So why you are so much busy for fulfilling the belly with a little two cāpāṭis? If the elephant can get so much food at a time, can I not get two, two cāpāṭis or four cāpāṭis? I can get also. But there is no confidence. He's thinking that "Unless I work very, very hard, I cannot live." The more a man is civilized, he's thinking like that. They accuse us, these Kṛṣṇa conscious people, that "They are escaping. They do not want to work." Not only us. Anyone... That is the allegation against the sādhus, that they are parasites, dependent on the society, eating at the cost of others. So many accusations. But actually, that is not the fact. Kṛṣṇa has provided food for everyone. Just like these birds. They're living very peacefully in this tree, and they have no problem. The monkeys... Who is going to give? Anyone, as soon as he sees a monkey, he drives: "Get out. Get out. Get out." But still they are living. They are eating.

So there are 8,400,000 species of life. They're all eating at the cost of God. Why human being is so much busy for solving economic problem? Because a foolish civilization. That's all. Everything is there. Simply you have to work little. Because this world, this material world, is made in such a way that unless you work little, you cannot get your food. That Viṣṇu Purāṇa, it is said, avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. Avidyā. Ignorance. (talking in background) (aside:) Ask them, not... (Hindi) Avidyā-karma-saṁjña. This material world is ignorance, darkness. Because he, people have no knowledge of that Kṛṣṇa is providing everyone food. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. That is the injunction of the Vedas, that one supreme one is supplying food to everyone. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. So Kṛṣṇa is supplying everyone. Nobody has to starve. The only business is how to develop our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is our only business. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Simply if we become engaged for economic development, fulfilling the belly, and we forget our real business, developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is not very intelligent work.

Therefore it is said here, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. To perform religious..., religiosity means how to get out of this material conditional life, apavarga. Pavarga means hard work. Pa pha. And so much hard work that there is foam in the mouth, phena. Pa pha ba. And vyarthatā. In spite of working so hard, we are confused, baffled. Pa pha ba bha. And still there is bhaya, fearfulness, "Whether it is done, or whether I shall get tomorrow, any food?" Bha. In this way, at the end, ma, mṛtyu. This is called pa pha ba bha ma-pavarga. So to take to religiosity means to get out of this pavarga. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Not pavargyasya. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthāya upakalpate. We go to temple or church or mosque to get some material benefit: "O God, give us our daily bread." The Christians pray like that. And the Hindus, they also pray, go to some demigod, or Kṛṣṇa. Mostly they go to demigod, especially to Lord Śiva, because Lord Śiva's name is Āśutoṣa. If you please Lord Śiva, it is very easy. He's very easily satisfied. And whatever you want, he gives you: "All right, take it." Therefore, generally people become devotee of Lord Śiva, because easily pliable. Viṣṇu is not so easily pliable. Devī is easily pliable. Say, for a meat-eater, goes to Devī: "My dear goddess, I want to eat meat." Devī will allow: "All right. Bring a goat and sacrifice it before me, and you eat." But if you go to Viṣṇu, "Sir, I want to eat meat," He'll not allow. Therefore they are very much devotees of Goddess Kālī. Purpose is to eat meat. He's not a devotee.

Actually, devotion cannot be applied except to Viṣṇu. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā says, kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. These rascals, who have lost of their intelligence, they go to other demigods to pray for some temporary benefit. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. Now suppose if I go to Goddess Kālī to get facility of eating flesh. Then the antavat. You eat flesh and acquire so much sinful result... Because you have killed one animal, he has to kill you. You take so much responsibility. Still, your pleasure by eating flesh is finished very quickly. But if you warn, if you worship Viṣṇu, even one percent you have... Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Worshiping the other demigods, it will be finished as soon as... I mean, suppose you go to heavenly planet. Everything will be finished, because this material world is temporary. So the benediction which you have achieved from a demigod, the demigod, the benediction, and yourself-everything will be finished. Therefore it is said, antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. Real problem is apavarga, how to get out of this entanglement of hard labor and fearfulness. That can be given by Viṣṇu. Hariṁ vinā na mṛtiṁ taranti.

Without Kṛṣṇa, nobody can save you. Other demigods... Just like Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa was a great devotee of

Lord Śiva. But when Lord Rāmacandra wanted to kill him, Lord Śiva's father could not even protect him. That is not possible. That is not possible. Mare kṛṣṇa rākhe ke. (aside:) Make it little... Yes. Little... Yes. If Kṛṣṇa kills you, nobody can protect, And if Kṛṣṇa protects you, nobody can kill you. Rākhe kṛṣṇa mare ke, mare kṛṣṇa rākhe ke. This is the formula. Here it is said that dharmasya. If you want to take to religiosity Practically dharma. I have several times explained that dharma means... (aside: ) What you are doing? It is disturbing me. Yes. Don't you see? He cannot do it. Yes. Do it. Dharma, to become religious, the purpose is to go up to the point of mukti. Dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Gradually. Gradually, step by step. But generally, people stuck up for some material gain. Ārtaḥ arthārthī jñānī jijñāsuḥ. Four kinds of people approaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead for evolution, but the, those who are going to the Supreme Person for some material gain, as soon as their material gain is finished, they also finish worship. "Now I have got the money. There is no need of worshiping."

So here Bhāgavata says that dharma... You take to, to the principles of religion for going up to the point of liberation, āpavargyasya. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. This is meant for getting out of this entanglement of birth, death, old age, and disease. That is real... The first step is religiosity. Unless you are pious, religious, there is no possibility of getting liberation. Therefore there are different types of dharma prescribed, twenty types of dharma. The beginning is varṇāśrama-dharma. The people have lost even varṇāśrama-dharma, what to speak of other dharmas. The first beginning is varṇāśrama-dharma, to become brāhmaṇa, to become kṣatriya, to become vaiśya. So in the Kali-yuga the time is so bad that even there is no fixity of this varṇāśrama-dharma. Nobody knows who is brāhmaṇa, who is śūdra. Because the quality is the same now, eating, sleeping, mating-animal quality. You can become a brāhmaṇa by sacred thread. That is a different thing. But there are brāhmaṇa and brahminical qualifications. That is real brāhmaṇa.

So even the varṇāśrama-dharma is lacking in this age, what to speak of other dharmas. Therefore the śāstra enjoins,

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāma eva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



You cannot execute any severe type of religious principles. Simply take to this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. You'll come out triumphant. But actually, on principle, dharma means gradually, step forward for liberation. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthāya [SB 1.2.9]. We should not execute dharma for some material gain, arthāya. Just like people are very busy to give in charity, because he'll get some exalted post. Yajña dāna tapa kriyā. These are karma-kāṇḍīyas, yajña, performing sacrifices, giving in charity, dāna, tapa, austerity. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu underwent severe austerities, Rāvaṇa underwent severe austerity. What for? For material gain. That's all.



So actually dharma does not mean that. Dharma means to come to the point to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When He says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], this is dharma, real dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Sākṣād Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa, is ordering like that. That is dharma. Na arthāya. Not for material gain. People generally execute religious principles for some material gain. That is warning. Bhāgavata is warning, na arthāya upakalpate: don't execute religious performances simply for material gain. Now material gain means money. Suppose you get money. Money, because according to previous pious activities, you get good birth, nice riches, janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. So suppose you have got money. A man is born with silver spoon in the mouth. He has got money immediately. Then what he'll do? He'll throw it away? No. It is said that nārthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ. If you have got money, don't spend it for sense gratification. Kāmo lābhāya. Just like at the present moment, if anyone has got more money, he purchases more motorcars. Formerly... Suppose he had no car. He gets one car. He gets more money-another car. More money-another car. In this way, they make prescription for sense gratification. But no. If you have got more money than you require, you spend it for Kṛṣṇa. That is required. Try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, the senses of Kṛṣṇa. Don't try to satisfy your senses. Then you'll be implicated. Actually the money belongs to Kṛṣṇa.

Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa also says, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. He's the proprietor. How Kṛṣṇa's money you can spend for your sense gratification? That is sinful activities. If you take government money, government treasury, and spend it for sense gratification, immediately you become criminal. Immediately. Mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam. You cannot touch. Human civilization... Now, at the present moment, they're less than animal, They are getting money by hook and crook and amassing money. But not spending for Kṛṣṇa. If you go for begging something for Kṛṣṇa, "No, we are not interested in religious affairs. No. We are secular." Nobody will pay. Now, if you go to somebody that "We are going to open a lunatic asylum and hospital for the drunkards," then they'll pay money. Yes. In USA, there is a big hospital for curing, curing drunkards priests. (laughter) Yes. Drunkard priests. Because they have to execute priesthood, but they are drunkard. So they want to be cured. This is a fact. They'll give money. If you want money for Kṛṣṇa, they'll not give money. They will... More hospitals. More hospitals. The report is "This year, we have increased so many hospital beds." That means that is advancement. So what is this advancement? People have become sick. You just stop people becoming sick, there should be no disease. That is advancement. No. Their advancement of civilization means you open more hospitals and more beds. That is advancement.

So this is all sense gratification, kāma, for sense gratification. You give medicine to a diseased man to cure him just to make him able to enjoy senses. That's all. But Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that you give him medicine so that he can get out of the clutches of this material entanglement and go back to home, back to Godhead, and live eternal, blissful life of knowledge. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So,

dharmasya hy āpavargyasya

nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate

nārthasya dharmaikāntasya...

[SB 1.2.9]



Actually who is religious, his money is not meant for sense gratification. Formerly anyone who had money, he used to spend for Kṛṣṇa. Just like you see here in Vṛndāvana big, big temples. They were constructed by very, very rich men. They knew that "Now I have got extra money. I can spend it for Kṛṣṇa." Just like Mahārāja Mansingh. He approached Rūpa Gosvāmī. Rūpa Gosvāmī was sitting here. Or sometimes somewhere. Rūpa Gosvāmī was famous, saintly person in Vṛndāvana. So Mahārāja Mansingh approached: "Sir, what can I do for you? I have got some money. I want to spend some money for you." So Rūpa Gosvāmī, what he'll do with the money? He was, he left his minister, ministerial post to come to Vṛndāvana not for earning money. So he advised him, "All right, if you have got money, you spend it for constructing a nice temple for Govindajī." So he constructed so nice temple, seven stories. It is impossible now to construct such a temple, such nice work. But he spent, he utilized his money in that way.



So everyone can serve Kṛṣṇa. Prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā. Either with your life, either with your money, either with your intelligence, either with your, with your words. You can serve Kṛṣṇa. Any way. Kṛṣṇa service is not checked. Ahaituky apratihatā. It cannot be checked. In any condition of life you can serve Kṛṣṇa. The first thing is that if you can dedicate your life, that is very good. Just like you have done. You have dedicated your life for spreading this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That is first class, prāṇaiḥ. If you cannot dedicate your life immediately, then spend fifty percent of your income for Kṛṣṇa. Prāṇair arthaiḥ. If you think you have no money, then prāṇair arthair dhiyā, by your intelligence. If you have got some knowledge, write some books and spread it, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And if you have no education, no money and you cannot dedicate your life, then you can spend your vacana. Vācā. Prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā. What is the vācā? Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and tell everyone, "Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Where is the difficulty? You can serve Kṛṣṇa in any condition of life. But don't be miser. If you think that you have got one crores of rupees, so Kṛṣṇa says, vācā. "Let the bank balance remain for my children, and I go to Vṛndāvana and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." No. That is called vitta-sārtha. If you have got money, you must spend money. Not that "Money is for my children and wife, and I come to Vṛndāvana and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." There are many such retired persons here. They leave the money for their relatives, and come here with a... Of course, that is good. But Kṛṣṇa is very intelligent. Kṛṣṇa wants to know where you have kept your money. (laughter) He inquires, "You kept your money for your children and you have come to love Me with your beads?" No. (laughter) Kṛṣṇa is very intelligent. Kṛṣṇa wants that "Whatever you have got, you have to utilize for Me."

Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was a warrior, and he utilized his energy for fighting the demons. Because He came to kill the demons. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. So Kṛṣṇa wants to utilize your energy for His satisfaction. That is devotion. Everyone has got his energy, and he can spare it for Kṛṣṇa's service. That is real devotion.

etāvaj janma-sāphalyaṁ

dehinām iha dehiṣu

prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā

śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā



If you want to make perfection of your life, then whatever you have got, you have to spend it, spare it for Kṛṣṇa. Not that "The substance is for my relatives, and simply I come with lip sympathy." No.



So,

dharmasya hy āpavargyasya

nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate

nārthasya dharmaikāntasya

kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

[SB 1.2.9]



Not for sense gratification. Don't use your money for sense gratification. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said, yajñārthe karma. You are working hard not for..., do not work for hard, hard work, for sense gratification. In the, another place, in the instruction of Ṛṣabhadeva, it is said that nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. This body, this human body, is not meant for working hard like the hogs for sense gratification. But people have made it a civilization. They are working very hard, day and night, simply for sense gratification. This is compared like the hogs. You have seen so many hogs in Vṛndāvana, loitering. The whole day, they are working to find out where is stool. That is their business. So it may not be very pleasing, but these hogs, they are also living in Vṛndāvana, but why they are hogs? Because they came to Vṛndāvana and behaved like hogs. So Kṛṣṇa has given them the opportunity: "All right you live in Vṛndāvana as a hog." We should not come Vṛndāvana to behave like hogs. What is the behavior of the hog? Sex indulgence without any discrimination. That is hogs. Hog has no discrimination whether it is mother, sister, or this or that. Any sex will do. This is hog life.



So it is the warning: arthasya dharmaikāntasya kāma... Don't try to gratify sense in the name of dharma, religion, or bhakti. Then we have to become hogs and dogs. Even in Vṛndāvana. It doesn't matter. Yes. Then nārthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ. Then we have got kāma. We, because we have got this body, then we must satisfy the senses. That is required. So there is sanction. Kāmasya. Kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. Just like sex. Sex life is allowed by the śāstra. Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā: dharmāviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi. "Sex life which is not against the religious principles, that is I," Kṛṣṇa says. That means sex life should be utilized only for begetting nice children. There are certain rules and regulations. One can have sex life once in a month. As soon as the wife is pregnant, he cannot have sex life. There are rules and regulations. Not for kāmasya na indriya-prītiḥ. Not because "I want to enjoy sex life, I can use it at any time." No. That is not. Kāmasya na indriya-prītiḥ. Kāma, there is, required. But na indriya-prītiḥ. Lābho jīveta yāvatā. You can utilize kāma as much as it is required for living condition. Not for sense gratification.

Why these are restriction? Why so much restriction? Now, because jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. Because our real business is to understand Kṛṣṇa, tattva-jijñāsā. We must save time from all directions and concentrate and utilize the time simply for Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



740423SB.HYD

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.9

-

Hyderabad, April 23, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



dharmasya hy āpavargyasya

nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate

nārthasya dharmaikāntasya

kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

[SB 1.2.9]



Translation: "All occupational engagements, or dharmas, are certainly meant for ultimate liberation. They should never be performed for material gain. Furthermore, one who is engaged in the ultimate occupational service, or dharma, should never use material gain to cultivate sense gratification."



Prabhupāda:



dharmasya hy āpavargyasya

nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate

nārthasya dharmaikāntasya

kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

[SB 1.2.9]



We have begun this discussion about dharma. We have several times described dharma, the constitutional characteristic. That is called dharma. So people have taken dharma for sense gratification. Just like generally people go to the church or temple for asking some material gain. That is beginning, beginning of God consciousness.



catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

[Bg. 7.16]



Four classes of men, means those conditioned souls... (aside:) Why it stopped? (about fan) People who are pious, not ordinary men, those who are pious... Therefore in the Vedic principle everyone has been directed to become pious, puṇya-karma. Tyaja durjana-saṁsargaṁ bhaja sādhu-samāgamam. This is moral instruction, that "Don't keep company with durjana." Durjana means those who are very much attached to material enjoyment. They are called durjana. Actually, human life is meant for tapasya, not to become like cats and dogs and hogs, simply eating and sense gratification. That is not human life. This is Vedic civilization. Because human life is meant for making solution of all problems.



Here it is said, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Apavarga. A means negation, and pavarga... Pavarga-pa pha ba bha ma. Just like-those who are acquainted with Sanskrit grammar-there are five vargas: ka varga, ca varga, ta varga, similarly, pa varga. Pa pha ba bha ma. So pavarga means they have taken the material life in different aspect. First of all, material life is pariśrama, hard labor. This is called pa, pariśrama. And then, pha: the labor is so hard, sometimes foam comes. We have seen from the mouth of the horse, cows, and bulls, dogs. We sometimes, we have also, our tongue becomes dry after working very hard. There are foams. This is pha. Pa, pha. And ba means vyarthatā: in spite of so much labor, our sense gratification is not fulfilled. That is called vyarthatā. Pa pha ba, vyarthatā. And then bha. Bha means bhaya, always fearful. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. Every conditioned soul is subjected to fearfulness, "What will happen next?" Big, big politician... Just like in U.S.A., President Nixon, he is also under fear, "How these people will drive me away?" So this bhaya must be there. Hard labor for election, then rejection, then bhaya, fearfulness, "Whether my this position will remain or not?" Nobody is free. Even Brahmā, big, big demigods, they are also fearful. Bhayaṁ dvitīya abhiniveśataḥ syāt. Śāstra says when one is attached to the other thing except God, dvitīya... Because God is one. Eka brahma. When one is not Brahman realized-the other realized means illusion realized-then there is bhaya. So apavarga, pa pha ba bha, in this way ma, means mṛtyu, death.

So this has been summarized. These are called pavarga. And apa... a means to nullify. So dharma, practice of dharma, means to nullify these conditions, these miserable conditions of material existence. That is the purpose of dharma. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Āpavargyasya, to cease this labor. Tri-tāpa-yatana, three types of miserable condition: adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. That is animal life, bodily concept of life. Therefore dharma should be practiced for nullifying. Because we do not want to work very hard, every one of us, but we have to, especially at the present moment. That is stated in the Bhāgavata. In the Kali-yuga the situation will be so much deteriorated that simply for a piece of bread, one has to work just like an ass. Very hard labor. It has come to become so. Gradually, it will deteriorate more and more. These are stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Now rice and wheat is selling at a high price, three rupees kilo. But time will come when if you pay 300,000 rupees, still, it will not be available. Especially rice, wheat, sugar and milk and fruits. That means sāttvikāhāra. These things will be finished. Therefore they are learning how to eat beef. This is the beginning. Just like a child learns to eat, little, little. Otherwise there will be no more food. Therefore dharma is required to stop this miserable condition of life. That is real dharma.

Therefore to come to the real point of dharma, transcendental position, in the material conditional life, the dharma, varṇāśrama-dharma... Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Viprādayo guṇaḥ pṛthak cātur-varṇyam. Ya eṣaṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād ātma-prabhāvam īśvaram, na bhajanti vā ajānanti... Puruṣasya āśramaiḥ saha. Tyakta jagṛhe varṇa vipro aday guṇaḥ pṛthak(?). These are the statements of śāstra, that the human society, just to make it real human society, not cats' and dogs' society, there must be varṇāśrama. That is dharma. In the material stage, when we have to take care of this body, there must be this varṇāśrama. That is systematic human society. If there is no varṇāśrama-dharma, then it is cats' and dogs' society. In the cats' and dogs' society there is no varṇāśrama-dharma. That... They do not require it; neither they can understand it. So if the human society becomes varṇāśrama-less, without varṇāśrama-dharma, then it is cats' and dogs' society. Then subjected to the so many miserable condition of material nature. That is inevitable.

So dharma, first of all this dharma. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma... [Bg. 4.13]. This is dharma: brāhmaṇa-dharma, kṣatriya-dharma, vaiśya-dharma, and śūdra-dharma, brahmacārī-dharma, gṛhastha-dharma... We call gṛhastha-dharma. Otherwise, wife and children..., the cats and dogs, they have also wife and children. Then why? This is called dharma. Dharmāviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi. Kṛṣṇa says, in the Bhagavad..., dharma aviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi: "Sex life, sense gratification, which is not against dharma, that is I." So there must be dharma, characteristic. This is the characteristics of brāhmaṇa. This is the characteristics of kṣatriya. This is the characteristic of vaiśya. This is character of śūdra, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. This must be systematically organized. That is called dharma. Because the real purpose is, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya: just to nullify this miserable condition of material life, not... Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthaḥ arthāya upakalpate.

Now it has been taken as, "I am brāhmaṇa. So how to earn more money by giving somebody blessings," or "Give me some money,"or "I shall make some pūjā; he will get some material benefit, this pūjā, that pūjā," especially demigods. You worship Kālī-pūjā. So you will be able to eat meat. Then Caṇḍī-pūjā. Then he will be able to drink wine, and so many others. They are also in the scriptures. Because people want... There are varieties of men. So they have been given. These are regulative principles. Just like Kālī-pūjā, pūjā of the goddess Kālī. The real purpose is to eat meat. Because in any other demigod worship there is no animal sacrifice. But there are some demigods, the purpose is, instead of purchasing from the slaughterhouse, if they are restricted that "You eat meat after worshiping this demigod," there will be some restriction. That is the purpose, to come in, to bring him under restriction. Otherwise it is not required at all. And you will find in the Pañcāṅga that "Today meat-eating is prohibited." Actually, it is prohibited. But those who are meat-eaters, they cannot give up. Therefore one day, restriction, this restriction, that restriction-everything to bring him under regulative principle. Because real purpose is to make him detached from this material attraction and make him promoted āpavargyasya, how to get out of this material miserable condition of life. This is called dharmasya hy āpavargyasya, not that "We have got this ceremony today, Kālī-pūjā ceremony. Let us sacrifice thousands of goats and eat and drink and enjoy." That is not the purpose. Na arthāya upakalpate. Some men... Artha means material. Paramārtha means spiritual.

So execution of dharma, religion-never mind, Hindu religion or Christian religion or-the purpose is not for any material gain. Na upakalpate. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthāya upakalpate. Then what about our sense gratification? We must have. We have got this body. We must have some facility. So that is also described here, na arthasya dharma ekāntasya. Arthasya, one who is actually a student of dharma, ekāntasya. Na arthasya dharma ekāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ. Not for sense gratification. You require some money. So by your profession, either as a brāhmaṇa or as kṣatriya or as a vaiśya or as a śūdra... A brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, that is for spiritual advancement. And for material-this brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. So you require some money. Because without money, without source of income, how you can live? But that is not meant for sense gratification. Therefore it is said, na arthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ.

Just like everyone is earning money simply for sense gratification. And there are so many advertisement for sense gratification. If you go to the city, you will find all the shops, cinema, hotel and wine shop and this shop or that shop. What are these, big, big, nice sāri, displayed, demonstrated? Everything is for sense gratification. So this is not meant for... You require money. People are hankering after money. "How I shall get money to purchase this nice sāri for my wife or for my beloved, for my...?" Then "How I shall purchase wine? How I shall purchase this car, this?" Everything is that. Everything is meant for kāma, for sense gratification. Naturally, one should be inclined to earn money, more money, more money, and more sense gratification. That means he is becoming implicated. That he does not know. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Pramattaḥ. Because they have become mad after sense gratification, they are doing everything which should not be done, vikarma. Karma vikarma akarma. So people are generally doing vikarma. Vikarma means forbidden, sinful activities. They are called vikarma. Karma is not sinful. Karma means according to the direction of the Vedas. That is called karma-kāṇḍa. But vikarma means against the principle of dharma. That is called vikarma.

So this has been observed. Therefore Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva says,

nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti

na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

[SB 5.5.4]



"My dear boys, people are so mad after sense gratification that they are simply..." [break] ...increasing. So why they are increasing? Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaye, simply for sense gratification, no other business. If they go to the cinema or to the wine shop or to so many other things... There are varieties. Simply sense gratification. There is no other profit. But the śāstra says, na sādhu, na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ [SB 5.5.4]. The people do not understand that this material body means suffering. They do not understand. They think very nice body. The cats and dogs may think like that. Just like hog. Hog is thinking, "I am very happy," and he is getting fatty. You will find. They think, "I am very happy." What is that happiness? "Now, I am eating stool." "Oh, that's very good. Then where you are living?" "Now, in the most unsanitary condition." But he is also thinking that "I am happy."



So this is called māyā. This is called illusion. Everyone is thinking that "I am happy," although his body, this material body, means suffering. Who is a person here who is not... Why we are getting this fan? Because the body is suffering on account of excessive heat. This is called adhidaivika, the heat, excessive heat, excessive cold. These are also sufferings. This is called adhidaivika. But we are thinking, "We are very comfortable." We never think that "I do not want this heat. Why it is being forced upon me?" That he never considers. "If there is any remedy? I do not want it." But this body, as soon as you accept this material body made of these five elements, earth, water, air, fire, sky, mind, intelligence... This is material body.

So Ṛṣabhadeva says, nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaye [SB 5.5.4]. Simply we have got this... This bodily concept of life means the senses. Indriyāṇi parā... The senses are very prominent. So simply for sense gratification we are acting so much sinfully that we are becoming implicated. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti na sādhu manye: [SB 5.5.4] "This is not good." Why? "Now, yata ātmanaḥ, the soul," ayam, ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ, "the ātmā, the soul, has accepted this body on account of this vikarma, on account of this vikarma." Therefore people should be instructed to be expert in sukarma, sukṛti, sukṛti. That sukṛti is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sukṛti. They should be instructed. Sukṛtivān. Catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtinaḥ arjuna. Unless one is sukṛtivān, he cannot take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore everyone should be instructed to become sukṛtivān, puṇyavān. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Unless one is free from all sinful activities simply by acting piously... Janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām, te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 7.28]. They can understand what is Kṛṣṇa and what is Kṛṣṇa worship. Others cannot do.

Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to make people free from all sinful activities. Then they will be happy. Because in the soul proper, it is pure. Just like you contaminate some disease, so you suffer. You have got fever, you have got some pain. So you have to go to the physician. He will give you some medicine to counteract the contamination. Then you become happy. Similarly, we are all part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa. Naturally, we must be happy. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). This is our position, that we must be always ānandamaya, jubilant. This is our position. Just like Kṛṣṇa is dancing-you have seen-similarly, our position is simply dancing with Kṛṣṇa and be happy. That is our position. But we have come to this material world to enjoy independently of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we have been captured by the illusory energy.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



As soon as we forget or defy to enjoy with Kṛṣṇa... Just like a big man, a rich man... So the rich man is enjoying along with the servants are also enjoying. The servants are not poor in a rich man's house. He is eating of the same thing. He is also riding on the same car with the master. Rather, the driver is in the front, and the master is in the back. So in this way we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Just like in a family, why you take the risk of family? For enjoyment. I am alone. I can remain happy. Now, why you take the wife? I know if I marry then there will be children, there will be so many responsibilities. But why you accept? For happiness. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the supreme happy person. So we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. To remain with Kṛṣṇa always... And He becomes happy, we are happy. This is our position.



So that we have forgotten. We wanted to be happy. Just like there are many examples: A very rich man's son, he wants to become happy without his father. He becomes independent, comes out of home and goes here and there, but he does not become happy. There are many instances. Again he comes back home. Similarly, our position in this material world is like that. Our position is very jubilant and happy, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12), sac-cid-ānanda. Sat-cit-ānan... We have got our eternal life, sat; cit, and full of knowledge; and blissful, as Kṛṣṇa has got. Therefore because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūta [Bg. 15.7], so Kṛṣṇa, if Kṛṣṇa is good, so I am also good. If Kṛṣṇa is happy, then I must be happy. If Kṛṣṇa is jubilant, then I must be jubilant. Wherefrom we get this idea of happiness? Because we are part of Kṛṣṇa. Just like Kṛṣṇa dances with the gopīs, we also want to dance with young girls here, in this material world, Why? Wherefrom this idea we have got? The idea is already there, and we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we have got this propensity. So ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt.

But this thing can be purely enjoyed not alone in this material world, but you have to go back to home, go back to Kṛṣṇa, and there is your real life. Kṛṣṇa comes therefore. He displays His rāsa dance in Vṛndāvana to attract these fallen souls, that "If you want enjoyment, why not come back to Me? Here is the enjoyment. Here is the enjoyment, eternal enjoyment. Why you are rotting in this material world and becoming implicated, sometimes as Brahmā and sometime as the worm in the stool? Enjoyment, varieties of enjoyment. Why? Why you are so become fool?" Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, He comes here, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You come to Me. Why you are bothering in this way and suffering?" But people will not hear. That is the difficulty. That is the difficulty. Kṛṣṇa displays what is the standard of happiness with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ.

itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā

dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena

māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa

sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ

[SB 10.12.11]



Śukadeva Gosvāmī is remarking... When he saw, means he came to the position of Kṛṣṇa's playing with the cowherds boys, so the cowherd boys are playing. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa is defeated. He has to take one cowherd boy on His shoulder. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī is studying that "Who are these cowherd boys? They're playing with Kṛṣṇa. They are not ordinary cowherd..." kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ: "After many, many births accumulation of pious activities, now they have come to play with Kṛṣṇa."



So this is the position. Itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā. Here is Kṛṣṇa. Who is that? The Supreme Brahman, Parabrahman. The jñānīs, they want to appreciate the Supreme Brahman. Satām. Brahma-sukha, brahma-sukha. They are after brahma-sukha. Here is the source of brahma-sukha. Brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā. So here is the... Just like the light, illumination-there is a source of light, the sunshine, illumination. The source is the sun globe. Similarly, the brahmajyoti, what is the source? Kṛṣṇa says, brahmaṇaḥ ahaṁ pratiṣṭhā: "I am the source. From Me it is coming." Therefore the same thing is... Itthaṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā: "the source of brahma-sukha." Itthaṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena. And dāsyaṁ gatānām: "Those who have accepted the principle of to become servant of God," means the devotees. The devotees, they never want to become one with Brahman effulgence, sāyujya-mukti. They will never accept this. They want to keep their individuality and enjoy with Kṛṣṇa. That is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Itthaṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena. Para-daivata: "the Supreme Lord." And māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa: "And those who are under the influence of māyā, they are thinking Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human child," nara-dārakeṇa. But after all, these boys who are playing, sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ: [SB 10.12.11] "After accumulating many lives' pious activities, now they are promoted here at Vṛndāvana to play with Kṛṣṇa."

So to play with Kṛṣṇa, to become associate of Kṛṣṇa, to dance with Kṛṣṇa, it is not ordinary thing. We want to do that. We want to do that here. We have got many sporting club, dancing club, because we want to do that. But we want to do in this material world. That is our defect. The same thing, you can do with Kṛṣṇa. Just become Kṛṣṇa conscious and you get the opportunity. Why you are suffering here for sporting and dancing? That is called dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Stop this, I mean to say, always painful condition of material life. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. Because we have got this material body. This material body means reservoir of all suffering. By artificial method, so-called scientific advancement, we are trying to patch up, but that is not real happiness. You can go on continuing patching up. This is called māyā. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. You cannot... The real purpose is that everyone wants to live and enjoy, but the māyā will not allow. You can have very nice skyscraper building, but have you made any insurance that you will be allowed to enjoy this house? "No, sir, there is no such insurance." At any moment the nature will call, "Please get out, immediately." "No, I have got to do some business." "No more, sir. Please get out immediately." Can you stop that? Then why you are making plan? Your real plan is not there. Whether you will be allowed to stay here? There is no insurance. And why you are taking so much trouble? Therefore, nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4], the whole day, night, they are working like ass, but there is no assurance whether the happiness for which he is laboring so hard will be allowed to be enjoyed. There is no certainty.

So this is not... Na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam. Therefore Ṛṣabhadeva says, "This is not good business, My dear boys, because you have got this body on account of this hard labor and planning in your last life." Yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada: "Again you want to have another body to suffer in? What is this intelligence? You are already suffering. You have got all one type of body which means suffering, by your past activities. Again you are doing the same, to get another body to suffer? Is that very intelligence? No, that is not intelligence." Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma, pramattaḥ [SB 5.5.4]. These are madman's business. Real business is, "How I shall become permanently happy?" That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa says,

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti kaunteya

[Bg. 4.9]



That is perfection.



mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



So this is the real life. Take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and execute it. We are opening centers all over the world to give this chance. It is not a whimsical concoction. It is strictly according to the śāstra, without any mistake, authorized. If you take to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, you will be happy perpetually.



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



750803S2.DET

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.9

-

Detroit, August 3, 1975,

University Lecture



Prabhupāda: Water? [break]



...sya

na arthaḥ arthāya upakalpate

na arthasya dharmaikāntasya

kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

[SB 1.2.9]



Dharma, generally it is understood "religion." Religion means a kind of faith. So that is not the proper meaning of dharma, "faith." Faith one may have, one may not have. But actually dharma means compulsory. It must be. Just like sugar. Sugar must be sweet. There is no question of sometimes becoming sweet and sometimes becoming bitter. That is not sugar. Sugar must be sweet. Similarly, dharma is also a "must be." It cannot be option or a kind of faith which you can change at your whims. That is not dharma. Dharma means "must be." The same example: A particular thing has a particular characteristic. The sugar characteristic is sweetness. Chili is hot. Similarly, everything has got its characteristic. Just like microphone. I am speaking; it must resound. That is the characteristic. That is dharma, which cannot be separated. If sweetness is separated from sugar, it is no longer sugar. Similarly, dharma means that. Dharma means, real meaning is, characteristic. The characteristic of the living being is to serve. Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave this instruction. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya kṛṣṇa dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. That is the characteristic of all living entities, to become servant, to become servant of Kṛṣṇa. But when we do not serve Kṛṣṇa, then, because my constitutional position is to serve, I have to serve māyā. If you don't serve Kṛṣṇa, then you will have to serve māyā. Because you have no other business than to serve. Just like a servant class. If he gives up one master, he must accept another master. May be better master, but master he has to accept. Just like dog. Without accepting a master, it is street dog. It has no position. So dharma means that, the characteristic of the living being.



So here it is, says, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na artha arthāyopakalpate. There are four principles in the material world: dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Human life begins from religious life, because in the animal life there is no religion. Animal life-cats' life, dogs' life, tigers' life, or any other less than human being... Especially civilized human being all over the world, there is some type of religion, either it may be Hindu religion or Christian religion or Muhammadan religion or Buddhist religion. That is the sign of civilized human society. Dharmeṇa hīnaḥ paśubhiḥ samānaḥ. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhiḥ narāṇām. Eating, sleeping, sex life and defense, they are common either to the human being or to the animals. So what is the difference between animal and human being? The difference is that a human being, civilized being, has some sort of religious understanding. The cats and dogs, they have no such thing. That is the difference. Therefore, when human being becomes irreligious, without any religion, then it is no better than the cats and dogs. Dharmeṇa hīnaḥ paśubhiḥ samāṇaḥ.

So civilized human being must have religion. But religion does not mean to develop or improve economic condition. Generally people go to church, to temple, to express some awful condition, ārtaḥ jijñāsuḥ. Catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtino 'rjuna. What is the next life? Ārto arthārthī jijñāsur jñānī ca bharatarṣabha [Bg. 7.16]. Four classes of men in the beginning take to God consciousness if they are pious, sukṛtinaḥ. Sukṛti means pious. One who does not act sinfully, he is called sukṛti. And one who acts sinfully, he is called duṣkṛtina. So Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that four classes of men, namely ārto arthārthī, if he is pious and if he is distressed, then he goes to church or temple-"My Lord, I am distressed. Please give me some help"-prays to the Lord. And arthārthī, one who is poor, he also goes to pray to God to give him some money. He is in distressed condition. These two classes, and another two classes, jijñāsu, one who is inquisitive to understand what is God, and jñānī... Jñānī means one who understands his constitutional position. He is jñānī. Most people, they do not understand what he is and what is the goal of life. They are called ajñānī, in ignorance. Just like animal. Animal does not know what is the aim of life. Similarly, if a human being does not know what is the aim of life, he is also animal. So catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtino 'rjuna, arthārthī jñānī, jijñāsur jñānī ca bharatarṣabha [Bg. 7.16].

So this is beginning of life. To try to understand, to approach God, that is the beginning of human civilized life. Therefore, in the Vedic civilization, there are four principles: dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa. Dharma means religious principle, to understand. And economic development, because we require money, after all, to keep this body fit, that is also required. Dharma, artha, kāma. Kāma means sense gratification. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. To eat, to make arrangement for eating, to make arrangement for sleeping, to make arrangement for sense gratification, and to make arrangment for defense-these are necessities of the body. These are called kāma. Dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. And at last, to become liberated, mokṣa. Mokṣa means to get out of the entanglement of material miserable condition of life. That is called mokṣa. What is the material miserable condition of life? There are many. But the essence is, as presented by Kṛṣṇa, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. Everyone is trying, struggling for existence, to get out of the miserable condition of life. Everyone is trying. The standard of miserable condition may be different. One has got a million dollar. He thinks, "This is miserable condition. I must have ten times of this money. Then I will be happy." And one has got one hundred million dollars, or one hundred dollars. He thinks that "If thousand dollars I get..." In this way, everyone is trying to approach a position where he will be happy. That is

The Vedānta-sūtra says that ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Because we are spirit soul, our position is ānandamāyā. Ānandamāyā means always blissful. Because we are part and parcel of God... God is blissful, all-good, sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. His form... He has got form. He is not formless. But His form is different. That form is sat-cit-ānanda. Sat means eternal, and cit means full of knowledge, and ānanda means full of bliss. So we are part and parcel of God. Kṛṣṇa says, mamaivāṁśo jīva bhūtaḥ: [Bg. 15.7] "All these living entities, they are My part and parcel." So if Kṛṣṇa is sat-cit-ānanda, then we are also sat-cit-ānanda, because we are part. Just like gold and a gold, small particle. That is also gold. You cannot say it is something else. No. So part or whole, it may be. That is difference. Part is never equal to the whole. But quality is the same. Therefore we, being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, we are trying to utilize our original constitutional position. This is going on. But we are doing that without Kṛṣṇa at the present moment. Therefore it is not successful. Part must remain with the whole. I have given this example many times, that a small screw of typewriter or any machine, it must remain with the whole machine. Then it has value. If it is out of the machine, there is no value. A small screw in the motorcar, so long it is with the motorcar, it has got value. And as soon as it is thrown out of the motorcar, it has no value. So similarly, we are part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa. If we remain with Kṛṣṇa Just like we are part and parcel of our family, father, mother. And father is opulent. So if we remain with father and mother, we are also opulent. But if we give up the company of father and mother, father and mother, not ordinary father and mother, opulent God is opulent. So then we are also opulent. And if we give up the company of father and mother, want to live independently, then we are in distress. This is our position.

Therefore it is said here, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. One should execute religion just to become free from this māyā and go back to home, back to Godhead. That is dharma. Therefore Kṛṣṇa personally comes and instructs that "My dear sons, My dear part and parcel, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. You are suffering here in this material world repeatedly, birth after birth. Still, you are not in sense." Therefore He said to Arjuna that "Because you are My intimate friend, I am just instructing you the most confidential part of dharma." What is that? Now, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "This is your duty." So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching the same principle. What Kṛṣṇa taught five thousand years ago in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra to Arjuna, we are broadcasting the same message. We have not manufactured anything new. That is not dharma. Dharma cannot be manufactured. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Just like law cannot be manufactured. If you manufacture some law at your home, that will not be accepted. Maybe some people, your friend, your relatives or your family members, may accept. But that cannot be accepted by all, law. But the law given by the government must be accepted by everyone. Similarly, dharma means the law given by God. That is dharma, not that I manufacture this dharma, you manufacture another dharma, you manufacture another... That may be partially good, but it is not dharma. Dharma is... Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. That is the definition. Just like law is made by the government. The government makes the law, "Keep your car to the right." That has to be accepted by everyone. You cannot say, "Why not left? In India we keep our car on the left side. Why not here?" No. Then it will be unlawful. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa says, "This is dharma." Not that yata mat tata pat, whatever you manufacture, that is dharma. No. That is rascaldom. This is dharma: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66], only one. That is dharma.

So here Sūta Gosvāmī is explaining that what is dharma. Dharma means dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Dharma means to disentangle yourself from these material complexities. That is dharma. Now, the same thing... Anywhere you go, the Vedic literature, the same thing is there. Dharma means to mold your life in such a way that ultimately you become disentangled from this complication of material life. The complication of, essence of the complication, is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi: [Bg. 13.9] "Birth, death, old age, and disease." This is material complication because we living entity, na jāyate na mriyate vā; we have no birth, no death. This is our position. We are... Simply we are changing body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. These are the instruction, that dehāntara-prāptir. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. Just like these children. They have got a body now. This will be changed. When they will be young, a different body... And the young man, when he will be old, a different body. Similarly, the old man, when he will finish this body, he will get a different body. This is called dehāntara-prāptiḥ, accepting another body. So we are changing, but we are so fool that we do not understand what is the real problem of life. We are simply busy in some temporary problems. Real problem is that a living being is eternal, and by the laws of nature, by his karma, he has to change his body. That is real problem. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. And we can see, if we have got eyes, that there are many varieties of life, 8,400,000 varieties of life. Jalajā nava-lakṣāni sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati. So Kṛṣṇa says, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. According to your karma, you will get another body. That What kind of body I shall get? That I do not know. Then what is your education? Suppose you are being educated. You know aim, that "I shall become a lawyer," "I shall become a scientist," "I shall become mathematician." With this purpose you are being educated. But what purpose you are being educated for the next life? Do you know this? No. Then what is your education? You may be very good scientist, but can you manufacture a scientific law that you will never die? No. That is not possible. You will never take birth after death? You will never be diseased? You can manufacture nice medicine for a type of disease, but you cannot stop disease. You cannot stop birth, you cannot stop death, you cannot stop disease, you cannot stop old age.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa gives the essence of knowledge, janma... Jñānī means one who can see "What is the problem of my life." Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. This is the problem. Therefore dharma means āpavargyasya, how to avoid birth, death, old age and disease. Apavarga. Pavarga. Pavarga... Those who are educated in India, they know that pa-varga, ka-varga, ca-varga, ta-varga. So here it is pa-varga: "pa, pha, ba, bha, ma." So pa means pariśrama, laboring. And pha means the hard laboring so that foam comes out of the mouth. Pa, pha, ba. Ba means baffled. In spite of all laboring hard, life is baffled. Pa, pha, ba, bha, and bha, bhaya. Bhaya means always fearful-"What will happen next?" And ma. Ma means mrtyu. So in this way, struggling-pa, pha, ba, bha, ma-that is called pavarga. So here it is said, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. Apa. Apa means just to make nullified this life of pavarga. That is, means, liberation, to come to the original position, spiritual life. Dharmasya hi āpavargyasya na arthāyopakalpate. Not that you go to church and temple and pray to God, "God, give me some money. I am in distressed condition. Please..." God can do that. It is not very difficult. He is doing already. The birds and beasts, they do not go to church or temple, but they have no problem. They are living very happy. So that is not the aim of life. The aim of life is how to regain our God consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and love Him. Because we do not love God, therefore we have been obliged to love māyā, Satan. This is our present position. Therefore in this chapter, in beginning, is sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharma yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. There are different types of religious system, but that type of religious system is first class which teaches the follower how to love God. That is first class, not to go to the church: "Give me my daily bread" or "Please minimize my troubles of life. Give me some money." No. This is also good. Because one has gone to God, so he is in touch. Some way or other, he has gone to the fire. Then, if he keeps there, it will be warmer, warmer. But those who are duṣkṛtina, they do not go even to the God. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamaḥ [Bg. 7.15]. So they are better than. One who goes to the church or temple and prays to God for minimizing his distressed condition, he is better than the atheist who never goes to God, because this man will get chance to understand God some day. And that man, the duṣkṛtina, narādhama, he will never get chance. This is the position now throughout the whole world. People are becoming godless more and more.

So this is very, very precarious condition of life. Therefore Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is essential. It is not a fashion. It is essential, and everyone should take to it very seriously, because we do not know what we are getting the next life. Next life... The other day I was giving example in Berkeley. We were sitting within the room, and next to our window there was a tree standing. That is also living entity. We are also living entity. Just a yard from our room the tree is standing, but he has got so many disadvantage. He cannot move an inch. There is severe cold, there is scorching heat, there is blast, there is wind and sunshine, but he has no power to move. And we are human being. We are in a comfortable room. Why these different changes of condition, although the tree is also living being and I am also living being? Who has made this condition? But we have no knowledge. So I may get that condition next life. Then what is the value of my education? Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran loke tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. Because at the time of death, the, your mentality, my mentality, will decide what kind of body I am going to get. That is under the laws of nature. You cannot dictate that "Give me this American life or Indian life." No. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. By your karma it will be decided whether you will be American, Indian, or snake or tree or bird. Daiva-netreṇa. Just like when you go to the court, the court will decide whether you will be punished or you will be rewarded. You cannot dictate to the court that "Sir, give me this judgment." No. That is not possible.

Similarly, here it is indicated that religion... What religion? Religion should be to disentangle you from this material miserable condition-dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthāyopakalpate. Not that you go to church or temple and ask for some material benefit. No. That is not the... Na arthasya dharmaikāntasya. Arthasya. We are earning money by some occupation. That's all. Then what is the purpose of this money? Now, if you are dharmic, dharmaikāntasya, if you are actually religious, then your money is not meant for sense gratification. Na arthasya. Dharmaikāntasya. Kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ. Not for your sense gratification. You should know that this money, excess money you have got, it is God's money, because in the Bhagavad-gītā we learn, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ [Bg. 5.29]. He is bhokta. He is bhokta. Bhokta means enjoyer. Just like we were just coming here. This Ford company and this company and so many, there are. So the factory is going on. The bhokta is the managing director or the proprietor, not the worker. Worker can get their salary, that's all. So bhokta, real enjoyer, is the proprietor. Therefore nowadays the Communist party, they say, "We are working. Why this man should enjoy?" They struggle. So this struggle, either the worker becomes proprietor or the capitalist become proprietor, it is the same thing. Real proprietor is Kṛṣṇa. Bhoktāham. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ. That we do not know. This kind of change will not help, the capitalist thinking that "I am bhokta," or the laborer thinking, "I am bhokta." Nobody is bhokta. Bhokta is Kṛṣṇa. If we try to understand... We can understand because bhokta means the proprietor. So God is the proprietor, everything. You are manufacturing one big nice car, but who has manufactured this metal? Who has manufactured this wood with which you have manufactured a nice car? That is manufactured by a God. You have not manufactured. You are changing the shape from iron to iron seat, iron seat to another form. That's all... You can do that. You cannot manufacture.

So original proprietor is Kṛṣṇa. He says, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca. Bhinnaṁ me prakṛtir aṣṭa... [Bg. 7.4]. Me, "My." The earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence... Even your intelligence is Kṛṣṇa's. With your intelligence, with ingredients of Kṛṣṇa, if you manufacture something, the proprietor is Kṛṣṇa. Because the... Just like a carpenter. You give the wood, the instrument, these labor charges. So when he manufactures a nice closet, who, to whom it will belong? It will belong to the man who has supplied you all these things. Similarly, you may be changing the form of the material elements, but you are not proprietor. The proprietor is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa conscious. If we understand this philosophy, that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa..." That is the fact. And if you do not understand that, that is māyā. Māyā means not fact, mā-yā.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is educating people in this way, that Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer. You have seen Kṛṣṇa's picture. He is always enjoying. He is not working. That is Kṛṣṇa. God... In the Vedas the definition of God is given, na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate: "God has nothing to do." He is enjoyer. Where He will do? He will not work. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate na tasya sama adhikaś ca dṛśyat: "Nobody is found equal to Him or greater than Him." That is God. Nowadays so many gods coming from India... So God is one. Na tasya sama adhikaś ca. Nobody can be equal to Him; nobody can be greater than Him. That is God.

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇam...

[Bs. 5.1]



Parama, controller... Īśvara means controller. So here in the material world we find that I am controller; I am controlled by somebody else. Then that controller is controlled by somebody else. So controller over controller over controller over... When you come to the point when the controller is there but no more controller upon him, that is God. That is God. If I am controlled by a dentist-a god has become affected with tooth trouble and goes to the... Then he is not God. Such kind of god we do not worship, that when there is some toothache, he goes to a doctor. So no, that is not God. God means īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. And Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more superior authority than Me." And Arjuna accept, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12].



So in this way, try to understand what is dharma, what is God. And we can help you, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We have got now about fifty books, big, big books like that, to understand Kṛṣṇa, simply to understand Kṛṣṇa. So if you want to understand Kṛṣṇa through your education, through your scientific knowledge, philosophy, and whatever you like-yes, we can convince you. We have got so many books. But if you say that you have no money to purchase books, you are not so learned to... Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Then you will understand Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. Any question?



Jagadīśa: Any questions?



Prabhupāda: Water.



Student: (indistinct)



Jagadīśa: He says, "Everybody knows God, but what's His name and how can we tell that He's God?"



Prabhupāda: You take from us. If you do not know what is the name of God, we give you His address, His father's name, everything.



Student: How am I to know He is God?



Prabhupāda: No, no. You are asking; we can give you. Now it is up to you to believe it or not believe it, but we can give you. Now you test whether it is real or not. That is your business. But we can give you the name of address, His father's name, His abode, everything, house number, everything. (laughter)



Indian man: In your opinion, what is the relationship between Kṛṣṇa and Christ? In this country, everybody, many people... There are 250,000,000 people in this country. And I would say maybe ten percent of the people haven't heard about Kṛṣṇa. And I have discussions with people, and I try to explain as much as I can.



Prabhupāda: So why don't you inform them?



Indian man: No, I know that. But those people, they don't know that. Now what would you say... You know, if they believe in Christ, and if they are a true religious people within their own means, knowledge, and right, what would be their relationship as far as going to Vaikuṇṭha or mokṣa or whatever you say?



Prabhupāda: No, first of all your question is what is the relationship between Christ and Kṛṣṇa. You inquired this. So Christ says that he is son of God. So he is son of Kṛṣṇa.



Indian man: That was what I thought, but I could not convince them all.



Prabhupāda: You should learn how to convince. (laughter) Without learning, how can you do it? First of all you become a disciple of Kṛṣṇa. Then you can teach. Tad-vijñānārtha... What is that?



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti tad jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



You should learn what is Kṛṣṇa from jñāninaḥ, tattva-darśinaḥ, who has seen Kṛṣṇa. So you can take. You can follow Arjuna. Arjuna has seen Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna has talked with Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna has taken instruction from Kṛṣṇa. What Arjuna says? Arjuna says, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān, puruṣaṁ śāśvatam ādyam [Bg. 10.12]. You learn it. Why don't you learn from Arjuna? Then you will be able to convince others. You learn. That is your duty as Indian.



Indian man: Oh, I have accepted the fact.



Prabhupāda: So you become more enlightened. Read Bhagavad-gītā carefully. Then you will be able. These foreigners, they are doing that. And you, Indian, you cannot do it?



Indian man: No, I didn't say that I couldn't do it.



Prabhupāda: Then you... Then do it. If one is not convinced, you... As Indian, it is your duty.



Indian man: Oh, I accept that.



Prabhupāda: Yes, so do it now. Join with us and do it. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. He advises,



bhārata-bhūmite manuṣya-janma haila yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



"Anyone who has taken birth in India as a human being, he must first of all know the success of life and preach the cult to others, para-upakāra." This is the duty of every Indian, that you should learn Bhagavad-gītā perfectly well and preach it. That is your duty, all Indians. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Bhārata-bhūmite manuṣya-janma haila yāra janma sārthaka kari' kara [Cc. Ādi 9.41]. They do not know it. They know that Christ is son of God. They have heard it. Now convince them that "Yes, there is no fighting between Christian or Kṛṣṇa-ite. One is worshiping the father; one is worshiping the son. So there is no difference." But īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Kṛṣṇa... He says that,



sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

sambhavanti mūrtayaḥ yāḥ

tāsāṁ mahad yonir brahma

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



He is the father. That's all right. He identifies Himself as being the father, and Christ identifying himself as the son, then where is the difference? There is no difference. Either you learn from the son or from the father, the teaching will be the same. Only a minority is Christian only.



Guest: I have a question. I think the...



Prabhupāda: Only a minority is Christian only.



Guest: The majority believe that Christ is also God, not just His son, but he is God also.



Prabhupāda: Yes. No, to... God... God and God's son, they are one and different simultaneously. That you, anyone, can understand, that a father and the son... The son is born out of the body of the father. So if the father is spirit, the son is also spirit because the son is born out of the body of the father. So, so far the body is concerned, it is spiritual. But still, the relationship is father and son. It is called acintya-bhedābheda-tattva, simultaneously one and different. Anyone can understand. The child is the father's body. In that way it is one. But a child is the son, and the father is the father. So simultaneously one and different. So Christ is God and not God simultaneously.



Guest: Are you saying that through the unity of Kṛṣṇa is also a unity of non-Kṛṣṇa?



Jagadīśa: He's saying that within the unity of Kṛṣṇa is also...



Guest: There is also the unity of non-Kṛṣṇa?



Prabhupāda: Well, in the higher sense there is nothing but Kṛṣṇa, or God.



Guest: It is also non-Kṛṣṇa?



Prabhupāda: There is... Just like... I have already explained that, simultaneously one and not one. Just like the sunshine. You see the sun, and you see the sunshine. The sunshine is of the same quality, heat and light, and the sun is also heat and light, but when the sunshine comes within your room it does not mean the sun has come within your room. The heat and light is already there with the sunshine, but still, you cannot say sunshine is the sun.



Guest: (indistinct)



Jagadīśa: Can't hear. Speak louder. (end)





731114SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.9-10

-

Delhi, November 14, 1973





Prabhupāda:



dharmasya hy āpavargyasya

nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate

nārthasya dharmaikāntasya

kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ

[SB 1.2.9]



kāmasya nendriya-prītir

lābho jīveta yāvatā

jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā

nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ

[SB 1.2.10]



What is the aim of life? This is described here, dharmasya hi āpavargyasya. The human life begins when he accepts religion. That is the beginning of human life, and that is the difference between human life and dog's life. The dog is engaged always for eating, sleeping, sex life and defending. The hog is also engaged always searching after where is food. Although the food is stool, he is busy. And as soon as his body is little strong by eating stool, immediately sex life, without any distinction whether it is mother or sister or daughter. It doesn't matter. This is hog's life, by nature's example.



Therefore śāstra says that ayaṁ deha,

nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke

kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye

[SB 5.5.1]



This human form of life, deha-bhājām... The cats and dogs and hogs, they have also accepted a body. And the trees, the plants, the insects, the birds, beasts-everyone has got body, material body. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. I have explained it. According to the infection of the modes of material nature, one is getting a type of body, nature's way. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi. The same example: if you contaminate some disease, you'll have to suffer or you'll have to accept that disease. So similarly, this is the nature's way. If you are associating with a certain type of quality of the material nature, you are preparing your body for that purpose.



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



We are very much proud of our body. "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am prime minister," "I am this," "I am that." The dog is also very much proud. "I am greyhound," "I am this bulldog," "I am this." Yes. Everyone is proud, however nasty body he may live. The hog is also very proud. Although he is eating stool and living in a very filthy place, but if you want to drag him from that place, he will, "Che che che, no, no, I don't want... I am very happy here." There is a story in the Bhāgavata that once Brahmā was cursed and he become a hog in this world. No, Indra. Because Indra was very offending, so he was cursed. He became a hog. So Brahmā thought that "In the absence of Indra the kingdom of heaven is not managed very nicely, so let me go an bring him again, excuse." So when he came, he asked the hog that "Come with me." "Where?" "To the heaven." "Oh, I cannot go. I have got my responsibility. I gave got my responsibility. I cannot go."



So this is the position. Everyone is very happy. This is called māyā's influence. Unless a hog feels happy, how he can live in this abominable life? This is called prakṣepātmika-śakti, covering. If one man knows or..., that "I was king in my previous life. Now I have become a poor cobbler" or something like..., then he will become mad. So therefore he forgets. Death means forget. Because the living entity does not die. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. There is no death. Death means forgetting everything of my past life. That's all. Just like we forget. At night, when we dream, we accept another body, and we forget this body. And in the daytime we forget the night dream body and accept this body. We have got daily experience. So death means forgetting the past life. Otherwise, there was past life. That's a fact. But as we forget daily night body in the daytime and day body at nighttime, so similarly, we are changing our body according to the infection of the quality or material nature, and we are entangled in this material world. Although we are part an parcel of Kṛṣṇa, God, or we ar sons of God, but unfortunately, we have come in contact of this material modes of nature. This is going on.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. Kṛṣṇa is the father of everyone. He canvasses, "My dear children, why you are rotting in this material world? Come back."

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



This is the message of Bhagavad-gītā. So dharma means to understand my relationship with God. That is dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Just like a good citizen means who knows the relationship with the state. That is good citizenship. Bad citizenship means who doesn't care for the state. That is criminal. They are put into the prison house. So similarly, the living entities, they are part and parcel of God. But when they are not ready or prepared to abide by the laws of God, they are put into this material world. Beginning from Brahmā, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16], they are rotating in this way. So dharma means to abide by the laws of God. Just like good citizen means to abide by the state laws. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19].



So here it is said, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya [SB 1.2.9]. Apavarga and pavarga. This material life is pavarga. Pa-varga means... Those who are acquainted with grammar... There are vargas, ka-varga, kha-varga, ca-varga, ta-varga. Similarly pa-varga. Pa-varga means pa, pha, ba, bha, ma, five. So pa represents pariśrama, labor, hard labor. This material world, you have to work. Either you are human being or a hog or dog or cat, it doesn't matter. You have to work. And very severe work so that foam will come within your mouth. Pha. Then pa, pha, ba. Ba means vyarthatā, baffledness. And bha means bhaya, always fearful, "What will happen next? What will happen next?" And in this way, ma-mṛtyu, maraṇa. This is called material life. There is no more gain, simply pa pha ba bha ma. That's all. This is material life. And apavarga means just the opposite, to nullify this pavarga business.

So here it is said, dharmasya hi āpavargyasya. Religion means to how to get out of these pavargas. That is dharma. Bhāgavata says, dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthaḥ arthāya upakalpate. Generally, people go to church, to temple, for some material benefit. Therefore śāstra says, "No, no. Dharma is not meant for that purpose." People have become materialistic more and more because, just like in our country, "If you want economic development, then why you should go to temple?" The communist theory is also like that, that "If you want material happiness, why you are going to church and accepting, 'O God, give us our daily bread'? The bread, you manufacture. You just work for it." In one side, it is good. But this is also fact, that without God's mercy, you cannot get even bread. Although bread you can manufacture, but the ingredients of the bread, the wheat, that is not in your hand. You cannot manufacture in the factory. That is in the hand of prakṛti, nature, and prakṛti is working under the control of the Supreme Lord. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. So it is prakṛti's business to control food supply when people become godless. That is prakṛti's business. Because prakṛti... These statements are there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the story of Mahārāja Pṛthu. So prakṛti said that "Because people have become godless, demons, I have restricted my supply." Therefore everything depends on the mercy of the Lord.

So therefore dharma means to abide by the laws of God-that is dharma-so that you can get our of the entanglement of this pavarga. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na artha upakalpate. Not for economic development. Don't go to the church, can't go to the temple for your economic development. Although in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, ārtaḥ arthārthī jñānī jijñāsuḥ, catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtino 'rjuna: "Four kinds of men, those who are ārta, distressed, arthārthī, in need of money, they come to Me." That is also good. But that is not the meaning of dharma. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya. You have to execute religious system only to get out of the entanglement of this pavarga. That is the purpose. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya nārthaḥ arthāya upakalpate. Not for economic development. In our Vedic literature you will never find these things, that economic development. Of course, the economic development, in the śāstra there are, in the Vedic literature, to sacrifice. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra. Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. That is there. But that is not the purpose. Real purpose is how to get out of the entanglement of pavarga. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthāya upakalpate. Then you can say, "We require some money." Yes. You require none. That's all right. Economic development, there is need. So therefore it is said, na arthasya dharma ekāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ, that you require money. Because you have got this body, you have got to gratify your senses. That is right. But not for sense gratification, only for sense gratification. No. Dharmasya na arthasya, arthasya. The money which you get, that is not meant for sense gratification. Dharmaikāntasya. Actually who is religious, who is interested in religion, for him, this economic development, getting money, is not meant for sense gratification. Nārthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ.

But we have got demands of our body. What to do? Kāmo lābhāya. The kāma is there, demands of the senses. So therefore it is said, kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. You can get the supply of the necessities of your senses as much as you require. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā: yuktāhāra-vihārasya yogo bhavati siddhiḥ. Yuktāhāra. You should eat what is actually needed by you. Don't eat more. A human being, there is... Certainly we are eating. But we are eating... A Kṛṣṇa conscious person eats kṛṣṇa-prasādam. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Our business is to eat... We don't say that you are vegetarian and nonvegetarian. Vegetarian or nonvegetarian, it does not make very much difference. Ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt bhuñjate te tv aghaṁ pāpāḥ [Bg. 3.13]. If you eat only for yourself, for sense gratification, it doesn't matter whether you are vegetarian or nonvegetarian. You are simply eating sinful results of your life. Ye pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt, yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9].

So our business is, so far we are concerned, Kṛṣṇa conscious people, we are not advocates of vegetarian and nonvegetarian. Of course, vegetarianism is very good, even for health's sake. But we do not take vegetables even if it is not offered to Kṛṣṇa. That is our principle. If Kṛṣṇa said that "You give Me nonvegetarian diet," then we can eat also. But Kṛṣṇa does not say. Kṛṣṇa says, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. So we are preparing so many nice foodstuffs with this patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam. We can prepare many, many hundreds of preparation of this patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam, and we can offer Kṛṣṇa and then take prasādam. That is all right. The human life is not meant for sense gratification. Sense gratification-my food is Kṛṣṇa prasādam. Why shall I go to restaurant? And this is tapasya. Eating is not stopped, but don't eat anything which is not kṛṣṇa-prasādam. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you, for satisfaction of your tongue, you get money and satisfy your tongue, that is forbidden. It is said that kāmasya na indriya-prītiḥ. You have demand. You have to, demand of the body. You have to eat something. You have to sleep somewhere. You must have some sense gratification. You must protect yourself from attack of others. That is all right. But don't do all these things for sense gratification. This is the injunction of the śāstra.

Just like Arjuna fought. Arjuna fought not for sense gratification. He fought for satisfying Kṛṣṇa. Because Arjuna, first of all, he was trying to satisfy his senses. He said to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, they are all my relatives. The other side: my grandfather, my brothers, my nephews, my son-in-laws. Oh, how can I fight with them?" This consideration was for sense gratification. He was thinking that "In this way I shall be satisfied." Personally. But there was no question of satisfying Kṛṣṇa. But when he understood that his business was to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, then he agreed. Kṛṣṇa inquired, "Whether you have now decided to fight or not?" He said, "Yes." Naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā: "I have now got back my memory, and my moha, illusion, is now lost." Kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73]. "I shall fight." So this fighting was service to Kṛṣṇa. It is not sense gratification. Rather, when he was trying to become nonviolent, very good man, not to fight, sacrifice for the other party, that was sense gratification.

This is the distinction between bhakti and karma. Karma is sense gratification, and bhakti is satisfying the Lord. The same thing. Therefore people cannot understand what is the difference between a bhakta and a karmī. Karmī is satisfying his own senses, and the bhakta is satisfying Kṛṣṇa's senses. There must be some sense gratification. But when you satisfy Kṛṣṇa, that is called bhakti. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Hṛṣīka means senses, purified senses. That I explained the other day, that

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



Bhakti does not mean stop your work. Bhakti does not mean sentimental fanaticism. That is not bhakti. Bhakti means to engage all your senses for the satisfaction of the proprietor of the senses. That is called bhakti.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Hṛṣīkeśa. Hṛṣīka means senses. And hṛṣīka īśa, He is the controller of the senses. Actually, our senses are working not independently. We can understand it. Kṛṣṇa is directing. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca. A scientist is working because Kṛṣṇa is helping him, not that he is independently working. That is not possible. But he wanted in that way. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is giving him facilities. But actually, Kṛṣṇa is working. These are explained in the Upaniṣads. Without Kṛṣṇa working, without seeing, without Kṛṣṇa's seeing, you cannot see. Just like the sunshine is explained in the Brahma-saṁhitā.

yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Therefore, sun being one of the eyes of Kṛṣṇa, because the sun rises there, because sun is seeing, therefore you are seeing. You cannot see independently. You are so much proud or you eyes. What is the value of your eyes if there is no sunlight? You cannot see. Even this electricity, that is derived from sun. So actually when Kṛṣṇa sees, you can see. That is the position.



So our senses... In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat. Sarvataḥ pāṇi-pāda... Everywhere Kṛṣṇa has His hands and legs. What are that? My hands, your hand, your leg-that is Kṛṣṇa's. Just like if somebody says I have got branches all over the world. So those branches are working on the management of the supreme person. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa also. Kṛṣṇa is therefore called Hṛṣīkeśa, Hṛṣīkeśa. So business is... Bhakti means when we engage our hṛṣīka, our indriyas, our senses, in the service of the proprietor of the senses. That is our perfect life. That is our perfect... But as soon as we desire to use our senses for the gratification on the senses, that is called karma. That is called material life. So therefore, for a bhakta there is nothing material. That is īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. The bhakta sees that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat, tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā. Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore whatever Kṛṣṇa gives us... Just like a master. Master allots something to the servant, "You can enjoy this." That prasādam. Prasāde sarva-duḥkhānāṁ hānir asyopajā... This is the life. If you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, if you understand that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, even my hands and legs, they also belong to Kṛṣṇa, all the parts of my body, they belong to Kṛṣṇa, then it should be used for Kṛṣṇa," that is called bhakti.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



That Kṛṣṇa did, er, Arjuna did. He wanted to satisfy his senses by not fighting, but he agreed after hearing Bhagavad-gītā that "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person."



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



These things are very nicely explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. That is the preliminary study of spiritual life. And if we are actually convinced of the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā, then we surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa wants that. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That He wants. When we actually take to this process, this is called śraddhā. Śraddhā. That has been explained by Kavirāja Gosvāmī, what is the meaning of śraddhā.



śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.62]



This is called śraddhā. Śraddhā means firm faith. What is that firm faith? Firm faith means that... Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. When you take this conclusion, "Yes, by surrender to Kṛṣṇa, by surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, everything is done very nicely," this is called śraddhā. And the more you increase this śraddhā, the more you become perfect.



This is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, beginning with this śraddhā. Ādau śraddhā. If you don't believe... You are reading Bhagavad-gītā three hundred years but don't believe that "I have to surrender to Kṛṣṇa," then what is the use of reading Bhagavad-gītā? All these rascals, they are reading Bhagavad-gītā but they have no concern with Kṛṣṇa, forget Kṛṣṇa. This is reading of Bhagavad-gītā useless waste of time. Useless waste of time. If you do not understand the meaning of Bhagavad-gītā, why you are...? Śrama eva hi kevalam. That has been explained in the previous verse.

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



If you do not understand Kṛṣṇa, if you do not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, then you are simply wasting your time. There is no meaning of writing big, big comments on Bhagavad-gītā, uselessly waste you time and waste others' time. This is the real point, śraddhā. Kṛṣṇa said, by surrendering to Kṛṣṇa everything will be done. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. So if one has no śraddhā, faith, on this instruction of Kṛṣṇa, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī [Bg. 18.65], then there is no use, simply waste of time.



If we come to this point, ādau śraddhā... This is called śraddhā. Then the next stage is ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. If one has..., one is convinced that "Surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, my all business will be perfect," this is called śraddhā. Then we have to seek out who are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Sādhu means Kṛṣṇa conscious person. Sādhu does not mean having a big beard and nice dress or saffron-colored dress. That is not sādhu. Sādhu is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. That is sādhu, who has no other business than to serve Kṛṣṇa. He is sādhu. He is sādhu because he has accepted the principle, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ [Bg. 9.30]. You cannot say, "Oh, he has got some bad principle in his life. Although he is worshiping Kṛṣṇa wholeheartedly, but he has got some defect." Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, api cet su-durācāraḥ. Even if he has got so many defects of his life, because he has dedicated his life for Kṛṣṇa's service, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. So if you have got śraddhā that by surrendering to Kṛṣṇa your all purpose of life will be practical or fruitful, then you have to associate with such persons who are engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ. Therefore our this movement is called International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.

So actually, one by one, as people are coming to the association of the society, automatically he is becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is practical. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ. This is sādhu-saṅga. Sādhu-saṅga does not mean to associate with some saffron-colored men. Sādhu-saṅga means to associate with Kṛṣṇa conscious person. This is śāstra. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu... This is Rūpa Gosvāmī's direction, that if you want to develop your love for Kṛṣṇa, this is the process. Because real purpose of life is not dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. And that will be explained here. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. What is the Absolute Truth? What is the aim of life? Then this is the process. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā. Practically we have seen. These boys and girls, Europe and America, they first of all came to me, and they associated, abided by my orders. Then automatically they wanted to be initiated. We are doing that. Every day we are initiating some new devotees. So this is called bhajana-kriyā. You'll be automatically anxious. If one associates with sādhu, then he will be automatically anxious to accept bhajana-kriyā, initiation. Then you have to rise early in the morning, you have to offer maṅgala-ārati, you have to do this, you have to do that. Twenty-four-hours program is there. That is called bhajana-kriyā. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Anartha means useless habits. Just like one smokes. It is useless habit. By bad association one becomes a smoker, one becomes a drunkard, one becomes a meat-eater, one becomes a gambler. These are anarthas. So everyone in this age, everyone is associated with these anarthas. But if he takes to kṛṣṇa-bhajana, bhajana-kriyā, then anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Practically you can see. These boys and girls, they are no more meat-eaters, they are no more taking any intoxicants, they are no more gambler. No more illicit sex hunters. No. Everything stopped. This is our prin... This is called mukti. This is called mukti. As soon as you get rid of these bad sinful activities, you are mukta. That is called mukti. And after mukti, tato niṣṭhā, then we have got firm conviction: "Yes, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the only business." Tato niṣṭhā, tato ruciḥ. Then you increase your taste. Tato niṣṭhā athāsaktiḥ. Then you become attached to Kṛṣṇa.

That is the beginning of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, bhakti-yoga. This is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ. When you increase your attachment for Kṛṣṇa... That is required. Increase... You have got attachment for your family, for your body, for your society, for your country, everything. That's all right. But you have to convert them. You have to increase attachment for Kṛṣṇa. That is called bhakti-yoga.

mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha

yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ

asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ

yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu

[Bg. 7.1]



Kṛṣṇa says in the Seventh Chapter, in the beginning.



So everything is there. If we actually want to make our life perfect, the directions are already there in our... We have got the Vedic knowledge, treasurehouse of spiritual knowledge, and the Bhagavad-gītā is the gist, is the summary. Gītopaniṣad. It is called Upaniṣad. If you simply study Bhagavad-gītā as it is, without foolishly interpreting it... That will spoil. Don't interpret. Just like you are given paramānna, or kṣīra. Everyone knows what is kṣīra, milk and rice cooked together with sugar, very nice foodstuff. But if you add with it several grains of sand, it becomes useless. You can add it, simply a few grains of sand-we spoil Bhagavad-gītā. Therefore Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī has advised how to save yourself from this rascaldom. He says, avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam, śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. Pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam. Hari-kathā. Kṛṣṇa is speaking Bhagavad-gītā; therefore it is called hari-kathā, kṛṣṇa-kathā. So Sanātana Gosvāmī says, "If it is uttered by avaiṣṇava, who is not a devotee, he is a professional man, so-called scholar and politician, don't hear it. Don't hear it." Avaiṣṇava: "Because he is not a Vaiṣṇava." Avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathā. Hari-kathā means Kṛṣṇa's words. They are very purified. That's all right. But śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. Why? Because sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ. Just like milk. Milk is very good food, but if it is touched by the tongue of a serpent, it becomes poison. If you eat that kind of milk, your life will be finished. Similarly, our only request is that don't try to read Bhagavad-gītā commented by unauthorized so-called scholars or politicians. Simply read Bhagavad-gītā as it is. Simply accept what Kṛṣṇa says. Then you will be benefited.

Kṛṣṇa says, dharma-kṣetra. Not Kṛṣṇa says. Sañjaya uvāca. Dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre. No. Dhṛtarāṣṭra uvāca. Dhṛtrāṣṭra says,

dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre

samavetā yuyutsavaḥ

māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva

kim akurvata sañjaya

[Bg. 1.1]



He is asking his secretary. He was blind man. So he was asking his secretary, "My dear Sañjaya, after my boys, māmakāḥ, and pāṇḍavāḥ, the sons of my younger brother Pāṇḍu, samavetā yuyutsavaḥ, they assembled for fighting in the dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre... [Bg. 1.1]." Dharma, kuru-kṣetra is still there. Everyone knows. And it is dharma-kṣetra. Everyone knows. Then where is the difficulty to understand dharma-kṣetra kuru-kṣetra māmakāḥ pāṇḍu? But if you foolishly interpret, "Dharma-kṣetra means this, and kuru-kṣetra means that, and pāṇḍavāḥ means that," you spoil the whole thing. That is going on. Otherwise there is no difficulty. Dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ [Bg. 1.1]. Actually, it is historical fact, Mahābhārata. There was fight between two cousin-brothers. They, "No. Pāṇḍava means this and this. Kuru-kṣetra means this and... This means this." In this way, things are being spoiled. So we are misled in that way. Actually, if we read Bhagavad-gītā as it is, as a devotee... Because without being devotee, nobody can understand Bhagavad-gītā. Because in the Bhagavad-gītā in so many places it is stated, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. Bhaktyā, only through devotion, only becoming a devotee, you can understand Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise you cannot. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ: [Bg. 7.25] "I am not exposed to anyone." Yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ. "Only bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]."



So this is the way. And this life is meant for that purpose. That is the advice of the Vedas. Vedaiś ca sarvaiḥ... [break] So Arjuna is inquiring from Kṛṣṇa, and He says, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. So Bhagavad-gītā is real Vedānta. And if one understands Bhagavad-gītā as it is, he is really Vedantist. Veda means knowledge, and anta means the last word. So last word of knowledge is Kṛṣṇa. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. If one does not understand Kṛṣṇa and does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, he is simply uselessly wasting his time. That is the verdict of all Vedic literature. Therefore in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavata it is said, kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. Kāmasya nendriya-prītir lābho jīveta yāvatā [SB 1.2.10]. Simply take so much as you will need, not for sense gratification. That is the process. Don't take more, don't take less. Yuktāhāra-vihārasya. Śāstra does not advise you that you starve, unnecessarily you starve. No. Kṛṣṇa has condemned one who unnecessarily starves. You take foodstuffs. But don't take anything which is forbidden. Take kṛṣṇa-prasādam. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam [Bg. 9.26]. Don't try to satisfy your senses. The senses will be satisfied. There are so many varieties of food, kṛṣṇa-prasādam. That you will... These Europeans and Americans, they used to take meat. Now if you give them, bribe that "You take again meat..." Because they have learned to cook so many nice foodstuffs. Ask any one of them. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā. When you get better thing, nivartate, then you give up which is not very good.

So this bhakti-yoga, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is so nice that if you take it very seriously, if you enter into the mystery of this bhakti-yoga... It is not all mystery, it is very open. Then naturally, paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. And that is required. Vairāgya.

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



We have discussed this verse. So our only request is that don't take this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement as some sentimental religious propaganda. No, no. It is not religious. It is scientific. It is to save the human society from gliding down to the abominable condition. Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Bhāgavata says, adanta-gobhiḥ. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Adānta. The verse is: matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā. Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām. Those who are gṛha-vrata, means simply materialistic or simply this life, this body, "I am this body, and the offsprings of this body, they are my kinsmen. I have to maintain them," or expanding: "They are my kinsmen, they are my family men, they are my nation," this is called gṛhamedhi. So such gṛhamedhi, matir na kṛṣṇe, they cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā.



Parataḥ means by instruction or superior persons. Parataḥ. Svataḥ, by reading himself. Mitho 'bhipadyeta, or holding big, big meeting. They cannot understand. Why? Because gṛha-vrata. Gṛha-vratānām. What is the business of gṛha-vrata? Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. By being unable to control the senses, creating another body. Another body, the sense gratification. Either as god or demigod or as dog or as hog or as human being, as tree or insect. The business is āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Punaḥ punaḥ. The same thing he is doing. He does not know the real business is how to get out of this entanglement of pavarga, repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. He does not know. There is no science, there is no education. There is only education in the Bhagavad-gītā. Therefore you have to, if you want to save the world, if you want to save the human civilization, you have to make to this proposition of Bhagavad-gītā, learn it scientifically, and make your life successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



721021SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.10

-

Vṛndāvana, October 21, 1972



Pradyumna: Translation: "Life's desires should never be aimed at gratifying the senses. One should desire to live only because human life enables one to inquire about the Absolute Truth. This should be the goal of all works."



Prabhupāda:



kāmasya nendriya prītir

lābho jīveta yāvatā

jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā

nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ

[SB 1.2.10]



So we were discussing dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. So we have already discussed that religiosity does not mean to gain material gain. We have already discussed, just people go to the church: "God, give us our daily bread." Or, even in temple, they go to ask something, material gain. But actually religiosity's not meant for that purpose. Religiosity is meant for dharmasya āpavargyasya. To enter into life of religiosity means to get out of the threefold miserable condition of life, apavarga.



So then dharma-artha, money also we want. Arthasya dharmaikāntasya na kāmo lābhāya hi smṛtaḥ. We want money. That's all right. But not for satisfaction of our lusty desires. Money has got its use. Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we get money also. But we are spending for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Our need is very great. People will be surprised what we are expending per month. We have got more than one hundred branches all over the world, and each branch, there is expenditure... In Los Angeles, we spend twenty thousand dollars per month. In New York, we spend ten thousand per..., dollars per month. Or more than that. Similarly, on the average, we spend not less than ten thousand dollars per each branch. But we have got calculation. We, we are spending seventy thousand dollar, dollars per month. So Indian exchange means seven lakhs of rupees. So we need money. And we are getting money also. In Europe, in America, the process of getting money is not the, like here, that I go to any gentleman, "Give us some donation." That is not possible. You cannot enter even one's house without introduction. Then you are trespasser. If you enter anyone's house without permission, he can kill you. This is the law. And every door, there is signboard: "Beware of the dogs." So it is not possible to go and beg, "Sir, give us something." But fortunately, we have published books, about twenty books, four hundred pages each. And we are going on publishing. By Kṛṣṇa's grace, we are selling books, daily, twenty five thousand rupees. Therefore we are able to spend seven lakhs of rupees per month.

So Kṛṣṇa gives. My Guru Mahārāja always used to speak that "Why should you go and flatter? You should speak plain truth, without any flattering. Money will come." That was his conviction. And... So it is experienced. We have got very, very heavy expenditure. But all this money collected, they are not meant for indriya-prīti, not for sense gratification. That is the significance. If we want money for sense gratification, then, according to our destiny, we shall get. Not more than that. Nobody can get more. Therefore Bhāgavata says,

tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



So far our sense gratification is concerned, we cannot get money more than what we are destined to get. Otherwise why there are so many people born with silver spoon in their mouth and somebody's born poor? And he's not getting even two times food, working very hard, day and night. So there is a destiny. Destiny we cannot improve. That is already settled up. But you can improve your Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That chance is there.



Therefore Bhāgavata says, tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Those who are learned, those who are intelligent, they should devote the life for developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there in everyone's heart, dormantly.

nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema 'sādhya' kabhu naya

śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

[Cc. Madhya 22.107]



Our love for Kṛṣṇa is there already. But it is covered. It is covered. By the influence of the modes of material nature, it is covered. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is nothing but discovering Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is already there. But we are giving chance to the people for hearing about Kṛṣṇa. That's all. All these European, American boys and girls who have joined, they have simply been given the chance of hearing. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Actually, if the people are given chance to hear this Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam, then gradually the dirty things within his heart becomes cleared, and he can understand what is Kṛṣṇa. This is the process. We do not ask anybody that "You become Hindu or you become so and so." We simply ask, "Please come and chant with us." This is our program. I began my chanting in New York in a park, Tompkinson Square. Those who are old students... Here is Acyutānanda. He's one of the old students. He first of all came and danced. He and Brahmānanda. So that is the beginning. He knows what was the beginning. I was sitting underneath a tree like this, and no khol. It was some dundubhi. And I was playing on it from two to five, three hours, chanting. And these young boys and girls with their dogs, with their children, they began to dance. Yes. That was the beginning. Gradually, they became student. Here is... Where is our Hayagrīva Prabhu?



Devotee: He's over here, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Yes. He's Professor Howard Wheeler. He also met me on the street, but he could not find out a guru. He returned back. Then, when I was going on a street, he found me, and he began to join. In this way, we developed. First of all in New York. Then San Francisco. Then Montreal. So now we have got more than one hundred branches all over the world. So simply by this chanting... And we are known as "Hare Krishna People." Wherever we go, people say "Here are the Hare Krishna People." They respect because we follow strictly the four principles: no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication, and no meat-eating. They respect. They become surprised how we can avoid.



So here it is stated, kāmasya nendriya prītiḥ. So long we have this body, we have to eat, we have to sleep, we have to enjoy senses, and we have to defend. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. These are bodily necessities of life. And they are called kāma. So kāma is allowed. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, dharma-aviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi: "Which is not against religious principles, that sort of kāma is allowed." But not for sense gratification. You can marry. You can beget children. That's all right. But you cannot enjoy sex for enjoyment, for simply enjoyment. No. That is not allowed. You eat, you sleep, you have sex life, you defend. Nothing is forbidden in the śāstra, but you must know the aim of your life. The aim of your life is tattva-jijñāsā. You should not forget that. Therefore the Vedic system is so organized that people may satisfy the bodily necessities of life, at the same time, he may progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness for understanding the Absolute Truth. That is Vedic system. Not one-sided. There is sufficient concession for our sense gratification, but we should not forget our real business of life, athāto brahma jijñāsā.

This brahma-jijñāsā is explained here as tattva-jijñāsā, the same thing. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. This human life... Athāto brahma jijñāsā means this human life is made for inquiring about the Absolute Truth. Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī, he inquired from Caitanya Mahāprabhu, ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya, "Who am I?" This is also brahma-jijñāsā. Because I am part and parcel of Brahman, the Absolute Truth, so I must know myself. So that is the beginning of brahma-jijñāsā. Just like Bhagavad-gītā begins... Kṛṣṇa is teaching Arjuna that "You are not this body. You are Brahman." Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]. Asmin dehe, in this body, there is the proprietor of the body. So that is the beginning of brahma-jijñāsā. "Who am I?" Ke āmi. And without knowing myself, I cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa. If I, without knowing myself, I try to understand Kṛṣṇa, then I shall misunderstand. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. I shall consider that "He's also a man like me. Maybe a better man or stronger man or richer man. That's all." Because they have no conception of the spiritual identity of self, therefore they misunderstand Kṛṣṇa as ordinary man.

So we cannot understand Brahman or God or Parabrahman, Supersoul, without understanding the nature of myself. This is called tattva-jijñāsā. So jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. We should work. Everyone is working, but they are working for sense gratification. Especially in the Western countries. Not only Western countries, Eastern, everywhere. Their aim is how to satisfy or gratify the senses more and more. This is their aim. But that is not the li..., aim of life. The aim of life, especially in the human form of life... We are coming to this human form of life through the evolutionary process, gradual evolutionary process of 8,400,000 species of life, and this is the opportunity to understand "What I am, what is God, and what is our relationship with Him?" If we miss this opportunity, then we are committing suicide. Again I..., we're going back in the cycle of birth and death, and we do not know when again we shall come to this form of human body. So we should not misuse this human form of body. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings,

hari hari biphale janama goṅāinu

manuṣya-janama pāiyā

rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā

jāniyā śuniyā biṣa khāinu



"Knowingly, I am drinking poison. I have heard that this life is meant for understanding for Absolute Truth, but I am spoiling my life in the business of sense gratification. So therefore I am drinking poison knowingly." Just like somebody takes poison knowingly, that "I, I must die." But he wants to end. So that is not our aim of life. We should properly utilize the opportunity given by nature, given by God. That is required.



So here is the opportunity. Kṛṣṇa is there. Kṛṣṇa is speaking. Not that Kṛṣṇa is not present. Kṛṣṇa is present by His words. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and His words. The Bhagavad-gītā As It Is, they're the words of Kṛṣṇa. When you read Bhagavad-gītā, you should know that you are talking with Kṛṣṇa directly: kṛṣṇa-kathā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore advises, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, kṛṣṇa-kathā, this should be spread all over the world. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that "I don't find any scarcity within this world, except Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Exc... Actually, that is the fact. There is no scarcity all over the world. In India there may be scarcity, but outside India still there are so much vacant places, especially in Africa, in America, in Australia, in New Zealand, that ten times of the population of the whole world can be fed. Still. There is so much potency of producing food grains, milk, and other things. Profusely. In America, they throw away so many grains and vegetables daily. It is simply mismanagement. Otherwise, there is no question of scarcity or poverty. There is no question. It is simply propaganda. Because they cannot manage, the foolish people, they present the population has increased and the foodstuff is not properly supplied. Foodstuff is always sufficient. But when there are demons, the supply is restricted by nature.

That we get information from Pṛthu Mahārāja's history. When there was scarcity, Pṛthu Mahārāja wanted to kill the earthly god, or Pṛthvī. But she replied that "I have restricted supply on account of demons, because they are not actually executing the purpose of life, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore I have restricted." So the more people become non-Kṛṣṇa conscious, materially conscious, the more there will be restriction of foodstuff. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the Twelfth Canto, it is stated that the end of Kali-yuga there will be no grain supply. Wheat, rice and milk and sugar will not be available. Now it is available still, because still people are little Kṛṣṇa conscious. For them only. But gradually, the things will deteriorate so much so that almost all supplies will be stopped.

So the fact is that we do not require to, I mean to say, endeavor for finding out food. The food is already there. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. We should sit down tightly, depending on Kṛṣṇa... That we have already explained, that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is going on. We have got heavy expenditure, but Kṛṣṇa is supplying. This is a fact. None of our boys and girls, they go to office or to factory or they earn. The... In Los Angeles, our neighborhood men, they're very envious. They say, "How you maintain such huge establishment and you do not work?" They cannot dream that without working one can eat. Yes. So here the fact, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. It is not that you have to work very hard. The... Everywhere in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that is the instruction. In one place, in the Fifth Chapter of Fifth Canto, while Ṛṣabhadeva was instructing His boys, He also said, nāham, nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. This human form of body is not meant for working hard like the dogs and the hogs for simply for sense gratification; it is meant for tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet [SB 5.5.1]. The human life is meant for tapasya, self-realization, tattva-jijñāsā. That is the basic principle of Vedic civilization.

In the Vedic, in Mahābhārata, we don't find there is any industrial development or trade development. No. Nothing like that. Why Mahābhārata? Even two hundred years ago, before the British advent, there was no industry all over the India. And they were happy. So it is not that simply by increasing your fruitive activities, karmabhiḥ, you can become happy. No, that is not possible. If you simply restrict yourself for life, inquiring about the Absolute Truth, then you'll be happy. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. That is, that is the only business of the human form of life and not working hard like asses and cows. Sa eva go-karaḥ. These examples are there in the... I was giving the example while coming. Who was there? That this ass... Ass, one ass was going. So the ass, he can eat grass anywhere. There are so many grasses. But he's thinking that "Unless I work very hard, the washerman will not give me grass." You see? This is ass intelligence. Everything is there. Why ass? There are elephants. In Africa there are millions of elephants. They're eating at the, at one time, at least eighty-two pounds, but they are supplied food.

So there is no question of... This is all political propaganda: "There is no food. There is increase of population." Nothing. Everything, Kṛṣṇa can provided. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). The Supreme Lord is the supreme nitya, eternal, and we are all dependent upon Him. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. And that one singular number of nitya, Kṛṣṇa, bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. So Kṛṣṇa has provided everyone's food. There is no necessity, necessity of becoming anxious, "Where is food? Where is food?" Every arrangement is there. Our only business is how to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness, how to know Kṛṣṇa. And if you simply in truth, if we try to understand Kṛṣṇa, our all problems are solved. Especially this problem, this repetition of birth and death. This is solved. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. And that is the main problem.

So our request is that everyone may take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement without any hesitation. This is authorized movement and approved movement, and people are accepting all over the world. Unfortunately, in India, they are lacking. I must admit that as the younger generation from other countries, they're enthusiastically join, or joining, our Indian youths are not joining in that way. But we require so many preachers, so many young men, to preach all over the world this sublime movement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. People are accepting. Even in Africa, who are supposed to be uncivilized, they are also accepting. Everywhere. There is no impediment. Ahaituky apratihatā. People are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. You'll be surprised to know that I was going from London to Nairobi, Africa, and our plane stopped for forty-five minutes in Athens, and as soon as we dropped down, some young men there, in Athens, Greece, they immediately began to chant, "Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa."

So the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is now well spread all over the world. The framework is there. So anyone can go and preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement very easily and people will take it. Recently I'm coming from Manila, Philippines. There also, they're dog-eaters. But still they took part in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, chanted, and we were very much encouraged. In the last meeting... We held our meeting in the hotel, big hall, very nice hall, and all young men came, and they chanted and danced with us, purchased our books, and here are... The organizer is Sudāmā-vipra Ma..., Gosvāmī Mahārāja is present here. He has gone there only six months, and within six months, he has organized so nicely that wherever we go, the young generation, especially, they chant, "Hare Kṛṣṇa!"

So the purport is that this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement has got great potency. Everywhere, all over the world. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma. He did not say in vain. There was meaning. Simply we have to take the opportunity, the blessings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and try our best. The people will be happy, and we shall be happy. That is the meaning of jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ.

Thank you very much. (end)



721228SB.BOM

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.10

-

Bombay, December 28, 1972



Prabhupāda:



kāmasya nendriya-prītir

lābho jīveta yāvatā

jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā

nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ

[SB 1.2.10]



This verse we have been discussing for the last few days, it is very important, especially for the modern civilized man, that they're after simply sense gratification, inventing so many things simply for sense gratification. So Rūpa Gosvāmī says that sense gratification is required, but not simply we shall devote our life for sense gratification. There is another business. Kāmasya nendriya-prītir [SB 1.2.10], lusty sense gratification, not for, there is demand. The sense demands some satisfaction, but not for..., for the sake of sense gratification. Just like sex life. Sex life, there is demand, but that should be utilized for begetting nice children, not for sense gratification. Dharma viruddha kāmaś ca aham asmi. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, "Sense gratification which is not against the religious principle, that is I am." Sense gratification is there, is also. Just like the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. That is cin-māyā. Cini means home(?); mithuna means dual, couple, the spiritual couple. Similarly here also, the same spiritual our duties are there, but because it is covered by this material body, it is perverted. So, just like when you are diseased, we cannot enjoy life; that is forbidden. If one is suffering from tuberculosis, and if he wants to enjoy sex life, that means he is bringing death. Similarly, in this material condition of life if we want to aggravate our sense gratification process, then we invite very from..., very quickly death. Death means, spiritual death, to become more and more entangled in material things.



Therefore Bhāgavata says, Sūta Goswami says, that this life, human life, or the purpose of the Vedic civilization, they are not meant for kāmasya nendriya-prītir [SB 1.2.10]. Kāma, that should be utilized for better purpose, not for sense gratification. The real business is jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Life should be engaged simply for tattva-jijñāsā, to understand the Absolute Truth. The whole Vedic literature, Vedic knowledge is meant for understanding the Absolute Truth. Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyam [Bg. 15.15]. The purpose of studying Veda means to understand Kṛṣṇa. And vedānta-vit. Because people are very much proud, especially Māyāvādī philosophers, they're very much proud of becoming vedāntī. So the Vaiṣṇava philosophers... (aside:) Stop that. ...Everyone is vedāntī. Śrī Rāmānujācārya, he is also vedāntī. Madhvācārya, he is also vedāntī. Nimbārka, he is also vedāntī. Without understanding Vedānta, where is the question of spiritual advancement? So Vedānta does not mean it is the monopoly of a certain class of philosopher. No. Actually Vedānta, this vedānta-bhāṣya understanding of Vedānta, it is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhāṣya brahma-sutrani. And this bhāṣya, this commentary, is given by the author Himself. The purpose of Vedānta is known to the author. Therefore if he personally gives the commentary, that is very perfect. Kṛṣṇa also says, vedānta-vit vedānta kṛd cāham: "I am the compiler of Vedānta, and I am the knower of it." That is, Vyāsadeva is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "I, I am the actual knower of Vedānta." So whatever is said by Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā, that is no a..., against Vedānta-sūtra, or what is spoken in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that is not..., that is actually following the Vedānta-sūtra.

Now, here it is said that jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Vedānta-sūtra begins with this word: athāto brahma jijñāsā. So nartho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. Generally people are very much attached to karma-kāṇḍa, offering, performing great sacrifice. It has become now a fashion to call vikṣa(?) yajña, this yajña, that yajña. But actually real purpose is tattva-jijñāsa. The nartho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ, this performance of yajña is a karma, prescribed duty. Yajña, dāna, tapaḥ, kriyā, yajña, performing yajña. But in this age, no other yajña can be performed perfectly. It is not possible. First deficiency is there is no yajnic brāhmaṇa. Formerly, the brāhmaṇas were so expert that by mantra they ignite fire, and they would test, putting one animal in the fire, they would take and make it again alive. That is the test of the mantra. By mantra, an animal, animal put into the fire, comes out again with rejuvenated life. People think that gomedha yajña, aśvamedha yajña are made for killing the animal. No. It was testing the mantra of the Vedas, whether actually being pronounced. That was the test. Just like in biological laboratory, the medical practitioner, they test with animals to observe the physiological and anatomical conditions. Similarly... But they cannot give life, they simply kill. But here in the Vedic yajña, the animal was put in the fire and it was again taken alive. Because such yajnic brāhmaṇa is not there in this Kali-yuga, therefore the all the yajñas are forbidden. Aśvamedhaṁ gavālambham [Cc. Ādi 17.164]. Aśvamedhaṁ ga... uh, pāla-paitṛkaṁ devareṇa sutot, sannyāsam pāla-paitṛkam. Even sannyāsa is also in this age. Karma-sannyāsa. That is called karma-sannyāsa. The Vedic principle of sannyāsa is to give up this karma-karma means yajña-and take sannyāsa. But vaiṣṇava sannyāsa is tri-daṇḍī sannyāsa. They, that means the living entity is offering his body, mind and words for the service of the Lord. So tri-daṇḍa sannyāsa can be accepted in this age, not otherwise. There are so many.

So Bhāgavata says, na artha yaś ceha karmabhiḥ, that this is not the purpose. Real purpose is, to perform yajña means to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu. But this process of yajña is not possible in this age. Therefore śāstra gives injunction: kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā, harer nāma harer nāma harer namaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21], saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajñaiḥ yajanti hi su-medhusaḥ. These are the injunctions.

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tvisa kṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgo pāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



Su-medhasaḥ, those who are possessing nice brain, not dull Because the yajña was performed in the Vedic yuga, so we have to perform yajña again the same style-that is not possible. You cannot get even the ghee, and so many things, that is not possible. Therefore śāstra says, yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ: those who are intelligent persons, they perform the saṅkīrtana yajña, as it is being done here. Saṅkīrtana... No other yajña is possible to be done in this age, but this can be done, and anyone can take part in it. We have seen practically, even the small children, they are also doing. This is real yajña. And tattva-vijñāsa... This saṅkīrtana-yajña and tattva-vijñāsa means hear something from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. That makes your life perfect. Jīvasya tattva-vijñāsa nartho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. No other karma... No other karma-kāṇḍīya ritual. Simply this yajña should be performed.



Now, unless we take to tattva-jijñāsa, we cannot get out of this material clutches. Inquisitiveness: "What is the Absolute Truth?" Now Śrīmad-Bhāgavata directly gives you information what is tattva-vit, what is that Absolute Truth. That Absolute Truth is described here, vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. Tattva vidaḥ. Tattva vidaḥ means one who knows the Absolute Truth. You cannot understand what is Absolute Truth who is not tattva-vit. Tattva-vit means one who knows the Supreme Personality, he is actually vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo. So by studying Vedas, if one comes to the point of understanding Kṛṣṇa, then he is tattva-vit. Otherwise partial. That is explained here. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam [SB 1.2.11]. Tattva-jñāna, there is no difference, tattva-jñāna, but there are different angles of vision, angles of..., brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate, but the different capacity. This I have explained many times. Just like from darkness you come to the light, tamasi mā jyotir gamaḥ, come to the light. So the example is, just like you are in dark room, and your friend or you want to come to the light, come to the sunlight. So this tattva-jñāna, light, is also the sunshine, has connection with the sun. And paramātmā, brahmeti paramātmeti and bhagavān.

So tattva-jñāna, those who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by mental speculation or mental exercises... There are many parties, they are, they are called theosophists and many others, they are trying to understand. So those who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by their own knowledge, not from the knowledge of the Supreme... Our process is avaroha panthā, descending process, and the Māyāvādī philosopher's policy or system is ascending policy. I want to understand the Absolute Truth by exercising my mental power-that is called ascending process or inductive process. But our process is deductive process. We, Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. We take it, we immediately take it, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We are not going to search out who is the Supreme. Because we are hearing from the Supreme, Kṛṣṇa, then our business is finished: "Here is the Supreme." So this is very natural. You are searching after the Supreme. This is one process, by your own dint of knowledge, and another person is getting the knowledge directly from the Supreme-he is perfect. This is perfect process. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2], Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā. The perfect knowledge received from Kṛṣṇa. From Kṛṣṇa the knowledge was received by Brahma. From Brahmā the knowledge was received by Nārada. From Nārada the knowledge was received by Vyāsadeva. From Vyāsadeva the knowledge was received by Madhva Muni. In this way, paramparā-sūtra, the same knowledge was received by Mādhavendra Purī. From Mādhavendra Purī, Īśvara Purī received the knowledge. From Īśvara Purī, Lord Caitanya received the knowledge. From Lord Caitanya, the six Gosvāmīs. In this way there is a paramparā system, handing down the knowledge from disciplic, from disciple to disciple, evaṁ paramparā. That is perfect knowledge.

So those who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by exercising their, exercising their limited knowledge... After all, we are living entities. Our knowledge is always imperfect. That we do not admit, but actually it is so because our senses are imperfect. I am very much proud of my eyes, but I cannot see as soon as the electricity, light, is not existing. I cannot see. Then what is the importance of my eyes? My eyes can see under certain condition. When there is sunlight, then I can see. At night I cannot see. Then what is value of these eyes? So people say that "I cannot see." So what is the value of your eyes? Because you do not see, the fact cannot be zero. Therefore it is called śruta paramparā, śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. We have to receive the absolute knowledge by the śrota paramparā, śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭha. Just like Kṛṣṇa said, sa kāleneha yoga naṣṭaḥ parantapa: "Because that process of hearing from the right person is now broken, therefore I am speaking the same truth, Bhagavad-gītā, again unto you, because you are My very dear friend and devotee." So our process is that. We understand, we try to understand the absolute [break] ...imperfect, my knowledge is not perfect. But because I hear from the dear friend and devotee of Kṛṣṇa, therefore whatever I speak, that is perfect. I am not manufacturing. I may be imperfect-I am imperfect; actually I am imperfect-but I am carrying the message, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead"; we say, "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me"; we say, "Just surrender unto Kṛṣṇa." So therefore, because there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa's statement and my statement, therefore our knowledge is perfect. Personally, I may not be perfect, but because we are carrying the message of Kṛṣṇa and presenting as it is, therefore it is perfect. This is our process. That is the recognized process, Vedic process, śrota paramparā.

So those who are anxious to understand the Absolute Truth by dint of imperfect knowledge, this is right conclusion. If your senses are imperfect, whatever your knowledge may be, that is imperfect, because you are gathering knowledge from..., by imperfect senses. You know the story of studying..., blind man studying an elephant. So blind man is going, somebody is catching the leg. So they, "Oh, elephant is just like a pillar, a column." And somebody is studying the tail, somebody is studying the trunk. So different knowledge, because they have no eyes. And one who sees the elephant as it is, he can understand that elephant is neither column, nor a trunk, nor this; he is a complete body. Similarly, those who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by dint of blind knowledge, they come to the understanding of impersonal Brahman, brahmeti. That is also truth, just like you touch the elephant, a blind man touching the elephant, but because he hasn't got eyes he is concluding that elephant is like, just like a column. But he has touched. Similarly, either the impersonalist or the yogi or the bhakta, they have come to the Absolute Truth; therefore it is called advaya-jñāna. There is no difference between impersonal Brahman and localized Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no difference, but still there is difference. This is called acintya-bhedābheda-tattva: inconceivable one and simultaneously different. The same example can be given, that when the sunshine enters into your room, it means that sun has entered, but at the same time the sun is far, far away from you. Similarly, to understand Brahman means the Absolute Truth is sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. If you simply try to understand impersonal Brahman, then you simply understand sat aṁśa, the eternity; paramātmā, citaṁśa; and ānandāṁśa is Kṛṣṇa. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12).

Kṛṣṇa is the supreme bliss. We therefore see Kṛṣṇa always enjoying, jaya rādhā-mādhava kuñja-bihārī. That is Kṛṣṇa. He is always in company with Rādhārāṇī, and kuñja-bihārī, and enjoying Her company in different kuñjas. And gopī-jana-vallabha, He is very dear to the gopīs or the gopas, gopī jana, in Vṛndāvana. Gopī-jana-vallabha giri-vara-dhārī. And because He loves the gopīs and the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana so much, as soon as there is some danger, He is prepared. He lifted the Govardhana Hill for them. They did not know except Kṛṣṇa. Indra, the demigod Indra wanted to punish the residents of Vṛndāvana, because on the word of Kṛṣṇa they stopped Indra-yajña. So Indra became very angry: "Who is this boy, cowherd boy? He has stopped my yajña." So the demigods become very angry if the particular type of yajña is not performed. But Kṛṣṇa proved that "Your anger is not even comparable with the, My little finger's end, that's all." So this was compromise; therefore this is Indra-yajña story, Govardhana Hill pūjā. So gopī-jana-vallabha giri-vara-dhārī. And yaśodā-nandana. When you address Kṛṣṇa as the son of Yaśodā, He becomes very, very glad. If you address Kṛṣṇa, "Oh, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma [Bg. 10.12]," as Arjuna did, "paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān śāśvataṁ puruṣam adyam," they're all the Vedic hymns, they're praying for Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is very, very pleased if you address Kṛṣṇa as yaśodā-nandana, nanda-nandana, rādhā-mādhava, He is so pleased. Immediately responds. He likes it. Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always worshiped by everyone as sublime, but nobody wants to chastise you, but He wants to be chastised also, and that power is given to mother Yaśodā. He wants! He disgusted some, that "Everyone praise Me; nobody comes to chastise Me." You see. "Ah, here is another devotee, 'Yes, I am prepared to chastise You.' " Just like in Vaikuṇṭha there is no fight, but Kṛṣṇa wanted to fight. Therefore some of His devotees, Jaya and Vijaya, they came as Rāvaṇa, and he fought with Kṛṣṇa, Rāmacandra. Otherwise, who can fight with Rāmacandra? He is also devotee when he is satisfying. Kṛṣṇa wanted to fight, the devotee is prepared, "Yes, I shall fight You." And He'll kill you. This is (indistinct); this is devotee.

So these are tattva-jñānī, tattva-jñāna, kṛṣṇa jñāna. These are truths. People should devote to understand this tattva-jñāna. But those who are not very advanced, they conclude the Absolute Truth is nirākāra, impersonal Brahman. Or a little advanced than them, the yogis, they see Paramātmā within heart. They, they are also the same truth, advaya-jñāna. But if you want real bliss, if you want to talk with this Absolute Truth face to face, and treat with Him as friend, as son, as lover, that is Bhagavān. Not impersonal Brahman, neither Paramātmā. That will not get. Therefore it is said here, "The Absolute Truth is one." Either you call Him nirākāra Brahman or call you Him localized Paramātmā, He's in my heart, everyone's heart, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. But if you want to take advantage, full association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. Vadanti tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam. This is very important verse. So tattva-darśīs are that, nondual; there is no difference. The same example, that there is the sun planet; there is sun-god, whose bodily effulgence is the sunshine; and the sun globe, localized; and the sunshine. All these three taken together is one light, but the sun-god is different from the sunshine; the sun globe is different from the sun-god. Similarly, this brahmajyoti is nothing but Kṛṣṇa's personal effulgence. Yasya prabhā. Yasya prabhā [Bs. 5.40], you can, you can say, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is so powerful that He is providing brahmajyoti." Well, why not? If some creation of Kṛṣṇa, the sunlight and moonlight, is so powerful that it expands all over the universe, so how much powerful is Kṛṣṇa? Brahmano 'ham pratiṣṭha. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the source of this brahmajyoti." Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11].

Now, how to understand the Absolute Truth? The next verse says,

tac chraddadhāna munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



These are very important words. The Absolute Truth can be understood, can be known, by whom? Chraddadhāna munayo. Chraddadhāna. Tac chradda dhāna: those who are faithful. That is the beginning. If one is not faithful, if he does not believe in God, for him it is, it is to be forgotten. He cannot not understand what is Absolute Truth. Atheist who does not believe in God, who has no faith, he cannot receive; he is not possible. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They are narādhamāḥ, or always constantly engaged in sinful activities. They cannot (indistinct). Chraddadhāna, ādau śraddhā, those who have got faith, that is the beginning. Then chradda dhāna, simply having faith, will not do. Then one must associate with sādhu, chraddadhāna munayo, must be thoughtful philosopher, munayo. Chraddadhāna munayo. Tac chraddadhāna munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12]. Simply mental speculator or philosopher will not do. He must have complete knowledge, and the effect of knowledge must be, he must be renounced, without any attachment for material world, jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā. Just like in the beginning we discussed this,



vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānam...

[SB 1.2.7]



Vairāgyam and jñānam. We must have complete knowledge of the Absolute Truth. At the same time, we must be detached from material sense gratification. These two: jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā.



We have got history in our country. Great sages, muni, ṛṣi, they used to live in the forest to culture knowledge and become detached from these material activities, jñāna-vairāgya. But that is not possible in this age. From the very beginning of our life we are brought up in big cities like Bombay, Calcutta, London, New York. Then, where is the question of going to the forest? Does it mean that if one cannot go to the forest for acquiring knowledge and detachment then he has no chance? No. Kali-yuga, there is special concession that is given by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You haven't got to go to the forest of Himalaya for attaining jñāna and vairāgya. You can stay in your place. You can remain in Bombay, you can remain in London, you can remain in New York, big, big cities, and you can perform your prescribed duties. You can be very businessman. You can remain in (indistinct), or anything. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says. He said also from the Vedic, sthāne sthitaḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ manobhir, jñāne prāyasam udapāsya namanta eva, san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām. This was spoken by Rāmānanda Rāya, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted. Originally this verse was spoken by Lord Brahmā. Rāmānanda Rāya quoted from the words of Lord Bralmā, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted: "Yes, this is the process." What is that process? Jñāne prāyasam udapāsya. If we don't be independent, unnecessarily mental exercise to understand what is God, what is Absolute Truth. Don't bother about these things. Then, what to do? Namanta eva: just become submissive, then san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya, just try to hear from a realized soul. This process. Don't try to speculate yourselves as great philosophers and waste your time and become puffed-up, that "I am now realized, I am God." These puffed-up positions must be given up. You must be submissive.

Kṛṣṇa therefore wants this submissiveness. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. Just like we speak sometime to our disobedient son, "First of all you submit. Then I shall do whatever you are require." The same. We have to... Our, this material position is we are all puffed-up, unnecessarily. Although we are on the grip of material nature, we are very much puffed-up. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamāyī [Bg. 7.14]. We are beaten every step, we are so beaten by the material nature, still I am thinking, "I am God." Every step. This position should be given up, and we have to become namanta eva, submissive. Then, becoming submissive, san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām, we have to hear about Kṛṣṇa from the Kṛṣṇa devotee, not from others, not from professional men, not from the impersonalists, even not from the yogi, but from the devotee, san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya. Because they will misrepresent it. A devotee will not, never misrepresent. A devotee will say exactly what Kṛṣṇa says. He'll not adulterate. That is not his business. Therefore it is recommended that you should hear about the Supreme from the realized devotee. San-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtāṁ sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ manobhir. You remain in your position. Remain in Calcutta, Bombay or any big city. Because nowadays, in this age is city life. No gentleman, no intelligent man lives in the village. So you remain there, but try to hear from the devotee about Kṛṣṇa.

Then it is said that prāyeṇa ajito 'pi. Kṛṣṇa is ajita. Nobody can conquer Him. But such devotee who submits himself to hear from the realized soul, Kṛṣṇa becomes conquered by him. Vedeṣu durlābhaṁ adurlābhaṁ ātmā-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. Therefore it is said, tac chraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā paśanty ātmani cātmānam [SB 1.2.12]. Ātmani, within his heart, he can see the Supreme Soul, Kṛṣṇa, ātmanaṁ bhaktyā. There is the real process, bhaktyā: by means of devotional service, not by speculation or mystic power. That is not possible. Therefore a special word is used there: bhaktyā. And in the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa also says, "Not by yoga system or by jñāna system or by karma system, but bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]." This tattvataḥ means the tattva-jñāna. Bhaktyā. And what kind of bhakti? Not that simply I sit I sit down and cry a little, I practice how to cry, sentiment. No. Śruta-gṛhītayā: understanding about the Absolute Truth from Vedic knowledge. That is bhakti. That is real bhakti. Sentiment is not bhakti-I stand and I practice how to cry: "Oh, this man cries always." No. Of course, crying is there, just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to cry. But that stage is very, very high. It is not possible. You are crying, but next moment you are engaged in ordinary thing, that crying is artificial. One who can cry for Kṛṣṇa, he becomes mad, just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Govinda-viraheṇa me. Śūnyāyitaṁ jagat-sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. He says, crying, "Everything is now over. There is I cannot see Kṛṣṇa." So that crying is different crying. Not that in the meeting I cry, and, next moment, I am now dry, "I want this, I want that..." But that not crying. Cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam śunyāyitaṁ jagat-sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa. Caitanya cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam, just like torrents of rain falls from the sky, so govinda-viraheṇa, on account of separation from Govinda, cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam, śunyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa.

So therefore here it is particularly said, bhaktyā. Bhaktyā means you have to execute the devotional service under the direction of a proper spiritual master, bhaktyā śruta-gṛhitaya, and you have to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Two things must go on. If... Just like here you'll find the arcā-vigraha, worshiping the Deity, is going on. But if simply these thing go on, it will be happening... Because none of us are expert. There must be śruta-gṛhitaya. We must hear about Kṛṣṇa also. Two things must go on parallel lines. If simply speculation goes on, that will not help us, and if simply ringing the bell goes on, and then that will not... That is not. There are temples, many hundreds and thousands, but nobody goes, because there is no śruti, śruta-gṛhitaya. People say, "What is there? They're simply ringing the bell, that's all." So two things must go on: bhaktyā, śruta-gṛhitaya. There must be devotional service, discharge of devotional service as they are prescribed in the śāstra, as they are guided or ordered by the spiritual master-that will go on-at the same time we have to hear, namanta eva, śruti vak-manobhiḥ. In this way, if we live our life, athāto brahma jijñāsā, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā, if you try to understand the Absolute Truth, this is the process. If we follow, then our life is a success.

Thank you very much. (end)



731116SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.10

-

Delhi, November 16, 1973



Prabhupāda: ...I spoke in Hindi. Now today I speak in English. If required I shall again speak in Hindi tomorrow. In this way, alternatively...



So we are worshiping Kṛṣṇa. His simple business is, as we have described, Rādhā-Mādhava, He is lover of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kṛṣṇa means lover. This very word Kṛṣṇa means "all-attractive." You can attract by your love, not by anything else. Therefore His name is Kṛṣṇa. I have read one book, Aquarian Gospel, among the Christians. In that book it is said that the word Christ has come from the word Christo, Christo, it is a Greek word, and the meaning of Christo is "lover, anointed." So I think the word Christ is apabhraṁśa of Christo, and Christo... In India still, if one's name is Kṛṣṇa, we call him Kriṣṭo, or sometimes Keṣṭo. My younger brother, his name was Kṛṣṇa. So in family we were calling him "Keṣṭo." That is very current. So actually love, the word love, has come from Kṛṣṇa. That is a fact. Therefore you will see always Kṛṣṇa always with Rādhārāṇī. We worship Kṛṣṇa-Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, Sītā-Rāma. This is Vaiṣṇava's worshipable Deity. We do not worship alone God. We Vaiṣṇava, we want to see Kṛṣṇa and His energy, potency. That is the Vedic system.

In the Vedas it is said, Upaniṣad, parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport].

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca



The Supreme Absolute Truth, He has nothing to do. He has nothing to do. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. He has nothing to do. Everything is being done by His potencies. Just like a big man, a big business man, or a big, the president of the state, he personally does not do anything. But his energies, his secretaries and others, they do everything. He simply signs or gives sanction. So this is the fact. God has nothing to do. Everything is being done very nicely by His energies. Just like the sunshine or the sun planet is one of the energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the whole material world is being conducted very nicely by the sunshine... This is scientific. Due to the sunshine all the planets, they are rotating in their prescribed orbit and nobody is colliding with one another. Everything is going nicely, sunshine. Due to sunshine, the seasonal changes are taking place, and the varieties of trees, plants are growing. Everything is going on. The moon is also working under sunshine. And due to the moon, there are waves in the sea. There are changes of the ebb tide and low tide. So one energy of the sunshine is doing so much things.



So parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. His energies are working so nicely that svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca. Svabhāva, natural. Just like a rose flower is coming into existence, very nicely painted, very nicely colored, very nicely flavored. So it requires brain. How you can say that it has been done automatically? No. There is brain. That is said in the Bhagavad-gītā: mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. The nature is working under His direction. But His direction is so complete that it appears to us as it is being done automatically. Not automatic. There is brain behind it. Just like nowadays there are so many mechanical inventions. You just push one button and things come, as we see in the airplane. There are simply... The pilot is working simply by pushing some buttons, and such a big, gigantic plane is floating in the sky. We can understand. The television, simply by pushing one button... So if materially it is so much advanced, perfection is possible, you can just imagine, spiritually how much it is perfectly possible.

So this perfection of love. We are also after love. A young man is after love; a young boy is after love. So wherefrom this love comes? Because originally the love is there in Kṛṣṇa. That is the version of the Vedānta-sūtra. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante. So this loving affair has come from the Supreme Absolute Truth, but it is pervertedly reflected only. Pervertedly reflected. Yatra tri-sargaḥ amṛṣā. Here in the material world we are simply seeing the perverted reflection of the spiritual world. Therefore in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said in the beginning,

janmādy asya yato 'nvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ svarāṭ

tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ

tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ yathā vinimayo yatra tri-sargo 'mṛṣā

dhāmnā svena sadā nirasta-kuhakaṁ satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi

[SB 1.1.1]



Satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi. Here everything is perverted. Reflection, shadow. The example is given. Just like in the desert, sometimes we find water. The reflection of the sunshine makes a false replica of water, exactly. But there is no water. There is no water, and the reflection of water. Similarly, in this material world there is only reflection of that love. Actually, there is no love. It is the mirage on the desert. Therefore, if we want really love, this word can be applied only to Kṛṣṇa, all-attractive.



So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is just to teach people not to be allured by the illusory so-called water and love or anything. There is one reality: satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi [SB 1.1.1]. Just try to come to the real reality. Don't be entrapped by the false reality. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness move... We are entrapped by the false reality, māyā. Māyā-mṛgaṁ dayitayepsitam anvadhāvat [SB 11.5.34]. Māyā, just like the deer, he runs over the false water in the desert. But the water goes ahead more and more, and the poor animal, without finding water, dies. But a sane man does not go. A sane man knows that reflection of water is not water. But that does not mean... Because there is no water in the desert, it does not mean that there is no water. The water is there, but not in the desert. That is knowledge.

Therefore we were discussing last night this verse, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Jīvasya, every living entity should be inquisitive to know where is real pleasure. Because we are hunting after pleasure, everyone. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Because we are by nature ānandamaya, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Mamaivāṁśaḥ, Kṛṣṇa says. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. Sat, cit, ānanda. He is personified, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. Vigraha means person or the form, transcendental form of sac-cid-ānanda. Sat means eternity, and cit means knowledge, and ānanda, pleasure. His body is sac-cid-ānanda. But our body is not sac-cid-ānanda, this present body, the material body. It is neither sat, because it is temporary. Therefore it is not sat. And cit. Oh, we are ignorant in so many things. There is no knowledge. Abodha-jāta. This body means ignorance. This material body means ignorance. Abodha-jāta. That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jātaḥ. Abodha-jāta means the embodiment of ignorance. We do not know so many things. In our own body... I am claiming, "It is my body," but I do not know how the body is working, how we are taking food, how it is being transferred into different secretions, then the secretion is going to the heart. And we know something by the medical science, but it is not perfect. Medical science fails. Although I am claiming... I do not know, at least. The physician may know, the medical man may know, but I am claiming I am this body," but I do not know how it is working. Therefore we are all abodha-jāta. Abodha-jāta.

Therefore our business is to inquire about the truth. This is explained in this verse, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. This human life should be engaged for inquiring about the truth, anything, either of this body or of this material nature or about God, our interrelationship-so many things that have to be known. Therefore in this verse it is said that jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. It is not our only business that simply to eat, sleep and have sex life and defend. That is not our only business. That may be the business of the cats and dogs. But human life is not meant for that purpose. The civilization should be so molded that people will have the chance to think soberly about the truth of life. That is the point. That is called tattva-jijñāsā. For this purpose the Vedic civilization is perfect. Vedic civilization is for everyone, but nowadays it is said that it is for the Indians or for the Hindus or... But actually, it is meant for everyone. Just like here it is said, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. It is everyone's duty to inquire about the Absolute Truth. Where is the question of Hindu, Muslim or this or that? Truth is truth. Two plus two equal to four; it is accepted by the Hindus, Muslims, Christians and everyone. Science is science. So therefore we should be interested about inquiring. This is the confirmation in every scripture, in the Bhāgavata also. This is also Bhāgavata.

In Bhāgavata, in another place, it is said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] "Those who are actually inquisitive to know the value of life, the Absolute Truth, he must approach a guru." Here also, it is said, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Jijñāsā means somebody in inferior position inquires from the superior man. Then there is jijñāsā. Just like a child inquires from his father. Intelligent child always inquires, "Father, what is this? What is this? What is this?" and father explains. In this way the child gets experience. So similarly, here it is said that jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Every human being... It is human being. Jīvasya, the general meaning is all living entities, but all living entities cannot inquire. That is not possible. The cats and dogs, they cannot inquire. There are 8,400,000 species of life, out of which this human form of life is competent to inquire about the Truth. Therefore here it is said, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. Now another place in Bhagavad-gītā it is said that,

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



So from whom you'll have to inquire? From a person who has actually seen what is tattva, what is truth, from him. Therefore I was speaking yesterday, last night, in Hindi, that the tattva is not to be inquired from a pān-wala or biḍi-wala. No. One who has actually seen the tattva, tattva-darśī.



So according to Vedic scripture, a tattva-darśī should be very pure, uncontaminated. Therefore, generally, we go to the qualified brāhmaṇa, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. One who is qualified. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. So according to Vedic system, a guru, generally, he must be a brāhmaṇa. Any guru. It doesn't matter, it doesn't require that he is to take birth in a brāhmaṇa family. If he is qualified, then he is guru. If he is not qualified, then he cannot become guru. Even becoming a brāhmaṇa, qualified brāhmaṇa, one does not become a guru, if he is not a Vaiṣṇava. That is the injunction of the śāstra.

ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ



Sad-vaiṣṇava. One has to become Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava means one who is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna, He said, bhakto 'si priyo 'si [Bg. 4.3], "Because you are My bhakta, therefore I am talking to you." So guru means a Vaiṣṇava. He must be a representative of Kṛṣṇa.



Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, supreme guru. He is the first guru. Tene brahma hṛdā ādi-kavaye [SB 1.1.1]. Kṛṣṇa imparted knowledge to the original person, Brahmā. You may inquire that "Brahmā is the original person. There was nobody present. Then who became his guru?" No, that is explained: tene brahma hṛdā, "From through the heart." Kṛṣṇa, or God, is situated in everyone's heart. As you become purified, He speaks. He speaks always, but in our impure condition, we cannot hear. Just like in Bhagavad-gītā it is said also,

sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

[Bg. 15.15]



So as Paramātmā, Supersoul, Kṛṣṇa is always prepared, ready to help every one of us, but provided we take His advice, we take His instruction. He says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



Those who are satata-yuktānām, means twenty-four hours engaged... Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatām. In which business engagement? Bhajatām, in the devotional service. Such person, bhajatām. What kind of bhajatām? Prīti-pūrvakam, with love and affection. Such person, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam. So what kind of buddhi-yogam? This tattva-jijñāsā, yena mām upayānti te. "This such instruction by which one can approach Me, one can understand Me," upayānti. In another place Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55].



So here also it is said, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. So if we want to know the tattva, the Absolute Truth, then we have to go through the process. That process is simply to engage oneself in the loving service of the Lord. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. By these blunt senses, materially blunt... Just like with blunt instrument you cannot take any benefit, it must be sharpened; similarly, these senses, you utilize these senses to understand the Absolute Truth, but it must be purified, sharpened. Just like a knife. When it is sharpened it cuts very nicely. If it is blunt, it does not. But you can use the same very knife. So you can use these very eyes. Now you cannot see God, or Kṛṣṇa. But if you purify these eyes, if you purify the senses, you can see God, you can talk with God, you can serve God, everything. That is possible. That is bhakti. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. We have to purify the senses. Now I am thinking, "This hand is my hand" or "This hand is my society's hand," "my family's hand" or "my nation's hand," "my community's hand." Upādhi, designation. But actually, this hand belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and therefore this hand should be used for Kṛṣṇa's purpose, not for anything else. That is called sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Purify. Actually that... Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Hṛṣīkeśa. When these senses are purified, then with that purified senses, hṛṣīkeṇa... Hṛṣīkeṇa means senses, by these senses. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. This is bhakti.

So tattva-jijñāsā. Everyone should be inquisitive to inquire about the value of life, not like cats and dogs, no inquiry, simply... We go, walk, walking in the morning. We see so many nice bungalows-they are sleeping, as if the sleeping will save him. No. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. These four things. They are thinking that these four things will save him. No. "Now we are situated in a very nice bungalow, very good income, very good wife and children." But any moment you can be kicked out of this situation, and you have to accept another body which is not very comfortable. This is nature's law. This is tattva-jijñāsā. If we simply foolishly think, "Now I am very secure," that is God... [break] ...Vṛndāvana, They were ministers in the government of Nawab Hussein Shah. But when they lived in Vṛndāvana, about their life it is stated by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau **. These things, nidrā, āhāra, vihāra. Nidrā means sleeping, āhāra means eating and vihāra means sense gratification. So nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau, conquered. Conquer. We have to conquer. This is called jitendriya.

So tattva-jijñāsā. This life is meant for tattva-jijñāsā. Not a single moment should be wasted if we actually want to save ourself. But we do not know what is saving. We do not know, even we do not understand the very first instruction of Bhagavad-gītā: tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. A sane person should be inquisitive: "Now I was a child; I got a baby's body. Now, from baby's body, youth's body. From youth's body, now I've got this old, old age body. Then what is next? What is next?" This is the natural inquiry. And the answer is there in the Bhagavad-gītā in the beginning, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. You'll have to accept another body. The nāstika, they say that "There is no, no more life." Just like Professor Kotovsky, when I was in Moscow, he said, "Swamiji, after the annihilation of the body, there is nothing. Everything finished." Just see. Now, Kṛṣṇa says that na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācin na hanyate. Now, shall I accept Professor Kotovsky's statement or Kṛṣṇa's statement? Which shall I accept?

Of course, according to our Vedic civilization, we have to accept the authority. All our ācāryas, those who are practically conducting the Vedic civilization or Hindu civilization, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Śaṅkarācārya, everything, everyone says there is life. Śaṅkarācārya says, bālās tāvat krīḍāsaktaḥ(?): "Oh, the boys..." He is going as a sannyāsī, passing through the street. He sees, bālās tāvat krīḍāsaktaḥ: "Oh, the boys are engaged in playing." Bālās tāvat krīḍāsaktaḥ. "And the young men, they are after young girls." Bālās tāvat krīḍāsaktaḥ, and vṛddhāś cintā-magnāḥ, tāvat taruṇās tāvat taruṇī-raktāḥ(?). I was just forgetting the words. Taruṇa means young man. Young man, he is after some young girl, or young girl is after some young man. So childhood is being spoiled by playing, and youthhood is being spoiled by searching after the opposite sex, and old man, vṛddhās tāvat cintā-magnāḥ. And old man is thinking, "Now I could not do so, I could not situate this boy into right position. The girl is still unmarried. Now I am going to die." So many things, thoughts. Parame brahmaṇi ko 'pi na lagnāḥ(?). "And nobody is interested with Parabrahman." This is the world. He is thinking of so many things for others' benefit. He does not know his own benefit, that after death he is going to change his body. He has to accept another body. His chapter will begin a new history. "Now, what kind of body I am going to accept?" That he does not know. Therefore he is called abodha-jāta, fools. So therefore in his ignorance, whatever he is doing, parābhava, simply defeat. Simply defeat.

parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto

yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam



apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



So we should be awakened to the consciousness, "Now what is my duty?" We should inquire. And for your inquiry, the answers are there already in the Bhagavad-gītā, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the Upaniṣads. We have got in the Purāṇas. So we should utilize it. So instead of utilizing this knowledge, this treasurehouse of knowledge, we are reading bunch of useless newspapers. You see? In the Western countries, most of you may know, they are delivering in the morning such big lump of newspapers. And after one hour, it is thrown away. Who will read that? But people's attentions are diverted by so many nonsense literatures, and they are not interested to inquire from the real source of knowledge, real treasurehouse of knowledge. Therefore here it is said that jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā: "Your only business is to inquire about the truth." And that truth should be inquired from whom? Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. If you are actually inquisitive to understand what is Absolute Truth, what is your life, what is the value of life, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta. A guru is not a fashion, "Oh, such and such swamiji is a..., let me make him guru." Just like, "Oh, there is a nice dog. Keep me a dog. Let me keep here dog." And if a guru says, "Yes, whatever you are doing, you are right. You can do whatever you... You can eat whatever you like. You can do whatever...," "Oh, he is a very nice guru." And as soon as he will say, "No illicit sex life, sir, no meat-eating, no gambling, no intoxication," "Oh, Swamiji, you are very conservative." I have heard these things. That poet Allen Ginsberg, he said, "Swamiji, you are very conservative." No, I am the most liberal. You do not know. If I become conservative, then none of you will come to me.



So a brahmacārī is strictly prohibited not to see even one young woman. But what can be done? In the Western countries, the boys and girls, they mix very freely. And if I say, "My dear boys, you cannot see even a young girl," then finished. My business there is finished. Therefore I have to arrange according to the country, according to the circumstances, as far as possible. So gradually, they are coming to the perfectional stage. So we have to adopt deśa-kāla-pātra, according to time, according to... But we are keeping our principles as it is, but making arrangement according to the circumstances. That is required.

So here, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Now what is tattva? Of course, I shall... It is... I can speak something about tattva. The next verse, it is tattva. Tattva, here it is said,

vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



So tattva, the Absolute Truth, is one. Absolute Truth is not two. Ekaṁ brahma dvitīyaṁ nāsti. Absolute Truth is one, but it is realized from different angles of vision. There are transcendentalists, just like... Karmīs are not transcendentalists. Fruitive worker. Those who are simply working for betterment of life or standard of life or economic development-dharma, artha, kāma. Kāma means sense gratification. That is already explained. Kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. But they are thinking that indriya-prīti, sense gratification, is the highest perfection of life. But Bhāgavata says, or our Vedic authority says, kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. So karmīs, they are rejected. They are not fit for spiritual life, at least, so long they remain karmīs. Muḍḥa. That I have explained last night. Then, out of many thousands of karmīs, one becomes jñānī, jñānī, in true knowledge. They are called jñānī. When one is fed up with this karmī, he comes to the stage of jñānī, knowledge, that "I am not this body. Why I am working so hard for this body like cats and dogs?" He comes to the platform of jñānī. Then above the jñānī, the yogi. Those who are trying to connect, link with the Supreme, they are called yogi. Yoga indriya-saṁyamaḥ. In the yoga stage, there is control of the senses. So yogis, and then bhaktas. Karmī, jñānī, yogi, and bhakta. Bhakta means devotee.



So those who are karmīs, they are not talked about here, tattva, because they are not interested in tattva-jijñāsā. They are interested in āhāra-nidrā-bhaya. Viṣayī. Viṣayiṇām sandarśanam [Cc. Madhya 11.8]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, therefore, He was very strict sannyāsī. Viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam atha yoṣitāṁ ca hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu. If you are interested... Caitanya Mahāprabhu was requested by His confidential devotee to allow a meeting with Mahārāja Pratāparudra. Oh, He immediately refused, "No, no, I cannot see a king." He was so strict. "A king is simply interested with politics and money, so what shall I do by meeting him? No, no, I cannot meet him." Refused. So in that connection He composed one śloka, verse, bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya: "Those who are interested to go to the other side of the spiritual world," bhava-sāgarasya jigamiṣoḥ, "that such person, for such person," viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam atha yoṣitāṁ ca, "to see the viṣayīs interested in simply eating, sleeping, mating, such persons, and yoṣit, and woman," hā hanta, hā hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu, "oḥ, for him, this kind of action is more abominable than drinking poison."

So actually, this is the position. If we are actually tattva-jijñāsu, then we must be very careful, very careful. Especially in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that karmī-jñānī. Karmī is also wanting, and jñānī is also wanting, and yogi is also wanting. Karmī wants the comfortable position of life. That is also want. And jñānī, he is also wanting mokṣa, to merge into the existence. Because after becoming big, big man within this material, when he is frustrated, he wants to become God. That is another illusion. And how you can become God, sir? But the jñānīs they want, merge into the existence. Sāyujya-mukti. It is called sāyujya-mukti, to merge into the existence. That is Brahman. That is brahma-jñāna. And yogis, they want some magic power, mystic power. They can walk on the water, they can fly in the air, and so many things-aṇimā, laghimā, siddhi. There are eight kinds of siddhis. Prakāmya, īśitā, vaśitā. So a yogi can attain such perfection. But they are wants also. The jñānīs also want, and the karmīs, what to speak, they are simply in want. Therefore, kṛṣṇa-bhakta niṣkāma ataeva śānta [Cc. Madhya 19.149]. A kṛṣṇa-bhakta, a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, he doesn't want anything more. He doesn't want anything more. You will never find that... Arjuna was a devotee. He was working for Kṛṣṇa so much, he was sacrificing everything. He was prepared to kill his family members and everything. Still, he never wanted anything, "Kṛṣṇa, give me this." Never. You will never find in the Bhagavad-gītā.

This is the position of bhakta. And that is the teaching of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4] "My dear Lord Jagadīśa, I don't want these things." Why? Na dhanam: "I don't want riches." Na dhanaṁ na janam. "Not many followers." Because materially everyone wants this. He wants money, he wants to become leader, he will..., many thousands of people will follow him, janam. And sundarīṁ kavitām, very beautiful wife. These are the material wants. So Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya Mahāpra bhu, He said, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye: "I don't want all these things." This is called niṣkāma. Kāma means those who are wanting all these things. And niṣkāma means those one who does not want all these things. How one can avoid these? Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. If one becomes perfect, unalloyed devotee, he doesn't want all these things. Therefore he is svāmī. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta niṣkāma ataeva śānta [Cc. Madhya 19.149]. Others, they are wanting something.

So we cannot be peaceful so long we shall want something. That is the secret. And that want can be completely, we can be free from all wants when we become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ

manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

yasmin sthito na duḥkhena

guruṇāpi vicālyate

[Bg. 6.20-23]



You have seen the history of Prahlāda Mahārāja, Dhruva Mahārāja, many, many devotees, Pāṇḍavas. How much tribulation they had to suffer in their lives! So yasmin sthite, because they were devotee of Kṛṣṇa, they were never disturbed. Never. This is the position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They will never want anything, and they are not disturbed by any material tribulations. This is the sign of a kṛṣṇa-bhakta. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta niṣkāma ataeva śānta [Cc. Madhya 19.149].



So it is possible to arrive that state by little endeavor, and that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And it is so simple, by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. And the practical examples you can see, that these European, American boys, they had so many wants, but they, all these demands could not satisfy them, but now they are fully satisfied simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Just like this boy, our Gurudāsa, explained that he could swim over liquor business. His father has got very big business of liquor. But no. He wants to swim in the ocean of transcendental love. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721022SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.11

-

Vṛndāvana, October 22, 1972



Pradyumna: "Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān."



Prabhupāda:



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



So the Absolute Truth is realized in three different features, according to the capacity of realization of the Person. Those who are trying to approach the Absolute Truth by exercise of the senses, they can reach up to the point of impersonal Brahman. Those who are searching out the Absolute Truth by meditation, by mystic yogic practices, they can realize the Paramātmā feature of the Absolute Truth. And those who are engaged in devotional service, they realize the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



Actually, we have to reach to the point of Personality of Godhead, person. Before that, Brahman realization and Paramātmā realization, that is partial realization of the Absolute Truth, because Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, brahmaṇaḥ ahaṁ pratiṣṭhā. The impersonal Brahman is resting on Kṛṣṇa. Just like the sunshine. Sunshine is very all-embracing, wide, widely spread all over the universe, the sunshine. But the sunshine is resting on the sun globe. We see the sun globe, localized. It is floating in one corner of this universal sky. But the sunshine is covering the whole universe. That does not mean the sunshine is more important than the sun globe. And if you can penetrate within the sun globe, then you'll find there is sun-god.

That is also mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. Kṛṣṇa says that "This yoga system, bhakti-yoga system, as they are mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā, it was first explained to the sun-god, Vivasvān." The śāstra gives us the name of the predominating deity of the sun globe. Just like any gentleman can know or give the name of your president, Mr. Nixon. He might not have seen, but he knows that the present president of U.S.A is Mr. Nixon. Similarly, actually, those who are in knowledge, they know who are the predominating deities of the different planets. They know. Not to speak of others, Kṛṣṇa, who can know better than Him? Vedāhaṁ samatītāni [Bg. 7.26]. Kṛṣṇa knows past, present, and future. So He's saying that imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. "This imperishable yoga system, bhakti-yoga..." It is imperishable, avyayam. This very word is very significant. Bhakti-yoga is imperishable. Other yoga systems may be perishable, but bhakti-yoga is not perishable. Whatever you execute in this life, bhakti-yoga, that becomes your permanent asset, so that in the next life you can begin from the point where you ended in this life. If you can finish in this life, cent percent, that is very nice. If not,... Suppose you have finished fifty percent. Still it is permanent asset. It will never be lost. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says avyayam, inexhaustible. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1].

So here we find that the Absolute Truth is realized as Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Bhagavān is the ultimate, the last word in the understanding of the Absolute Truth. Unless you come to the point of Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa... Bhagavān means original Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. All other Bhagavāns, They are expansions, plenary or part of the plenary expansion of Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. So in the spiritual world also one has to go farther and farther until he reaches to the point of Kṛṣṇa. That is ultimate progress. It is said therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā,

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



After many, many births, understanding the Brahman... Brahman understanding is certainly transcendental, but because Brahman is only partial realization of the Absolute Truth, only the eternity... The Absolute Truth is eternal, blissful, knowledgeable, cognizant. So Brahman realization means realization of the eternity portion. Paramātmā-realization is knowledgeable. Paramātmā knows everything. Paramātmā is present in everyone's heart, and He knows everyone's activities. But actual realization, complete realization, means ānanda, sac-cid-ānanda. That ānanda-realization is in Kṛṣṇa-realization. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Kṛṣṇa is by nature jolly, always full of bliss. You have seen the picture of Kṛṣṇa. He's always tri-bhaṅga-murāri, with two hands, with, playing on flute, surrounded by the gopīs, enjoying. That is blissfulness.



So brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11], step by step. But if you approach Kṛṣṇa and try to understand Him through devotional service, then automatically you understand Brahman and Paramātmā. There is no need of separate endeavor for understanding Brahman and Paramātmā. Anyone who knows Kṛṣṇa, tattvataḥ, in fact... Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



So one has to know Kṛṣṇa in tattvataḥ, as He is. So this tattvataḥ means accept the process of devotional service. Tattvataḥ, Kṛṣṇa as He is, cannot be understood by the other methods, namely by mental speculation or mystic yogic exercises. Kṛṣṇa cannot be understood in that way. If we want to understand Kṛṣṇa, then we have to accept the Kṛṣṇa method, bhakti method. That is plainly spoken by Kṛṣṇa: bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Kṛṣṇa does not say that you can know Him by mental exercises or yogic practices. No. Yogi can know... Tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ. Yogi also, by meditation, they see Kṛṣṇa. That is real yoga. As it is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, the first-class yogi is he who always thinks of Kṛṣṇa within himself.



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



That is first-class yogi.



So you are thinking of Kṛṣṇa by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa because the more you practice, immediately with your chanting, the name, the form, the quality, the pastimes, everything will be revealed. As we go on cleansing our dirty heart by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and as we chant faultless, offenseless harer nāma, Kṛṣṇa reveals. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. By service attitude, if you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without any offense, then Kṛṣṇa will reveal Himself. You cannot try to see Kṛṣṇa by your speculation or yogic practice. If you simply submissively, surrendering yourself, chant His holy name... There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa's name and Kṛṣṇa. Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.133]. People generally ask that what is the meaning of chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. We explain, you know, chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra means immediately, directly associating with Kṛṣṇa. One has to approach Kṛṣṇa by yogic practice or mental speculation for many, many births. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. They can come to the conclusion that "Here is Kṛṣṇa." Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti. But if you take to this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without any offense, then immediately you contact Kṛṣṇa. You save so much time. Why should you wait for many, many births?

That is the gift of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It is in the śāstra. Caitanya Mahāprabhu does not give you anything which is not in the śāstra. He's ācārya, although He's God Himself. He can make śāstra. Whatever He does, whatever He speaks, that is śāstra. But still, because He's playing the part of ācārya, He immediately gives Vedic evidences. That is the way of ācārya. Ācāryas will never say, "I think." "It is in my opinion." No. Such things are not accepted. No personal opinion. It must be supported by Vedic evidences. That is called paramparā system, genuine system of understanding. As Kṛṣṇa says, evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. No change. Therefore we are presenting Bhagavad-gītā as it is. We do not change. We have no power to change. Then where is the authority of Bhagavad-gītā? I am a third-class man, and if I change the statements in the Bhagavad-gītā, then where is the authority of Bhagavad-gītā? That is going on. Therefore it is practically... You have got experience that there are hundreds of Bhagavad-gītā editions in the Western countries, but because we are presenting Bhagavad-gītā as it is, our sale is better than all others. There is a report from the trade manager of Macmillan. He says, "While other editions are dwindling, going down, this edition is coming up." They published our, this present enlarged edition of Bhagavad-gītā, fifty thousand in the month of August. They are going to print again, second edition, August, September, October. So the reason is that if we present things as they are, it will be accepted. Without any adulteration. Sometimes, you know, people say that I have done miracles. They say everywhere. But I do not know anything, miracles or magic. If there is any miracle, that miracle is that we present things as they are. That's all. Without any adulteration. So that should be the principle. Present as it is. It will be accepted.

So Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti. We, we do not present Brahma-jñāna. Brahma-jñāna automatically comes if one is conversant with the knowledge of Kṛṣṇa. Then he can understand that this Brahman effulgence is the bodily rays of Kṛṣṇa.

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.40]



So we immediately understand that this brahmajyoti, impersonal effulgence of brahmajyoti is the rays of Kṛṣṇa's body. Yasya prabhā [Bs. 5.40]. Kṛṣṇa also confirms this in the Bhagavad-gītā: brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Kṛṣṇa says everything is emanating from Him. The Brahman is also emanation from Him. Paramātmā is also expansion of Kṛṣṇa.



So therefore if you understand Kṛṣṇa, tattvataḥ, yo māṁ vetti tattvataḥ... Tattva is that Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, is originally a person. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). He's the supreme eternal nitya. He's the supreme living being. As we are living beings, living entities, Kṛṣṇa is also living entity. He's not a dead stone. He's living entity. And as we have got all the propensities of living entity, He has got all the propensities of living entity. Here we are pervertedly... A young boy likes to love a young girl. A young girl likes to love a young boy. But wherefrom these natural propensities come? Because it is there in Kṛṣṇa. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. So there cannot be any question of impersonalism. Because by studying the sample living entity, you can understand the chief living entity. Kṛṣṇa is the chief living entity, supreme living entity. So we are samples. Whatever propensities we have got, Kṛṣṇa has also got. But we have got in a limited proportion. Kṛṣṇa has got unlimited proportion. The... Take the same example. The loving propensity, yupat..., yupatidvan yatha yuna,(?) this is natural. But we may finish... Because it is perverted, we may finish these loving propensities within time and space. But Kṛṣṇa's loving propensity is not finished within time and space. It is eternal. That is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and ourself.

So if we actually study Kṛṣṇa,... The Bhagavad-gītā is the Kṛṣṇa-science, and it is further explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So the Bhāga..., Bhāgava..., Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is explaining in tattva, in fact, in truth, what is Kṛṣṇa. So if we learn Kṛṣṇa, if we understand Kṛṣṇa, then our life is fulfilled. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. This is our only business. Try to understand what is Kṛṣṇa, what is Bhagavān. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. If you simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa through authorities, through Kṛṣṇa, through ācāryas, not mental concoction, manufacturing something... Kṛṣṇa should be understood through the authorities. Kṛṣṇa's love affair with Rādhārāṇī should be understood through the authorities. Not that because we see Kṛṣṇa is just like a young boy, Rādhārāṇī is young girl, if we see here, it is very nice... Of course, it is very nice, but if we do not try to understand Kṛṣṇa through the authorities, we shall be misled. Therefore in the beginning one should not try to understand the loving affairs of Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs. Then... Because it appears like ordinary dealings. But if we do not go through the authorities, we shall take Kṛṣṇa as ordinary boy or man, as it is warned in the Bhagavad-gītā, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. Because He's acting just like a young boy, if we do not try to understand tattvataḥ, vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11], in fact, in truth, through the authorities... Because here it is: vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. Tattva-vit. Yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei guru haya [Cc. Madhya 8.128].

So guru means kṛṣṇa-tattva-vit, one who knows about Kṛṣṇa. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He explains about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa explains about Himself. The Gosvāmīs, Ṣaḍ Gosvāmīs, they are explaining about Kṛṣṇa. And in their paramparā system, the ācāryas, they are also explaining Kṛṣṇa. So if we do not go through these tattva-vits, then we'll misunderstand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, rūpa-raghunātha-pade hoibe ākuti, kabe hāma bujhabo se jugala-pīriti. All of a sudden, if you become a knower of the jugala-pīriti, love of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, then there is chance of becoming fallen. There is chance. So we should... Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. We must approach the tattva-vit, one who knows the truth; through them, through him, we should try to understand Kṛṣṇa. Not simply by

Therefore they're ma..., committing so many mistakes. Even scholars like Dr. Radhakrishnan and others, they're committing so many mistakes. Because they do not go through tattva-vit. There are so many political leaders who are commenting on Kṛṣṇa's book without knowing Kṛṣṇa, without any knowledge of Kṛṣṇa. Just see their impudency. Without knowing Kṛṣṇa, they want to make trade with Kṛṣṇa. That is not very good. You cannot make trade commodity, Kṛṣṇa as trade commodity. You cannot handle Kṛṣṇa by your whims. Let you be handled by the Kṛṣṇa's whims. Then you'll be successful. Then... My Guru Mahārāja used to say that "Don't try to see Kṛṣṇa; do something so that Kṛṣṇa may see you." That is wanted. If Kṛṣṇa, if you can draw little attention of Kṛṣṇa, yat kāruṇya-katākṣa-vaibhavavatām, katākṣa-vaibhavavatām... Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says... If you somehow or other you can draw little attention of Kṛṣṇa, your life is successful. Immediately. And how you can draw? Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Simply by serving Kṛṣṇa. Take service, take to service of Kṛṣṇa, as it is ordered by the spiritual master. Because spiritual master is the representative of Kṛṣṇa. We cannot approach Kṛṣṇa directly. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. If you have bona fide spiritual master, representative of Kṛṣṇa, it is also not very difficult. Everyone can become representative of Kṛṣṇa. How? If you simply carry the message of Kṛṣṇa without any adulteration. That's all.

Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, āmāra ājñāya guru hañā [Cc. Madhya 7.128], "You become a spiritual master under My order." So if you carry out the order of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa, then you become guru. Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā. Unfortunately, we do not wish to carry out order of the ācāryas. We manufacture our own ways. We have got practical experience how a great institution was lost by whimsical ways. Without carrying out the order of the spiritual master, they manufactured something and the whole thing was lost. Therefore Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura stresses very much on the words of the spiritual master. Vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana [Bg. 2.41]. If you stick to the order of spiritual master, then, without caring for your own convenience or inconvenience, then you become perfect.

yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



This is the confirmation of all authorities. We have to carry out very faithfully the order of the bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa. Then our life is successful. Then we can understand Kṛṣṇa in truth. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. We have to hear from the tattva-vit, not from the so-called scholars and politicians. No. One who knows the truth, you have to hear from him. And if you stick to that principle, then you understand everything very clearly.



Thank you very much. (end)



740426SB.TIR

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.11

-

Tirupati, April 26, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



Translation: "Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān."



Prabhupāda: I will speak, then you translate.



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



Yesterday we have been discussing the aim of life. That is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. Kāma... Lābho jīveta yāvatā. The purpose of life is not sense gratification. Kāmasya na indriya-prītiḥ. We have got this body and we have got some bodily demands, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna, the bodily demands. We want to eat something, we want some resting place, we want to satisfy our senses, and we want to defend from dangers. These are bodily demands. But we should not be simply concerned with the bodily demands. Then we shall become on the level of animals. Our real demand is self-realization.



As it is stated in the Brahma-sūtra, athāto brahma jijñāsā, similarly, here it is advised,

kāmasya nendriya-prītir

lābho jīveta yāvatā

jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā

nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ

[SB 1.2.10]



This is very important verse for understanding the aim of life. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Not that simply economic development for sense gratification. Tattva-jijñāsā. What is the value of life? That is the aim business. (aside:) Yes, you can translate. [break] ...to give you one example of Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sanātana Gosvāmī, he was minister in the government of Nawab Hussein Shah. Somehow or other, he came in contact with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and he decide to retire from government service and join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement started by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu five hundred years ago. About them it is said by one learned scholar, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tucchavat. Because they were ministers, their association was with aristocratic family, big, big men. But he decided, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīm. Maṇḍala-pati means leaders, social leaders, political leaders. So they gave up the company of the so-called aristocratic circle-tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tucchavat-as most insignificant. Bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. Just to give real service to the mass of people, they became mendicants, kaupīna-kanthāśritau, or accepted the sannyāsa order. As Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted sannyāsa order, all the ācāryas, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Viṣṇu Svāmī, they accepted for the greater benefit of the human society.



tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tucchavat

bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau

gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau



So they gave up this life of luxury, exuberance, but adopted sannyāsa order for greater benefit of the human society.



So when Sanātana Gosvāmī approached Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to become His disciple, he inquired from Him, tattva-jijñāsā. (to translator, Mahāṁśa Swami:) Shall I stop here?

Mahāṁśa Swami: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Who is the disciple? Sanātana Gosvāmī. [break] So this Sanātana Gosvāmī, when (he) approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu... That is the system. We sometimes accept one guru. But why should we accept guru? What is the necessity of accepting guru? This is the necessity for tattva-jijñāsā, for inquiring about the Absolute Truth. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet, samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. This is the Vedic injunction. Simply if we remain engaged in the four activities of this material body, namely eating, sleeping, sex life, and defense, then we are animals. Our human life should be executed with the aim of life.



The aim of life is tattva-jijñāsā. That Sanātana Gosvāmī did when he approached Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He inquired from Him, ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya: "My dear Lord, kindly let me know who am I and why I am put into the threefold miserable condition of life." Then one can say, "You are minister. You know what you are." Then he says, "No, actually I do not know what I am." Grāmya-vyavahāre paṇḍita tāi satya māni: "Some neighborhood men, they call me I am very big man, I am very learned man, and when I study myself," āpanāra hitāhita kichui nā jāni, "I do not know what I am, wherefrom I have come, where I have to go after leaving this body, why I am put into the tribulation of threefold miseries. I do not want to die. Why death is enforced upon me? I do not want to take birth. Why that is also enforced upon me? I do not want old age. Why it is enforced upon me? I do not want disease. Why it is enforced upon me? And what is the purpose of my coming in this material world, and where I shall go after my death? Or this is the finish?" There are so many things to inquire. That is called tattva-jijñāsā. This is called tattva-jijñāsā. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā.

The Bhāgavata recommends that in the human form of life, the only necessity is to inquire about the Absolute Truth. That includes so many other things. The Absolute Truth is experienced by different persons from different angle of vision. That is explained here. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. That is the Absolute Truth-Brahman or Parabrahman-which is nondual. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam [SB 1.2.11]. Advayam means without any duality. When we say Brahman, impersonal Brahman, or when we speak Paramātmā, or when we speak of Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no difference between these three terms. Just like sunshine and the sun globe and the sun-god. According to Bhagavad-gītā, we have got the name of the predominating deity in the sun globe. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. This is said in the Bhagavad-gītā. First of all Kṛṣṇa says, "Long, long ago, millions of years ago, I spoke this philosophy of Bhagavad-gītā to Vivasvān." Vivasvān means the present predominating deity of the sun globe. Just like we have got a president, similarly, but he has got a particular name, similarly, the president of the sun globe is called Sūrya, Sūryadeva. But he has got a particular name.

So at the present moment, the predominating deity of the sun globe is called Vivasvān. So this Vivasvān or the sun-god and the sun globe and the sunshine, they are not different. All of them are light. Without light in the sun globe, how so much light is emanating? So therefore the inhabitants of the sun globe, their body is made of fire. Therefore everything is glowing. And we, from distant place, we see the sun globe also glowing. And the sunshine is also glowing. Similarly, Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān, they are one, the glowing or the light, but still, there is difference. What is that difference? If you remain in the sunshine... Every one of us, we remain in the sunshine. That does not mean that I am in the sun globe or I have seen the predominating deity, Vivasvān. Similarly, brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11], you can realize the Absolute Truth in three features: Brahman, Paramātmā... [break]... brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. The same Absolute Truth is realized from three angles of vision. Those who are trying to understand the Absolute Truth by their own scholarship, eruditely... There are many philosophers. They are trying to find out what is the original source of everything. The scientists, they are also trying to find out the original source of everything. So somebody, say, for example, the scientists, they are finding original of everything as matter, chemical, chemical evolution, the modern theory of originality. But actually, if we study what is the position of chemical theory, the so-called scientists, they could not produce life from chemicals, although their theory is that from matter life comes.

This is against our Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge says, as it is said in the Brahma-sūtra, Vedānta-sūtra, that the original cause of the Absolute Truth is a living entity. It is not matter. Just like Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. That aham, Kṛṣṇa, is not a dead matter. He is the living entity, supreme living entity. And we also understand from Upaniṣad, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). The Absolute Truth is person, a living entity. He is the supreme living entity. Similarly, the original Absolute Truth is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. That is Absolute Truth. There is no more para-tattva, superior tattva. Here the question is vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. We want to know the Absolute Truth. And here is Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān. Bhagavān is the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa. Bālajī is Absolute Truth, Bhagavān, person. Brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, "The impersonal Brahman is situated on Me." Just like the sunshine. Although it is all-pervading throughout the universe, the light is there, but wherefrom the light is coming? The light is coming from Kṛṣṇa.

That is explained in the Brahma-saṁhitā:

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.40]



The Brahman effulgence is the bodily glowing of Kṛṣṇa. Yasya prabhā. When Kṛṣṇa expands His bodily effulgence, then everything generates. This material world has also come out of the brahmajyoti, or from the rays of the body of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā. In another place Kṛṣṇa says that mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ jagad avyakta-mūrtinā. His impersonal feature, the Brahman, feature, is expanded everywhere. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni: [Bg. 9.4] "Everything is resting on my bodily effulgence, Brahman." Nāhaṁ teṣu avasthitaḥ: "But I am not there." This is tattva-jñāna. It is not that because everything is resting on Brahman, therefore everything should be worshiped. No. That is not.



So brahmeti paramātmeti. If we try to understand the Absolute Truth, then we can approach only up to the impersonal feature. Just like if we simply want to come to the light, so we can see the sunshine is light. But if we want to study what is the sun globe and if we want to study what is the predominating deity in the sun globe, that is different thing. That is, simply coming to the light, sunshine, will not help you. You must have strength and process to go to the sun globe. The same example: One can understand impersonal Brahman by dint of his speculative knowledge, but he cannot understand Paramātmā, who is situated in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣ... [Bg. 18.61]. That is Paramātmā feature. That Paramātmā feature is also one fourth expansion of Kṛṣṇa's personal existence. And it is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



The Paramātmā feature is one fourth part expansion of Kṛṣṇa's bodily expansion. (aside:) Shall I stop here? [break]



So Bhagavān is the ultimate Absolute Truth. Therefore Kṛṣṇa confirms it, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat. You go, make progress. You understand the impersonal Brahman feature. You understand Paramātmā feature by yogic process. By yogic... The yogis, they try to understand the Paramātmā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61]. The Paramātmā is sitting in everyone's heart. The yogis try to understand the Paramātmā. And the jñānīs, impersonalists, they try to understand the all-pervading feature of the Supreme Lord. But one who understands Kṛṣṇa, then he understands both the features, the Paramātmā feature and Brahman feature. Therefore in the Vedas it is said, kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. If you simply understand Kṛṣṇa, then the Brahman feature and Paramātmā feature will be automatically understood. You haven't got to understand Brahman and Paramātmā separately. Simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, you will understand both.

Another example is: just like if you see a mountain. Just like surrounding your this place, Tirupati, there are so many hills. From the distant place, your vision is not clear. You simply see something like cloudy, the same mountain. But if you make little further progress, you see the same mountain or hill greenish. And if you actually go in the same hill, you will find there are so many animals, so many men and so many houses. So object is the same, but from different angle vision, it appears differently. Similarly, unless one can understand Kṛṣṇa perfectly, he realizes the Absolute Truth as impersonal, nirākāra Brahman. Unless one understands Kṛṣṇa perfectly well, he cannot understand what is Paramātmā, which is realized by yogic principles. But when you understand Kṛṣṇa, then you understand Paramātmā and Brahman also. This is the verdict of the śāstra. Just like if you have got one lakh of rupees, your possession of few thousands of rupees or few hundred of rupees are already there.

Similarly, Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. The same thing, tattvataḥ. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. Kṛṣṇa says that "My appearance," ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā, "how I appear, how I disappear, if anyone understands in truth..." Because we do not understand Kṛṣṇa in truth, therefore we consider Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]. Mūḍhāḥ means asses or rascals. They consider Kṛṣṇa as something of this material world. But He is not that. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ. If anyone understands Kṛṣṇa as Absolute Truth, then immediately his mission of life is complete. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Therefore this is tattva-jñāna. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. This is tattva-jñāna. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa, what He is.

But that understanding, how it can be achieved, that is explained in the next verse:

tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



Bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. You have to hear of Kṛṣṇa in devotion, bhaktyā, not as a nondevotee. A nondevotee cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. He has no scope. If a nondevotee interprets on the Bhagavad-gītā, he is simply wasting time of himself and others. Here it is clearly stated, bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. One has to become devotee and hear from the authorities. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was a bhakta. Bhakto 'si priyo 'si sakhā ceti [Bg. 4.3]. And he heard from the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he understood Bhagavad-gītā. So one who has not heard Bhagavad-gītā or about Kṛṣṇa and who is not a devotee, his speaking on Bhagavad-gītā is simply useless waste of time. Yes. [break]



So as it is stated here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, paśyanty ātmani ca ātmānam, this is paramātma-darśana, ātmani. Or there is another verse in the Brahma-saṁhitā, premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena. The same word, bhakti.

premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.38]



So one has to learn the art of seeing the Absolute Truth in three features-as Bhagavān, as Paramātmā and as impersonal Brahman. That prescription is given here. Tac chraddadhānā munayaḥ. The ordinary person not. Munayaḥ. Those who are very much advanced in the process of thinking, munayaḥ, or great saintly persons... Tac chraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12]. Jñāna and vairāgya-these two things are required. First of all, one must have sufficient knowledge and vairāgya, renunciation, detachment. Then he can see what is Bhagavān, what is Paramātmā, and what is impersonal Brahman. It is a very long subject matter, but as it is stated here by Vyāsadeva that paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā, through bhakti and śruti, by hearing the Vedic literature... Not whimsically, not by sentiment. One has to develop his dormant bhakti consciousness or Kṛṣṇa consciousness by thorough study of the Vedic literature. Then he can understand what is Brahman, what is Paramātmā and what is Bhagavān. Otherwise it is not possible.



Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā also, it is said, "The basic principle is bhakti." Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. One has to learn the Absolute Truth through bhakti. Bhakti is the principle. If you have got bhakti, then jñāna-vairāgya will automatically come. But if you remain only on the platform of jñāna-vairāgya, you may not develop bhakti. This is the process. That is also mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



This is the... You must have complete knowledge, jñānam and vairāgya, detachment. Jñāna means detachment. If one is attached to the material activities, he is not a jñānī, because he is in the bodily concept of life. Therefore he is not jñānī. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13], sa eva go-kharaḥ: "If one is in the bodily concept of life, he is no better than the cows and asses." This is the verdict of the śāstra. So you cannot understand the Absolute Truth on the platform of bodily concept of life. You must get yourself on the transcendental platform, and bhakti is the transcendental platform for the activities of the spirit soul.



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



You can attain bhakti when you are already Brahman realized person, or perfect brāhmaṇa. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ.



So when you have realized, when you are a brāhmaṇa, when you have complete knowledge of Brahman, that is the beginning of bhakti life. Not that by bhakti one comes to the Brahman realization platform. One who has got complete understanding of Brahman, he can make progress to the bhakti platform.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



After all these qualifications, making oneself brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] and prasannātmā, no more lamentation, no more hankering, always joyful, jubilant, blissful... This is the symptom for Brahman realization. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati, samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu [Bg. 18.54]. Then he can see on equal level to all living entities. Samaḥ sar... Then he can enter mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām.



So I do not wish to take much of your time, and the children are disturbing. It is a very great subject matter. So our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is this expanding this bhakti cult on the basis of Vedic knowledge. It is not a sentimental thing. These European, American boys and girls who have joined us, they are not going on sentiments. They are being taught actual knowledge, śruti. Bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. And therefore they are being fixed up. So our request is that this temple, Bālajī's temple, is the greatest temple in the world, and Kṛṣṇa's temple. For spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world, the temple authorities should fully cooperate in spreading Kṛṣṇa knowledge.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720815SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.12

-

Los Angeles, August 15, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



"The seriously inquisitive student or sage, well equipped with knowledge and detachment, realizes that Absolute Truth by rendering devotional service in terms of what he has heard from the Vedānta-śruti."



Prabhupāda: (interrupts and corrects one devotee's chanting of the verse:) We are repeating so that by hearing the sound, you can practice. You should be attentive. By... (chanting resumes)



Very good, thank you. Yes. She has done better than all of you. All right. (chanting resumes) (Prabhupāda interrupts again:) Yes. That's all.

So people, they sometimes say, "Can you show me God? Have you seen God?" These questions sometimes we meet. So the answer is here. Yes, you can see God. Everyone can see God. I am also seeing God. But there must be the qualification. Just like God is there... Suppose a motorcar is there, something is wrong there. Everyone is seeing. But one engineer or mechanic, he sees differently. Therefore we have to go there. "What is the wrong in this car? It is not running." He immediately touches some machine part; it runs. So these rascals, they do not know that "How I can see God if I have not the qualification?" The machine has gone wrong, I am seeing the machine. And the engineer, the mechanic, he is also seeing the machine. But his seeing and my seeing is different. He's qualified to see. Therefore when the machine has gone wrong, immediately he touches some part, it runs. So if for a machine we require so much qualification, and we want to see God without any qualification? Just see the fun. Without any qualification. Rascal, they are so rascal, so fool, that they want to see God with their nuisance qualification.

Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā: nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ: [Bg. 7.25] "I am not exposed to everyone. Yogamāyā, yogamāyā is covering." So how you can see God? But this rascaldom is going on, that "Can you show me God? Have you seen God?" God has become just like a plaything. "Here is God. He is incarnation of God." Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They are sinful, rascals, fools, lowest of the mankind. They inquire like that: "Can you show me God?" What qualification you have acquired, that you can see God? Here is the qualification. What is that? Tac chraddadhānā munayaḥ. One must be first of all faithful. Faithful. Śraddadhānāḥ. He must be very much eager to see God, actually. Not that as a proclivity, frivolous thing, "Can you show me God?" A magic, just like God is a magic. No. He must be very serious: "Yes, if there is God... We have seen, we have been informed about God. So I must see."

There is a story in this connection. It is very instructive; try to hear. One professional reciter was reciting about Bhāgavata, and he was describing that Kṛṣṇa, being very highly decorated with all jewels, He is sent for tending the cows in the forest. So there was a thief in that meeting. So he thought that "Why not then go to Vṛndāvana and plunder this boy? He is in the forest with so many valuable jewels. I can go there and catch the child and take the, all the jewels." That was his intention. So, he was serious that "I must find out that boy. Then in one night I shall become millionaire. So much jewelries. No." So he went there, but his qualification was that "I must see Kṛṣṇa, I must see Kṛṣṇa." That anxiety, that eagerness, made it possible that in Vṛndāvana he saw Kṛṣṇa. He saw Kṛṣṇa the same way as he was informed by the Bhāgavata reader. Then he saw, "Oh, oh, you are so nice boy, Kṛṣṇa." So he began to flatter. He thought that "Flattering, I shall take all the jewels" (laughter). So when he proposed his real business, "So may I take some of your these ornaments? You are so rich." "No, no, no. You... My mother will be angry. I cannot..." (laughter) Kṛṣṇa as a child. So he became more and more eager for Kṛṣṇa. And then... By Kṛṣṇa's association, he had already become purified. Then, at last, Kṛṣṇa said, "All right, you can take." Then he became a devotee, immediately. Because by Kṛṣṇa's association...

So some way or other, we should come in contact with Kṛṣṇa. Some way or other. Then we'll be purified. Kāmād bhayād dveṣyāt. Just like the gopīs... The gopīs came to Kṛṣṇa being captivated by His beautiful features. They were young girls, and Kṛṣṇa was so beautiful. So actually, they came to Kṛṣṇa being lusty, but Kṛṣṇa is so pure that they became first-class devotees. There is no comparison of their devotion. Because they loved Kṛṣṇa with heart and soul. That is the qualification. That is the qualification. They loved so much Kṛṣṇa that they didn't care for family, for reputation. When they were going at dead of night... Kṛṣṇa's flute was there, and they were all fleeing. Their father, their brother, their husband: "Where you are going? Where you are going in this dead of night?" They didn't care. They neglected their children, their family, everything: "We must go to Kṛṣṇa." So this is required. We must be very, very eager so that... And many gopīs who were forcibly stopped, going to Kṛṣṇa, they lost their life. Just see how much eager they are. So this eagerness is wanted. Then you can see God. Either you become lusty or a thief or a murderer or whatever it may be. Some way or other, if you develop this eagerness, that "I must see Kṛṣṇa," then Kṛṣṇa will be seen.

So here is... The first thing is how much eager you are to see Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will respond. If you are actually eager to see Kṛṣṇa... It, the reason may be different, either you are lusty or to steal His ornament. Some way or other, you become attracted to Kṛṣṇa, then your business is successful. Rūpa Gosvāmī has advised that... He says in a poetry. It is on the matter of the gopīs talking. One gopī is advising another gopī that "My dear friend..."

smerān bhaṅgī-traya-paricitāṁ sāci-vistīrṇa-dṛṣṭiṁ

vaṁśīnyastādhara-kiśalayām ujjvalāṁ candrakeṇa

govindākhyāṁ haritanumitaḥ keśi-tīrthopakaṇṭhe

mā prekṣiṣṭhāstava yadi sakhe! bandhu-saṅge 'sti raṅgaḥ



The idea is that one gopī is advising another gopī, "My dear friend, there is one boy. His name is Govinda. He is standing on the bank of Yamunā near the Keśi-ghāṭa, and He's playing on His flute. And He's so beautiful that especially during full moon night, please do not go there." (laughter) Why? "Now, because if you have got intention to enjoy in this material world with your family members, wife, children, husband, please do not go there." Smerān bhaṅgī-traya-paricitāṁ sāci-vistīrṇa-dṛṣṭim. Bhaṅgī-traya. "Kṛṣṇa always stands in three-curved way with His flute. That is Kṛṣṇa's tri-bhaṅga-murāri." Tri-bhaṅga. Three places, He is bent. So,



smerān bhaṅgī-traya-paricitāṁ sāci-vistīrṇa-dṛṣṭiṁ

vaṁśīnyastādhara-kiśalayām ujjvalāṁ candrakeṇa

govindākhyāṁ haritanumitaḥ keśi-tīrthopakaṇṭhe

mā prekṣiṣṭhāstava yadi sakhe! bandhu-saṅge 'sti raṅgaḥ



"If you think that you will enjoy more your life in this material world, then you do not go there. You do not go there."



The idea is that if you once see Kṛṣṇa, then you will forget all this nonsense material enjoyment. That is seeing Kṛṣṇa. No more. Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]. "My dear Lord I don't want anything." Dhruva Mahārāja... Dhruva Mahārāja went to see Kṛṣṇa to get the kingdom of his father, but when he saw Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu... Viṣṇu offered, "Now, whatever benediction you want, you take." He said, svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce, "My dear Lord, I have no more any desire." That is Kṛṣṇa seeing. That if you want to see Kṛṣṇa for some business, that "I shall see Kṛṣṇa..." Just like... Of course, if you are eager to see Kṛṣṇa, the motive may be different, but somehow or other, due to your eagerness, you'll see Kṛṣṇa. That is the only qualification.

In another poetry Rūpa Gosvāmī says, kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ kriyatāṁ yadi kuto 'pi labhyate. The, our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I have taken this from this word kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ. This is actual translation in Sanskrit or... Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ. So Rūpa Gosvāmī advises that "Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if it is possible, please purchase. Don't delay." Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ kriyatām. "Purchase immediately!" Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ kriyatāṁ yadi kuto 'pi. "Where it is available? It is very nice thing." "Yes, it is available. You can purchase. The movement is going on." "And what is the price?" "Price?" "It is such a nice thing; you have to pay price." "Yes, there is price." "What is that?" Tatra laulyam ekalaṁ mūlyam: "Simply your eagerness. That is price. This price you have to pay." Then you get Kṛṣṇa. Immediately. Kṛṣṇa is not poor. And the Kṛṣṇa-seller, the Kṛṣṇa devotee, he is also not poor. He can distribute Kṛṣṇa free. And he's doing that. Simply you have to purchase by your eagerness. That is wanted. Tatra laulyam. "Oh, eagerness? I have got eagerness." "Oh, it is not so easy." Tatra laulyam ekalaṁ mūlyaṁ janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate: "This eagerness cannot be achieved even by pious activities for millions of births." If you simply go on doing pious activities... Because without being pious, you cannot approach Kṛṣṇa. So if you go on doing simply pious, janma-koṭi-sukṛtaiḥ... Sukṛti means pious activities, simply pious. Still, this eagerness is not awakened.

So this eagerness is very important thing. But it can be awakened by the association of devotees. Therefore we are giving chance to everyone to invoke that eagerness. Then you will see God eye to eye. It is not difficult. Tac chraddadhānā munayaḥ. Those who have developed that eagerness, faith, that "I must see Kṛṣṇa in this life..." This life is meant for seeing Kṛṣṇa. It is not meant for becoming dogs and hogs. Unfortunately, the whole civilization is going on, they are being trained to become dogs and hogs. It is the only institution that is teaching people how to see Kṛṣṇa. This is the only institution, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. It is so important. Tac chraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12]. By eagerness, automatically you will be enriched with knowledge and detachment. Knowledge does not mean, "Now we have discovered this atomic bomb." That is not knowledge. What knowledge this is? People are dying. You have discovered something which will accelerate death. But we are giving some knowledge to stop death. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is knowledge. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā. And as soon as you get this knowledge, automatically you become detached to all this nonsense material happiness.

Hare Kṛṣṇa. Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (devotees offer obeisances) Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721023SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.12

-

Vṛndāvana, October 23, 1972



Pradyumna: "That Absolute Truth is realized by the seriously inquisitive student or sage who is well equipped with knowledge and who has become detached by rendering devotional service and hearing the Vedānta-śruti."



Prabhupāda:



tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



So first of all it has been described what is the purpose of life. This human form of life, it is not meant for being spoiled like the dogs and hogs. The dogs and hogs, they're busy to find out food: "Where is food? Where is stool?" And they are spoiling their whole day and night. Their life has been made by nature in such a way that they have no other business than to find out where is some food, where is some food, where is... And laboring, they're laboring very hard.



So human life is not meant for that purpose. It is a chance given by the nature's way. Aśītiṁ caturaś caiva lakṣāṁs tāñ jīva-jātiṣu. Eight million, four hundred thousands forms of life we are passing through. Nature has given a chance, this human form of body, especially civilized form of body... (aside:) Hmm? Don't do that. What is the purpose? Just like try to understand, a government servant, a big minister or M.P.'s, they're given all facilities of living condition, good bungalow, nice salary, servant. What is the purpose? The purpose is that with cool brain, satisfied mind, they'll do, be able to render valuable service to the administration. That is the purpose. Similarly, human being has been given so much facilities. The grains, the fruits, the flowers, the milk, intelligence to construct nice house, nice road, nice cities. The cats and dogs, they cannot do it. Why? You live peacefully and try to understand the value of life. Not that we get more facilities for bodily comfort and we engaged ourself in sense gratification. No.

Just like in the Western world, they have been endowed with so much facilities of comfortable life, but because they do not know how to utilize the comfortable situation of life, there is so much chaos and confusion. The so rich nations, young boys and girls, they are turning to be hippies. Because they do not find... It is hackneyed. The same wine, same women, and same motorcar and same road, it has become disgusting. That is the nature's way. Because human life is not meant for that purpose. Human life is meant for, as it is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. You are working so hard... You are so working hard... Why? Is it meant for simply sense gratification and satisfying the bodily needs? That is being done by the hogs and dogs. The... We see the hogs and dogs, they are always busy. So this human form of life is not meant for that purpose. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. Earn money, but... Be comfortable, but utilize time-tattva-jijñāsā, athāto brahma jijñāsā. That is your aim of life.

So this has been described in the previous verses: jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. If you have no program for tattva-jijñāsā, then why should you work so hard? Food is available for birds and beasts. You have also your food. That is already there, destined by nature's way, by God's arrangement. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. God provides food just before your birth. A child takes birth; the mother, young mother, has no milk on the breast a minute ago. But as soon as the child is born, immediately there is profuse milk in the breast of the mother. That is the nature's arrangement. Before birth, the food, the child immediately require, the mother's breast, there is milk supply immediately. So by God's arrangement, the economic position is already arranged. Our only business is tattva-jijñāsā.

What is that tattva? Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. The original cause of everything, the cause of all causes. That is already mentioned in the Vedas, that Kṛṣṇa:

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



The cause of all causes. Why you have come to this material world? Why you are under the threefold miserable condition of life: adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. These things are to be inquired. "I do not wish to die, but death is forced upon me. I do not want to become old man. Old age is forced upon me." So these are the inquiries, tattva-jijñāsā. But they are not interested. Neither educational department, nor any other department. They are simply interested, "Where is money? Where is money? Where is money?" Divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā [SB 2.1.3]. We are spoiling our night simply by sleeping. And, and those who have got sex facilities, they enjoying sex life. This is the night's engagement. And day's engagement, "Where is money? Where is money? Where is money?" And if we get money, then how to spend it for relatives, for sons, children. That's all. Divā cārthehayā rājan.



So in this way we shall not spoil our life. The life's purpose is different. They do not know. The modern civilization do not know what is the purpose of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They are trying to make adjustment, political situation, social situation in so many problems. The United Nations, they're trying to solve the problems of whole nation, but still the war is going on between such and such party, such and such party, and everyone busy in politics and diplomacy. This way, the problems of life cannot be solved. If there is any solution of the problems of life, it is actually this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Those who are intelligent, they should study the purpose of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and try to apply in all fields of activities-political, social, religious, anything, economical. Everything can be solved. Jīva, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. This is called inquiry, inquisitiveness about the Absolute Truth.

Now this verse is describing how one can become interested in the values of life. The values of life is to inquire the Absolute Truth, how this inclination can be developed or how Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be developed. Tattva-jijñāsā means Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa. Now how this inclination... There is inclination in everyone, but by artificial means, they have been checked. Otherwise, normally, this inclination is there in everyone's heart. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya. It is not an artificial imposition. Naturally there is tendency to know, if he's a sane man, "What I am? What is God? What is my relationship with Him? Why I am suffering?" There are so many questions. So here it is suggested that if you are actually serious about tattva-jijñāsā, to understand the Absolute Truth, this is the process. What is that? Tat śraddadhānāḥ. Śraddhā. Śraddhā means that at least to understand that "These people are doing some nice things." Just like in Europe and America, the papers are now discussing about our Movement. They say, "They are nice people, and we want more of them." At least, they are saying like that. Yes. "These Hare Krishna people, they are very nice, and we want more of them." And in Berkeley, when our procession was taken, the neighboring shopkeepers, they remarked that "These people are not window-breaking crowd." Because as soon as there is some crowd, or procession, immediately they begin to break the windows and throw stones. That is, that has become a custom. So when they see that these people are very peaceful... Even the police, they also give certificate that "We don't have to take much worries to control this crowd," when our Ratha-yātrā festival go.

So actually, this is the fact. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. If one develops Kṛṣṇa consciousness, devotion to Kṛṣṇa, then naturally, without any separate endeavor, all the good qualities will develop. This is the symptom how one is advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That means all the good qualities will be visible in his character. That is practical. Anyone can test. Just like these boys, these girls, European, American boys and girls who have taken to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, just see how their bad habits have been altogether stopped. Sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ. All good qualities will develop. You see practically. You see practically. These young boys and girls, they never asked me that "Give me some money. I shall go to cinema," or "I shall purchase a packet of cigarettes. I shall drink." No. This is practical. And everyone knows that from the very their birth, they are accustomed to eat meat, and... I do not know from the very beginning whether they are accustomed to take intoxicants. But actually they were habituated to these things, but they have altogether given up. They don't drink tea even, coffee, cigarettes, anything. Sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate... This is the test. A man has become devotee, at the same time smoking-this is ludicrous. This is ludicrous. A devotee cannot smoke, cannot indulge in intoxication, nor illicit sex or meat... They cannot. That is disqualification. That means he's not on the platform. This is the practical.

So tat śraddadhānāḥ. The first thing is śraddhā. Ādau śraddhā. That is the beginning of Kṛṣṇa conscious life. Rūpa Gosvāmī has given this formula that in order to attain to the perfectional stage of life, how to love God,... Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means that we are try, teaching people how to love God. This is the sum and substance. Unfortunately, people have no idea of God, who is God, what is His form... Generally, they think God has no form. If anyone has advanced little in spiritual life, they come to the point of nirākāra, or nirviśeṣa-brahman, formless. That is the first step in Brahman realization. We have already described this. But beyond that they don't want to proceed. They think this is fac..., this is final, to realize the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth, that is final. That is Māyāvāda philosophy. No, that is not final. Still you have to advance, realize Paramātmā. Still you have to advance, realize God, the Supreme Personality of God.

So we are teaching people how to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That means one who has surpassed the realm of Brahman and Paramātmā, they can realize, they can understand what is the process of loving God. If they have no idea of God, then whom to love? You cannot love air or sky. You must have form. But they have no idea what is the form of God. Therefore śāstra says, "Here is form." Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Vigraha means form. Without form, how we can love? So to come to that perfectional stage, how to love God, this is our philosophy. How to love God. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. That is first-class religious system which helps the followers to come to the point to love God. That is first-class religion.

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

[SB 1.2.6]



If you want actually peace and tranquillity, ātmā, of your self, of your mind, of your body, everything fully, then this is the process. This is the aim, how to love God.



So that stage, that supreme stage can be attained as it is described here, tac chraddadhānāḥ. Śraddhā. Rūpa Gosvāmī therefore says, ādau śraddhā. In the beginning, one must have a conviction that "I must love Kṛṣṇa, or God." This is the first... Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā explains this śraddhā:

'śraddhā'-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.62]



This is called śraddhā, beginning, one... Bhagavān, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is teaching in the Bhagavad-gītā,



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



This is the beginning. If I am firmly convinced that simply by surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa I'll be saved by Him... Because He assures, "I..." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. People suffer on account of sinful activities. The resultant actions are reserved there. What we are suffering now, it is the resultant action of our past sinful activities. And we are preparing another body in this life by committing sinful activities. The more we... Everyone within this material world who has got this material body, it is to be understood it is due to our past sinful activities. It doesn't matter what kind of body you have got. Therefore Bhāgavata says that we should not, I mean to say, commit any more sinful activities. Na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ [SB 5.5.4].



Although we have got this temporary body... You can say that "Although I am suffering, I'll, it will be finished, within, say, twenty years, ten years." Asann api. It is not permanent. But why you should make yourself under these tribulations of life? That is the problem. Not only that. Asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ. I have got this body. I am suffering. I am undergoing threefold miseries, threefold miserable condition of life. Why I shall make another body, again undergo the threefold miseries of life? Not only human life, any form of life. Human life, there... Human form of life, there is possibility of little comfort. Suppose if I get a body like a tree. Just like here is an eucalyptus tree standing. Then I'll have to stand for thousands of years. And I have to suffer scorching heat, shivering cold, and blast wind, and so many things.

So people have no education, unfortunately, that the spirit soul is permanent. It is changing different types of body in order to suffer different types of miserable condition of life. They're thinking, easy-going... "I have got now very nice body, eating, sleeping mating and..." That is the business of the hogs and dogs. That is not the business of human being. Human being must be serious to understand the value of life and prepare himself for the next life. The next life, if you go back to Kṛṣṇa... Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. Kṛṣṇa says, "You can go back to Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa comes here. He takes His incarnation here to canvass, "My dear sons, please come back home. Why you are suffering here?" Kṛṣṇa comes, Kṛṣṇa canvasses. Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. "Why you have created so many rascaldom, politics and economics and this and that, So many things are encumbered. Please come to Me. You'll be happy." This is the whole instruction of Bhagavad-gītā. He comes. He shows His vṛndāvana-līlā, that "You can dance also with Me. You can play with Me just like cowherds boy. And I shall give you protection. There are so many demons. They're coming to attack us. But I'll give you protection." Jolly life. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Kṛṣṇa is coming personally, but we are so stubborn, we shall not take to this. We shall not take to this. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Kṛṣṇa says, "These are the classes of men who do not surrender unto Me." Who are they? Duṣkṛtinaḥ. Those who are engaged always in sinful activities. Duṣkṛtinaḥ. Mūḍhāḥ. Rascals without any knowledge. Asses. So duṣkṛtinaḥ mūḍhāḥ and narādhamāḥ, lowest of the mankind, lowest of the mankind. Means this human form of life is meant for understanding Kṛṣṇa and surrender unto Him, but they'll not do. They're busy in so many other rascaldom except Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is their business, narādhamas. You can say, "Oh, there are so many educated persons, B.A., M.A., D.A.C.'s, and they do not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness." (aside:) Vaikuṇṭha, you come here. You are in front of the... Agreti dalayam(?). Give him... Yes. You... So you can say that "So many educated persons, they're not taking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Are they narādhamas, lowest of the mankind?" Yes? The immediate answer is "Yes." "Now, after passing so big, big examination, they have become narādhamas?" "Yes."

The Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura confirms it: jībake karaye gādhā, jaḍa-bidyā jato māyāra vaibhava. This material education, they're simply expansion of the opulence of māyā, illusion. Suppose if I am darkness, in darkness, if the darkness becomes more and more deeper, is it advancement? The darkness, there must be light. Then it is advancement. But if, if the, if there is little darkness, if you make it more and more dark, then is that advancement? So here it is actually... The advancement of so-called material education is making the people more and more attached to this material world. The value of life is jñāna-vairāgya, to acquire the knowledge, "What is the value of life?" And when one has actually attained to that platform of knowledge, he should be detached from this material world. Jñāna-vairāgya. That is required.

But what is happening? There is no knowledge of the value of life, and they are becoming more and more attached to this material world. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that so-called advancement of education, education means māyayā apahṛta-jñāna. The māyā, the illusory energy, is plundering the real purpose of knowledge. Therefore they are narādhamas, simply spoiled. In Los Angeles, from the University, many scientists come, many psychologists and psychiatrists... We have got many students also, they are Doctor of Science. So we talked. So we flatly say that "This advancement of education making you narādhama, lowest of the mankind." So they are convinced. And some of them are very serious student. So actually this education, as Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said, jaḍa-bidyā jato māyāra vaibhava, tomāra bhajane bādhā. You, you'll see, the more a person is materially educated, he has no interested. Just like our whole state has become secular state. No more interested. Here is our Bhagavad-gītā. Gandhi started his movement with Bhagavad-gītā. The big, big politician, Aravinda, he studied Bhagavad-gītā. And Tilaka, he studied Bhagavad-gītā. Now, in our schools and colleges, if there is question of studying Bhagavad-gītā, the state will not allow. Is it not? They... So māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. Such a cultural book, such a book of knowledge, great book of knowledge, Bhagavad-gītā, they're banned. It is banned. And if you present Bhagavad-gītā with some nonsense commentary, that will be sold. And when you speak Bhagavad-gītā as it is... Of course, factually, now we are getting ground. Our Bhagavad-gītā is selling more than other editions, Bhagavad-gītā As It Is.

So actually this is the knowledge. This knowledge is rejected. Māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. Why this is happening? Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Because they have taken to the shelter of atheism, the philosophy of atheism: "There is no God. Everyone is God. I am God. You are God. Why you are finding out, trying to find out...? You are... Why you are going to the temples? There is no God. God is everywhere." God is everywhere, except in the temple. They'll preach this philosophy, "God is everywhere; why you are going to the temple?" That means God is everywhere except in the temple. That is their philosophy. So these nonsense things are going on. Narādhama. Therefore they're narādhamas. Don't follow these narādhamas. Be faithful. Try to understand, those who are actually followers of God. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. So you take to this line of disciplic succession from Kṛṣṇa and try to understand what is Absolute Truth, what is your relationship with you, how you can get out of the threefold miserable condition of life. This is possible. That is called brahma-jijñāsā, tattva-jijñāsā, athāto brahma jijñāsā.

The Bhāgavata also says, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā.

So this śraddadhānāḥ, if we have got little faith that... Just like people come here with little faith. That faith is the little spark of fire. Now you have to fan it, fan it, so that fire may increase. Tat śraddadhānāḥ munayaḥ. So śraddadhānāḥ, Rūpa Gosvāmī has given us the formula that if you have got little faith in for understanding the Absolute Truth, Bhagavān, then ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15], associate with sādhu. Who is sādhu? Sādhu means devotee. Kṛṣṇa says, api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. He's sādhu. Not a sādhu having big beard or mustaches and having red cloth without any sense of Kṛṣṇa. He's not sādhu. Sādhu means one who is fully engaged in the service of the Lord. He's sādhu. Api cet su-durācāraḥ. Even if he's not very well-behaved, su-durācāra, still he's sādhu. Why? Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. He has no other business than to love Kṛṣṇa. This is the symptom of sādhu.

So sādhu-saṅga means: Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Sādhu-saṅga means to associate with the devotees of Kṛṣṇa. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā. Sādhu-saṅga. As soon as these boys... They first of all, they come out of inquisitiveness to our several centers. Gradually, they shave their head and try to understand the books and literature. They then come forward: "Swamiji, give me initiation. Make, get me the sannyāsī-āśrama." Gradually they come. So ādau śraddhā tataḥ sā... Sādhu, this is the effect of sādhu-saṅga. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said,

sādhu-saṅga sādhu-saṅga sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.54]



Actually, if one associates with a sādhu, with a pure devotee of Lord, then certainly it will be effective. Certainly. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness society is meant for giving opportunity to the people to make association with bhaktas. By association with bhakta, devotees, they'll become also bhakta. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. If you associate with drunkards, then you gradually become a drunkard. But if you associate with devotees, gradually you become a devotee. This is natural sequence.



So ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Anartha, things which are not wanted. Artha means wanted, something wanted; anartha means this is not wanted. So we are habituated to so many things, bad habits. So anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. This is the result of bhajana-kriyā. Anartha. Anartha. Just like these things, as we prohibit-illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling-these are anarthas. They are not required actually. But people are habituated to these things on account of bad association. So if you associate with a really sādhu, if you execute really devotional service, these anarthas will be vanquished. That is the symptom. No more illicit sex. No more intoxication. No more gambling. No more meat-eating, fish-eating, egg-eating. No. That is called anartha.

People are not dying for want, for want of cigarette smoking. But it is habit. You can give it up. You can give up so many things which is not required at all. So these unwanted things will be automatically vanquished. This is the result of bhajana-kriyā. Not that I am chanting one hand, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and in another hand, smoking. This is not anartha-nivṛtti. The... If actually you are chanting, there will be no more in the other hand, smoking biḍi or cigarette. This is called anartha-nivṛtti. Then after anartha-nivṛtti, then you become cleansed. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. This is called the freedom stage from all sinful activities. Because unless you are free from all sinful activities, we cannot engage ourself in devotional service.

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



The bhajana, devotional service, is possible when one is freed from these anarthas, unwanted things. Tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ athāsaktis tato bhāvaḥ, sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ.



So these are the different steps of śraddhā. Actually, devotional service means increasing your faith more and more. And these are the steps. The first step is that you must associate with devotees and then take to bhajana-kriyā. Then see, examine yourself that whether you are free from all the anarthas, all the unwanted things. If all the unwanted things are vanquished, then you'll have firm faith. Bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu... Naṣṭa [SB 1.2.18]. Not that I am completely free from all sinful activities, but prāyeṣu, say, fifty percent, sixty percent is gone. At that time, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu... How it has come to take place? Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Nityam... We have to daily. Not that Bhāgavata-saptāha, and finish, and whole year you can do all nonsense. Not like that. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā.

I don't find any Bhāgavata-saptāha any authorized book. I don't find. There are so many big, big stalwart commentators of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, beginning from Śrīdhara Svāmī. Nobody has recommended this Bhāgavata-saptāha. But it has come to existence by the professional man. But actually nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. How you can finish Bhāgavatam in seven days? You cannot finish even one word. My Guru Mahārāja explained Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the first verse, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], in Dacca, for three months. Actually, it is so profound. Janmādy asya yataḥ. This very quote contains all the Vedānta philosophy. How you can finish Bhāgavatam within seven days? It is a farce. Actually, Bhāgavata should be relished. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā.

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]



As soon as prāya, seventy-five, sixty percent of your unwanted things are given up, and then your naiṣṭhikī, firm, steady devotional attitude develops. Bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī.



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



You cannot have a steady position unless you come to the platform of goodness. Sthitaṁ sattve. Sattva means sattva-guṇa, goodness. And rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa means kāma and lobha, lust and greediness. This is the symptoms. And when you come to the platform of goodness, then you are satisfied that "I don't want all these things. Now I want Brahman." Brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ.



So these are the processes. So Bhāgavata recommends, tat śraddhā, śraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12]. There must be sufficient knowledge. Otherwise this kind of vairāgya has no meaning. I have, I've taken renounced order of life, but I've, privately I've got all these nonsense, illicit sex, intoxication, gambling-that is not required. Real knowledge means there must be renouncement of this nonsense. That is real knowledge. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā munayaḥ paśyanty ātma... For him, it is not difficult to find out where is God. He can immediately find out God sitting within his heart. Immediately. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Anywhere he can sit down and he can talk with God, he can see God, he can take direction from God. Paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. By devotional service. Not by other means. Śruta-gṛhītayā. By understanding from the Vedas. Not manufactured. Just like Kṛṣṇa says, evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. You have to hear from Kṛṣṇa or from His bona fide representative. Then it will be sufficient.

Thank you very much. (end)



731118SB.DEL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.12

-

Delhi, November 18, 1973



Prabhupāda:



tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



We have been discussing the instruction of Sūta Gosvāmī, what is the purpose of life. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā. The only business of the human being is to inquire about the Absolute Truth, tattva-jijñāsā. And that tattva has been explained in the previous verse:



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



So the Absolute Truth is one. There is no doubt about it. But according to our angle of vision, we appreciate the Absolute Truth in different ways, although the Absolute Truth is one. Somebody is realizing the Absolute Truth as impersonal Brahman, and somebody is realizing the Absolute Truth as localized Paramātmā, Supersoul, and somebody is realizing the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the last word, Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the matter of understanding the Absolute Truth.



So our Gosvāmī Bhavānanda has explained about the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Bhagavān iti. But who is Bhagavān? That has been also explained. Bhagavān means ṣaḍ-aiśvarya-pūrṇa, complete in six opulences. He is Bhagavān. Bhaga means opulence. Just like we say bhāgyavān. This bhāgyavān word comes from bhaga. Bhaga bhavārthe śrī-karṇa(?), bhāgya. And vān is vatup, asty arthe vatup(?). If somebody possesses something, this affix vat or mat is used. So bhagavān means one who has opulences. So Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa, when He was present on this planet, nobody could excel His opulences. That's a fact. Everyone knows. People want to enjoy. That is natural tendency, the association of woman. Here also we see that very, very rich men, they want to associate with nice, beautiful woman. In the Western countries I have seen. In Paris there are many clubs. So the club business is to go and enjoy the association of nice beautiful woman. So everyone knows it. So tendency is there. That is also richness. So that richness I have already explained. Here in the material world the same thing is represented pervertedly, not in actual position. Therefore we are frustrated.

So there are two kinds of philosophers. The mental speculators, empiric philosophers, they therefore reject that this should be zero. Here the association of woman is so abominable that it should be rejected. But they have no information that this association of woman and man is so, I mean to say, opulent in the spiritual world. Otherwise how Kṛṣṇa is associating with the gopīs? Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī. Gosvāmīs, the six Gosvāmīs, about their life, they are described by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī were ministers in the government of Nawab Hussein Shah, most opulent. So naturally the minister must have association with big, big zamindars, lords, aristocratic family. But about them it is said, when they joined Caitanya Mahāprabhu's movement, resigning from their ministership, so that is described by Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ. Maṇḍala-pati means big, big zamindars, aristocrats. So tyaktvā, gave up their association. Just like we flatter here. If we can mix with a very big rich man, we consider very fortunate. But these Gosvāmīs, they gave up, tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa, not only one, two. Because they were ministers, everyone is coming to flatter him, all big, big zamindars. But he gave up that association. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. Tuccha means very insignificant. Then what they became? Bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. Dīna-gaṇeśakau, just to show favor to the poor souls, dīna-gaṇeśakau. Gaṇa. Gaṇa means people in general. So just to show them favor, accepted the life of a mendicant. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau. Kaupīna-kanthā. That is the last stage of sannyāsa, paramahaṁsa stage: a loin cloth and an underwear, kaupīna-kanthāśritau.

But we have got practical experience that if somebody from very exalted post becomes a renouncer, he cannot tolerate that. We have seen it. In Calcutta there was a big man. You have heard. Mr. C. R. Das, Gandhi's lieutenant, he gave up his practice. In those days he was..., fifty years ago he was earning fifty thousand rupees. So that is not joke. So he became mendicant. All Gandhi's followers, they became mendicant. Without becoming mendicant, you cannot do any welfare activities. That is the Vedic process, sannyāsa. So but he could not live. After giving up his job as a lawyer, he could not live for more than one year, because he was living very opulently and all of a sudden he became a mendicant. He could not tolerate. That we have seen. But here we see that the Gosvāmīs, they were also very big men, ministers, but how they lived? Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau, gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī. Gopī-bhāva. They were living simply by thinking of the ecstatic love of gopīs. Gopī-bhāvāmṛta. That is compared with an ocean. As the ocean is beautiful, constant flowing of waves, similarly, the ocean of bliss of the gopīs relationship with Kṛṣṇa, these Gosvāmīs were always absorbed in that. Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau. So Kṛṣṇa's opulence, Kṛṣṇa's dealings with the gopīs, they are not ordinary things.

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.37]



He got His pleasure potency. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). The Supreme Absolute Truth is the reservoir of all pleasure. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt.



So Brahman realization, Paramātmā realization and Bhagavān realization. If you realize Bhagavān, then you realize Brahman and Paramātmā. Just like if you have got one lakh of rupees, ten rupees or fifty rupees are already there within, similarly, if you understand Kṛṣṇa, Bhagavān, then you understand automatically what is Brahman and what is Paramātmā. But if you simply stick to Brahman realization or Paramātmā realization... The jñānīs, they are interested in Brahman realization, and the yogis, they are interested in... [break] ...realization cannot be continued if you do not realize the other two things, namely Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Cit and ānanda. Simply realization of sat, oṁ tat sat, will not satisfy you because you are part and parcel of the sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Vigraha means form. So you are also form. Because you are part and parcel of the form, therefore you have got a form. The form may be different in the material world. Kṛṣṇa therefore claims all forms. Sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ [Bg. 14.4]. Sarva-yoniṣu. There are different, 8,400,000 forms of living entities, and Kṛṣṇa claims, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ, "As many forms are there," tāsāṁ mahad yonir brahma ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā, Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the seed-giving father."

So Kṛṣṇa is father for all living entities. They are simply struggling here in this material world under different desires, and therefore they are getting transmigrating from one body to another, and in this way they are wandering within this material world. That is their real disadvantageous position. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says the real problem is janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. This is the real problem. Whole spiritual process should be executed to get out of this entanglement of repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. That is real problem. So Kṛṣṇa therefore comes, that "Why you are rotting in this material world?" Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati. "Why you are struggling so hard?" For ānanda. Everyone is struggling for ānanda, but he does not know whether ānanda is there. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Absolute Truth, He is the reservoir of ānanda Therefore you will see Kṛṣṇa's picture always in ānanda. Wherever you see Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa is in the battlefield, still, He is smiling, ānanda. He is not morose. Arjuna is morose. But He is not morose. Because he is ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt.

So everything is there. The pleasure which we are hunting here within this material world, everything is there, full, full ānanda. You can enter into the ānandamaya-līlā. That He practically demonstrates in Vṛndāvana. He is playing with His cowherd boyfriends, He is dancing with the gopīs, He is playing as a child to His father and mother Yaśodā. He has got conjugal love with Rādhārāṇī. Everything is there. Therefore here it is said, tac chraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā, paśyanti [SB 1.2.12]. You can see all this ānandamaya-līlā, ātmani, within yourself. How? Tac chradda, chraddadhānāḥ. Śraddhā. This śraddhā means... I have already explained many times. It is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya [Cc. Madhya 22.62]. This is called śraddhā, when you firmly believe. Śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha. Without any shaking. Not shaking platform. Firmly. What is that? Kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya. If you become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, then all perfection is there. This is called śraddhā. Because Kṛṣṇa says at the last stage of His instruction in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Śaraṇaṁ vraja: "Voluntarily you surrender unto Me. Then I take charge of you." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ. "There is no question of considering. Do it immediately." That Kṛṣṇa says.

So if one accepts this principle, then that is called śraddhā. Here it is said... Because after Bhagavad-gītā, Bhāgavata was written... So one who accepts Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead by understanding Bhagavad-gītā as it is, not by malinterpretations, as it is, then that is called śraddhā. Śraddadhānā munayaḥ. As soon as you become a surrendered soul, then you become one of the munis, great-minded, wide-minded, muni, mahātmā. Munayaḥ. And why kind of śraddhā? Now, jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā. Two things must be there-jñāna and vairāgya. I have already explained that actually our aim of life, human life, is to acquire knowledge and vairāgya. Simply talking of knowledge is useless. There must be vairāgya also. Therefore Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya, he never liked simply talking. "First of all become a sannyāsī." That was his propaganda. "Then you talk." So jñāna-vairāgya. One who is actually jñānī, he must be vairāgī. Vairāgī means vigata-rāga. We are not rāgī. Rāga means attachment. We are materially attached, and when you become actually jñānī, then you should be materially detached. That is called jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā. Tac chraddadhānā munayo jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā, paśyanty ātmani cātmānam [SB 1.2.12]. Ātmani, within his mind and within his self, he sees the Paramātmā. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Perfect yogi always sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead within himself.

Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti, yaṁ śyāmasundaram [Bs. 5.38]. The question was, "Why Kṛṣṇa is black?" But that black is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā, śyāmasundara. Here one who is black, nobody likes to see, naturally. But Kṛṣṇa is black, at the same time the most exquisitely beautiful. That we cannot adjust. In another place it is said, asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam. Asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam. Asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam. His body is just like black cloud. Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya. Kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya. We understand Kandarpa, the Cupid, as very beautiful, but if you millions of Kandarpas act together to increase the beauty, that is also not comparable with Kṛṣṇa's beauty. So these contradictory terms cannot be understood unless one has got the ointment of love of Godhead. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena. Añjana. Añjana we understand, a kind of ointment. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. So the first beginning is śraddhā, tac chraddadhānā munayaḥ. Ādau śraddhā. If you have got this faith... This is the...Bhagavad-gītā is just to create the preliminary faith to understand God. That is the only... That is Bhagavad-gītā.

Because we do not know. We cannot understand God with these blunt senses. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. The present senses, they are simply after material gratification. So how they can understand Kṛṣṇa? That is not possible. Therefore it is said, jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12]. You can understand after jñāna. Jñāna means brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20], one who understands ahaṁ brahmāsmi: "I am not this material body; I am spirit soul." So brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. Now we are designated by this bodily relationship: "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya," "I am black," "I am white," "I am strong," "I am weak," "I am fatty," "I am thin," so many. These are all designation. So one has to become free from the designation. That is jñāna. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Upādhi. This upādhi. The bodily conception of life is called upādhi.

So sarva upādhi, when you become completely freed, no more thinking like American, Indian, brāhmaṇa, śūdra, no... "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa." Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave His identification in this way: "I am not a brāhmaṇa, I am not a śūdra, neither I am a king, neither I am a vaiśya, neither I am a sannyāsī. I am nothing of this." Because this material designation, varṇa-āśrama. Four varṇas, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and four āśramas, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So anybody must be within these eight categories. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "I don't belong to any of these categories." Nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir na ca yatir vā. Then what you are? Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. "Gopī-bhartuḥ, the maintainer of the gopīs, gopī-bhartuḥ, and the master of the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa, pada-kamalayoḥ, lotus feet-I am His servant, dāsa, and his servant, his servant, his servant, his servant, his servant, his servant, in this way servants' servant." The more you become servants of servant, then you are liberated. Here this material world they want master. He is master: "I am his master, I am his master, I am his master." They are trying to become master. It is just the opposite-to become servant. This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy, how to become the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant, oh, hundred times servant [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. Because this philosophy is understood by becoming a servant, not by becoming a master. That you will not. That is called jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā [SB 1.2.12]. Because so long wants to become a master, he is still in ajñāna because he cannot be master. How he can be master? Real master is Kṛṣṇa. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. How you can be master? Can you become more than Kṛṣṇa? He is sarva-loka-maheśvaram.

So this is jñāna, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu enunciates, not to become master or God, to become servant of the God. Not only servant, but servant, servant, servant, servant, hundred times downward. Then you become perfect. That is the demand of Kṛṣṇa, that you first of all become servant. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. Because that is your real position. Caitanya Mahāprabhu confirms it. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. This is our position. This is jñāna. Anyone who is claiming other that this is not in knowledge. He is ajñāna. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā-I have several times repeated-bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. After many, many births trying to become the master, when actually he becomes jñānavān, then jñānavān māṁ prapadyate. This is the sign, when he surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is real knowledge. That knowledge is not sentiment. Because bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. After experiencing many, many births that "I am the master, I am God, I am this, I am that," so when he actually jñānavān, māṁ prapadyate, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti.. [Bg. 7.19]. When he understands, "Oh, Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the origin or everything," that is real jñāna. That is real jñāna.

Therefore it has said, jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā. Then you have to become vairāgī to your puffed up consciousness that "I am master, I am God, I am this, I am that." No. That is called jñāna and vairāgya. Jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā. And again it is confirmed, bhaktyā. As soon as the bhakti word is used, there is no question of becoming master. Bhakti is used via media between Bhagavān and bhakta. The dealings of Bhagavān and bhakta is called bhakti. Bhakti, bhaja-dhātu. Bhaja-dhātu sevāyām. Sevāyām. Sevā mean there is a sevaka and there is a master, sevya, one who is worshiped and one who serves. Then the process is called bhakti. Here it is also said, bhaktyā. What kind of bhakti? Bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. Śruta, by hearing śruti, or Vedas. Completely on the basis of Vedic knowledge, that bhakti, not sentimental. Sentimental bhakti is also there, because the acceptance of Kṛṣṇa is there. Therefore there is some value. But real bhakti, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has commented that bhakti based on understanding of Vedānta-sūtra is perfect, on the basis of jñāna, knowledge, and vairāgya. That is... And Kṛṣṇa has also said, brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ [Bg. 13.5]. Brahma-sūtra means Vedānta-sūtra.

So actually the Vedānta-sūtra, everything is bhakti. But unfortunately, people have taken Vedānta in a different way, after the Śārīraka-bhāṣya. But all the ācāryas, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, they have all, they have commentated on the Vedānta-sūtra. So Vedantist does not mean simply the Māyāvādīs. Actually Vedantists are the devotees. Because veda anta. Veda means knowledge, and anta means the last word. The last word is bhagavān. That is Vedānta. Here it is said, brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. If you understand by studying Vedānta simply Brahman realization, that is not perfect. If you understand Paramātmā realization by studying Vedānta, that is also not perfect. When you come to understand Bhagavān, that is perfect. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā: vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. By studying Vedānta or all Vedic literatures, if you do not understand Kṛṣṇa, then śrama eva hi kevalam [SB 1.2.8].

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



These things are required, jñāna and vairāgya. That is very easily achieved. Vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ. If bhakti-yoga is adopted unto the Supreme Personality of God, Vāsudeva, then very soon janayaty āśu... Āśu means very soon. Jñāna-va irāgyam ahaitukam.



The example you can see. These European and American boys and girls, how they have become vairāgī? They have got immense opportunity for material enjoyment. Material enjoyment means money and woman. That is the standard of material enjoyment. So these boys, these girls, they have got enough. The money is thrown on the street. And woman is loitering on the street. You can pick up as many as you like. You see. That is the Western countries. But they have left everything. That is vairāgya Why? Jñānam. They have obtained the real knowledge. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. As Bhavānanda Mahārāja said. They are firmly fixed up. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam, "Let us sacrifice our life for Kṛṣṇa." That is real jñāna and vairāgya. Bhaktyā. This is to be understood, bhaktyā. Because without bhakti, there is no admission in the kingdom of God. That is not possible. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram

[Bg. 18.55]



Viśate means enter. One is admitted in the spiritual world... Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ. There is spiritual world. There is another world. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. That sanātana-dhāma you cannot enter without being a bhakta. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Those who enter that spiritual world, Brahman, nirviśeṣa-brahman, because they are lacking in bhakti, they again falls down.



That is stated in the Bhāgavata. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. There are certain persons, they are thinking, "Now I have become liberated." Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. Vimukta-māninaḥ means "thinking that they have become liberated." But aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ, their intelligence is not yet clear. So what is the result? Suppose one realizes Brahman realization. He is not mukta? Yes, he is mukta. That's all right. But the intelligence is not yet purified. Why? Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ [SB 10.2.32]. After undergoing sever austerities and penances, they rise up to the Brahmaloka, paraṁ padam. Patanty adhaḥ, again falls down, again falls down. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. Just like the impersonal sky. You can go in the sky with your seedy airplane, but if you don't get a shelter in any planet, you will have to come again. Just like this moon planet-goers, going and coming. Why don't they stay there? So it doubtful whether they are going.

So anyway, this is the position of the nirviśeṣa-vāda. Because they do not enter in one of the Vaikuṇṭha planets... Because they are not bhaktas, they are not admitted. Without being bhakta, nobody is allowed to enter into the Vaikuṇṭha planets. Just like here in the sky there are millions and millions of planets, similarly, in the brahmajyoti there are also millions and millions of planets. They are called Vaikuṇṭhaloka. But in those Vaikuṇṭhalokas only bhaktas are admitted, not the nondevotees. They can go to the Brahmaloka. Brahmaloka is combination of the spirit souls. But spirit soul means part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, who is ānandamaya. So they do not get that ānanda. They simply are elevated to the position of eternity. But eternity without ānanda. Just like you just imagine: suppose you are given a very nice place. You are ordered that "You live here eternally, but don't allow nobody else. You can live alone." How long you will live? Because as a living entity, as part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, you want ānanda. So ānanda, you require society, friendship and love. That is ānanda. That is not impersonalism. That is personalism. So unless you enter to the personal activities of Kṛṣṇa, there cannot be ānanda. There cannot be. Unless you are qualified to dance with Kṛṣṇa or to play with Kṛṣṇa, to become father of Kṛṣṇa, mother of Kṛṣṇa, and enjoy the ānandamayam, ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37], you cannot be happy. Therefore āruhya kṛcchreṇa. The brahma-pada, the Supreme, paraṁ padam, it is called paraṁ padam... Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Adhaḥ. They fall down. Therefore we see sometimes, big, big sannyāsīs, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā, they give up this world, take sannyāsa, but after some time they come to politics, to sociology. Why? If the jagat is mithyā, why you are interested in politics and sociology an welfare acts? That means anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ: He could not get ānanda without being in touch with the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore they come this ānanda. Ānanda. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa. This is practical.

So simply Brahman realization is not perfect. Simply Paramātmā realization is also not perfect. When you realize Bhagavān, then you realize Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān simultaneously. That is ānanda. That is ānanda. That is available as it is. Paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. Śruta-gṛhītayā, hearing. Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī says,

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



One who does not understand the bhakti philosophy through śruti, through Veda, smṛti... Just like Bhagavad-gītā is smṛti. Śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi [Brs. 1.2.101], and Nārada-pañcarātra. Without reference to these books of knowledge, if one becomes a so-called devotee, that is not accepted by Rūpa Gosvāmī. Here also it is said, bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. Śruta-gṛhītayā, knowledge, full knowledge, through Vedas, bhaktyā, with devotion. Dry Vedic knowledge makes you impersonalist, only a partial realization. Therefore bhakti must be there. Bhakti means without any result or karma and jñāna. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11]. People are interested with dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. But Bhāgavata says that above that, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. Here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa, they are cheating, because they are not giving directly the devotional service to the Lord. Dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa. Therefore Vyāsadeva says, dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ vāstavaṁ vastu vedyam atra [SB 1.1.2].



So if we want to understand the real reality, vāstava-vastu, that is Kṛṣṇa, then this is the process. What is that?

tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



You have to receive through the channel of paramparā system, bhakti. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Paramparā. Ādau gurvāśrayam. Therefore we have to accept a guru who is coming in the paramparā. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna is paramparā. Because the paramparā was lost, Kṛṣṇa again said Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna. So as Arjuna understood, if you understand Bhagavad-gītā as Arjuna understood, if you understand Kṛṣṇa, then your understanding of Kṛṣṇa is perfect. And if you invent some imaginary meaning, then you are śrama eva hi kevalam, waste of time. So don't do that. Try to understand Kṛṣṇa as He is, as He speaks Himself about Himself, that "I am like this." What is the difficulty? If Kṛṣṇa says, if God says, "I am like this," why you are manufacturing ways and means to understand God, uselessly wasting time? God is giving His name, God is giving His address, God is giving His activities. Everything is there. Why don't you understand God? Why you are researching? This is called śrama eva hi...



dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



So don't waste time in searching out what is God. God is canvassing you, "I am God, here." Bhaktyā sa... Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65].



So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not a manufactured way. It is simply the standard. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru. We are preaching this philosophy. It is not difficult. Anyone can do it. Anyone can do it. It is not that I am playing something wonderful. What Wonderful? They talk about this, that I have done something wonderful. I do not know any wonderful thing. I only know to present Kṛṣṇa as He is. That's all. This is the secret. So anyone can understand Kṛṣṇa as He is from Bhagavad-gītā or from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Why do they search out? Why they should invent some means? This is useless waste of time.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720816SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.13

-

Los Angeles, August 16, 1972



Prabhupāda:



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



So ataḥ, therefore, in the previous verse it was decided who is qualified to see God. God is there within yourself. He is not far away. Not that you have to go many miles away to see God. Paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. Just like you are searching out something, you do not know what the thing is like, you are harassed. But if somebody knows what the thing is like, "Why you are harassing yourself? Here is the thing. Take it," you can get it immediately. Similarly, God is not far away, God is very near to him, side by side, jīvātmā and Paramātmā. You are sitting with God, you simply do not know how to see. But that qualification, we have explained yesterday, is the eagerness, "Yes, I want to see."



When you want to see... Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja was a young boy, he was insulted by his stepmother. Son of a kṣatriya, they were very proud family, even a five-year-old boy could not tolerate the insult. A kṣatriya cannot tolerate insult, immediately sword. Not that nonviolence. Nonviolence is not for kṣatriya. Therefore it is said, varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ-you cannot stop violence. There must be violence, but kṣatriyas, they know how to use violence. That is different thing. So he was insulted and he went to his mother, "Stepmother has insulted me like this," he began to cry in front of his mother. She said,"How can I help you, my dear boy? Your father does not care for me, even like the maidservants." So he was determined to retaliate. So his mother advised, that "If you can meet Kṛṣṇa, or God, He can help you." "Where is God?" "Yes, I have heard that people go to the forest to search out God." This is eagerness. And Nārada Muni, because Kṛṣṇa is within, He is seeing that this boy is very eager. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Kṛṣṇa, as soon as He sees that you are serious, He will send you the help of a spiritual master.

So Nārada came to him, "My dear boy, you are child, why you are affected by the insult? What is insult to you? You are a child, you play." Actually, if you insult a child, they do not take it, actually. A small boy if you insult, what does he care for it? Insult or honor, a child has no knowledge of it. "So why you are so much affected? You are king's son, so much delicate body. It is very difficult to search out God here in this forest. It requires great austerity. Better go home now, and when you are mature, old age, you can come."

"Sir, I am sorry. I am born of a kṣatriya father, so I cannot accept your instruction. This is very good instruction, but I am born in such a family. I am sorry, I cannot take your instruction," he frankly said. "If you can give me anything, any clue how I can find God, please tell me. Otherwise, please excuse me. Don't tell me, don't give me instructions." This is eagerness, a five-year-old boy, "I must see God. If you can give me some clue how I find out God then talk. Otherwise excuse." This is seriousness. Then this mantra was given to Dhruva Mahārāja: oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. So he, by that eagerness, within six months he saw Kṛṣṇa.

So it is possible. One has to accept the proper person who can let him know what is God. And if he is determined, then it is not difficult. But when you see God, what is your next business? Suppose you see God, what you will do? The business is to ask God, "Kṛṣṇa, please engage me in Your service." That is wanted. When Nṛsiṁhadeva was seen by Prahlāda Mahārāja, He wanted to give him. Actually his father was dead, he was to be king, so Prahlāda Mahārāja was offered, "Anything you want. You have suffered for Me so much. Now you take what you want." Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "Sir, what shall I require from You? I have seen all these material opulences. My father was so strong that even the demigods would not dare to challenge him. He was so powerful, and all this power and strength You have finished in a second. So what is the use of these powers? Please do not allure me by this material power. All this material power can be finished immediately, within a second, if You like."

That is a fact. You may have material possessions, power, and everything very good situation, and simply by little motor accident, finished immediately, within a second. In your country, President Kennedy was so powerful, opulent and so on, and within a second it was finished. So these rascals, they do not see that "What I shall gain by this so-called material opulence and power?" It can be finished at any moment by the direction, and Kṛṣṇa says also in the Bhagavad-gītā, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu, he was thinking, "I am so powerful." And when Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared as his death, finished everything.

So that they do not see. They are claiming to become God, but how they will control this death? That will come, "As sure as death." God means controller. Can you control death, can you control disease, can you control old age? No? Then how do you become God? Rascal, you are claiming to have become God. If I give you a kick on your face, you cannot control, yet you claim to have become God. You see, this is going on.

So when you meet God, you can meet God at any moment if you follow the instructions. Then what is your business? In that meeting, fully learned scholars were present, therefore it is called dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ, best of the brāhmaṇas. Best of the brāhmaṇas means these devotees. To become brāhmaṇa means the best of the learned scholars. Brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇa. Everyone is born śūdra-janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. Śūdra means the fourth-class man. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. By reformation, by cultivation of knowledge and culture, one becomes second class, third class and first class. So brāhmaṇa means the first class, means one who knows-brāhmaṇa. And śreṣṭhāḥ, the best of the brāhmaṇas, means that he knows not only what is Brahman, but he knows what is Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. Three stages. Simply knowing Brahman is not perfect knowledge; you must know what is Paramātmā, you must know what is the Personality of Godhead. Therefore it is addressed here, dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ.

There are many in that meeting at Naimiṣāraṇya. The human society should be divided into four classes of men, not that everything is a drunkard, that's all. This is not civilization; this is animal life. There must be first-class men. There is already, just like you are, you are all first class, but they will not admit. They will admit drunkard first class. That is a different thing. But you are all first class, devotees of Kṛṣṇa. So there must be first class, second class, third class, fourth class, because this material world is conducted under the influence of three qualities-goodness, passion and ignorance. How you can avoid it? So those who are on the platform of goodness, they are first-class men. Those who are on the platform of passion, they are second-class men. Those who are mixed up, they are third-class men, and those who are in ignorance, they are fourth-class men, and less than that, they are animals. They may have two hands, two legs, but they are simply animals, that's all, no better than animals.

So actually human civilization begins when there is varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ, four varṇas and four āśramas. Here is brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. Unless human society is scientifically divided in this varṇāśrama system, it is animal society. It is not man's society. Therefore he is stressing varṇāśrama. Not others who are not within the category of varṇāśrama, they are animals. So when the human society comes to the system of varṇāśrama-dharma, then they can think about God. Otherwise it is not possible. Animal, how they can think about God? Because you are all first-class boys and girls, therefore you have come to hear about God. Now if you call first-class dogs, they will not come, that is not possible. So unless the human society is organized in the varṇāśrama-dharma, it remains animal society. And in animal society you cannot expect any intelligence or any sense of goodness or any idea of God. This is not possible.

So when you come to the system of varṇāśrama, this is by nature. It is creation of God, just like in your body there are four divisions-the brain, arms, belly and legs divisions. So how can you avoid? This is natural. Unless you have got brain, if your head is cut off from the body, then what is the value? It is dead body. Similarly, at the present moment there is no brahminical culture. There may be very strong arm department, there may be very well-equipped economic department or labor department, but because the head is not there, it is a dead body. Therefore the whole society is suffering; there is no brāhmaṇa, or the head. We are creating brāhmaṇas so that the society may be saved. We are not creating rascals; we are creating brāhmaṇas. So if you all are responsible, if you know your duty, try to save the society, especially in your country, America. By God's grace you have enough of everything. And you have got intelligence also, otherwise how you are coming? Unless you are born of intelligent father and mother, how you are taking this?

So we are creating first-class nationalists in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement who can save your country. We are not creating cats and dogs and bluffing the society. We are actually creating real nationalists of your country, real scholars. We don't decry material civilization, no. We don't say that. Yesterday on the beach I was talking with Karandhara, "Why your country does not allow to marry more than one wife?" He said they think it is immoral. I do not know what is the ethics or psychology behind it, but giving opportunity for the girls to become prostitute is not immoral? To marry more than one wife is immoral? You see your leaders. This is the leaders. Why? Because there is no varṇāśrama-dharma, they do not know. The brāhmaṇas, the kṣatriyas, especially, they are allowed to marry more than one wife. At least every woman will get a chance to have a husband.

So it is very scientific system, but they are killing. In India it was there, and still the rascal leaders, they are trying to kill it. Classless society-how you can make classless society? They are dogs, cats..., how you can make classless society? It can be made in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because when you accept Kṛṣṇa as the supreme master, the supreme proprietor, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29], then you become classless. Just like in this body there is brain. Brain is very important, and leg is not so important. But it is important, because if the leg does not help you to move, simply brain, how it will help? So there is cooperation. Although the brain is the most important part of the body, still leg is required, hand is required, the belly is also required, everything is required. We do not avoid anything. We do not say "Stop this." No. Everything is required, just like we have discovered this microphone. Yes, it is required, we are taking advantage of it and speaking nicely about Kṛṣṇa.

So our point is not to disregard anything, but everything use for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, that is called saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam: [SB 1.2.13] means satisfying Kṛṣṇa. You have manufactured, you have discovered something, but you will get perfection by manufacturing this. Anything you do, if you can satisfy Kṛṣṇa by your art and intelligence and education, by your work, then your life is perfect. We don't decry, "Don't do this." Do everything, but do it for Kṛṣṇa, then it is perfect. Otherwise, go to hell. Śrama eva hi kevalam [SB 1.2.8]. "Oh, I am a brāhmaṇa, I am doing my duty." "But do you know Kṛṣṇa, do you serve Kṛṣṇa?" "Yes, I know Kṛṣṇa, I am Kṛṣṇa." This will not help you. Suppose a big man, a president, if you say, "I am president," what the government will think of you? "He is a crazy fellow." Similarly, these rascals, when they say, "I am God," then we take it, "That is a crazy fellow."

Therefore you have to satisfy the Supreme. Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā never said that you claim yourself to have become Kṛṣṇa. No. He claimed sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. "You come under My shelter." He does not say that You become equal with Me. That is nonsense. So Kṛṣṇa will be satisfied because your business is how to satisfy Hari, and Hari says, Kṛṣṇa says, that you surrender. That will satisfy Kṛṣṇa, not that you falsely claim that "I am Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is now dead, and now I have come." These rascals will not satisfy Kṛṣṇa.

So this is our proposition. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. It does not matter, varṇāśrama-dharma, eight categories, four social and four spiritual or four material and four spiritual, but when the material activities are enacted for spiritual advancement, then it is no more material; it is spiritual. Actually there is nothing material. Material means forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa, that's all. Otherwise there is nothing material. It is called buddhi-bheda, means those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious thoroughly, they have got distinction "This is spiritual; this is material." But when you are fully, ekatvam anupaśyataḥ [Īśo 7]. That is stated in the Īśopaniṣad. That means everything is related to Kṛṣṇa, that is ekatvam. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme, and everything is emanation from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's energy is variety. The example just like the sun. From sun, two energies are emanating-heat and light. And the whole material creation is based on heat and light. As soon as there is no light or as soon as there is not heat, immediately the trees become skeletons. Or a few days after, it will be vanished.

So anyone can understand, heat and light is the basic principle of this material creation. And wherefrom the heat and light is coming? From the sun. So if you take service of the heat and light, you cannot avoid the sun. Similarly, two energies of Kṛṣṇa, they are acting. Heat and light-the material energy and the spiritual energy. The material energy means the earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, ego, and spiritual energy is this living entity. Jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. That is spiritual energy. Just like you mix up two things, and there is chemical action. Similarly, the whole world is going on. Here there is material and spiritual distinction because here there is forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa. Here, ninety-nine and nine tenths percent have forgotten God; therefore it is material. And as soon as you are Kṛṣṇa conscious, there is no more material, everything is spiritual.

īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ

yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā

mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam

[Īśo mantra 1]



It requires only advancement of spiritual knowledge, then you will find that everything is spiritual. Just like in Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said:



sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe, nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti

[Cc. Madhya 8.274]



"A materialistic person, because he does not know what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa, he sees matter. But a spiritually advanced, Kṛṣṇa conscious person, he does not see matter." Just like an atheist will come, they will see this Deity, stone, a stone statue. But a spiritually advanced, he will see that Kṛṣṇa is here personally. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as soon as He saw Jagannātha, immediately fainted, "Here is My Kṛṣṇa."



So the material vision means forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa, that's all. Otherwise there is no material, because everything is coming from Kṛṣṇa, either material energy or spiritual energy. They are coming from the same source, so in the higher spiritual understanding, the spiritual platform, there is nothing material. Everything is spiritual. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. So don't imitate, but there is possibility. So long we are on the material platform, on the platform of forgetfulness, our business should be how to satisfy the Supreme. How to satisfy,(?) you do whatever you like, not whatever you like, within the institution. Varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ, it must be organized. If your aim is simply to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, then your life is perfect.

Thank you very much. (end)



721024SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.13

-

Vṛndāvana, October 24, 1972



Pradyumna: Translation: "O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest perfection one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties, or dharma, according to caste divisions and order of life, is to please the Lord Hari." [SB 1.2.13]



Prabhupāda: Ataḥ pumbhir-dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Varṇa and āśrama. This varṇāśrama is very important thing in the human society. Unless one accepts these principles of varṇa and āśrama, they're animal society. That is not human society. Four varṇas-the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, and śūdra, four divisions of the society; and āśrama, spiritual order-brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. This is Vedic culture, varṇa and āśrama. That is accepted as human society.



In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa also it is said,

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



The whole aim of life is to achieve the favor of Viṣṇu. Oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. That is the Ṛg-Veda mantra. To reach Viṣṇu. But they do not know the goal of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know. Anyone, or any society who does not know the aim of life, they are in the darkness. Actually, at the present moment especially, the whole human society has missed the point. They are trying to be happy by material adjustment. By social adjustment, by political adjustment, by economic adjustment, or by religious adjustment, they are trying to make the whole human society happy, but Bhāgavata says, durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ. This is something which is beyond the fulfillment of hopes. This hope will never be fulfilled. Durāśayā. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ. Because they have accepted the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, bahir-artha.



Just like this body. Your body, my body, this is bahir-artha, external. Just like my, this wrapper. This is external. Real person is the soul. But they have no information of the soul, neither information of Viṣṇu, the origin of soul. They are interested with the external body. That is called bahir-artha. Bahiḥ means external. Artha means interest. Just like you have seen, our, in our Bhāgavata, the picture, that one lady is taking care of the cage, and the bird within is dying. So bahir-artha-mānī means this, that we are taking care of the body, external body, but not taking care of the soul within. This is the civilization of cows and asses. Sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Go means cows, and khara means asses. Therefore here it is said, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ.

Dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. In that meeting of Naimiṣāraṇya, there were all best brāhmaṇas, the kṣatriya and the vaiśyas. They are supposed to be twice-born. One birth by the father and mother, and the other birth is by the guru and Vedic knowledge. The guru is the father and Vedic knowledge is the mother. This is in Aryan civilization, this varṇāśrama, varṇa: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Śūdras are once-born. They have no ceremony for twice-born. Or one who is not twice-born, he's a śūdra. If the twice-born ceremony is not observed, is not observed, then it is śūdra. Or act..., practically at the present moment, even in India, these ceremonies are not accepted or they do not care for it. And what to speak of other countries. Therefore the conclusion of the śāstra is kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In this age of Kali, there are only śūdras. Practically there is no brāhmaṇa, no kṣatriya, no vaiśyas. Maybe some vaiśyas. But this is the position.

But here it is said, varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Unless one, unless the society comes to the institution for accepting these four varṇas and āśrama, it is not human society. And in the human society there is understanding of God, not in the animal society. Therefore as the institution of varṇāśrama is now abolished, people are becoming godless. Because varṇāśrama means the institution or a set-up of society where gradually one can understand Viṣṇu and worship Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur ārādhyate. That is the system. Not that so-called brāhmaṇa and so-called kṣatriya, they have no information of Viṣṇu, and they are declaring, "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am kṣatriya." They are called, according to śāstra, brahma-bandhu, dvija-bandhu. Dvija-bandhu. One who is born of a brāhmaṇa family or a kṣatriya family or vaiśya family, but do not act as brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, and vaiśyas, they are called dvija-bandhu. They are not accepted as dvija. Strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā [SB 1.4.25].

This Mahābhārata was compiled by Vyāsadeva for this purpose because strī, women; śūdra, the fourth class of the society, laborer class, worker class; strī, śūdra; and dvija-bandhu, and persons who are born in the families of brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, but they do not act, they are called dvija-bandhu. For them, this Mahābhārata was compiled. It is called "Fifth Vedas." Four Vedas: Sāma, Yajur, Atharva..., Sāma, Yajur, Ṛk, Atharva. So this Vedic language cannot be understood by the less intelligent class of men who are known as woman, śūdra, and dvija-bandhu, strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnām [SB 1.4.25]. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said,

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim

[Bg. 9.32]



So when one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, it does not matter whether he's a strī or a śūdra or a dvija-bandhu. Te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. They also can be elevated to the highest platform of perfection.



So that is Kṛṣṇa's special favor. Ordinarily, this is the formula. This formula. What is that? Dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. This is the ordinary formula. Ataḥ pumbhir, pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. It is based on the varṇāśrama division. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. Everyone must have perfection, but people are not interested what is the perfection of life. Neither they know what is the position of perfection. The perfection is hari-toṣaṇam, to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It doesn't matter what you are. If you are brāhmaṇa, by your activities, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā, by your austerity, knowledge, you satisfy Kṛṣṇa, the Sup..., Viṣṇu, the Supreme... Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu, the same. Viṣṇu-tattva..., Kṛṣṇa is the origin of viṣṇu-tattva. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Kṛṣṇa says. He is the origin of Viṣṇu also. Sarvasya. Because in the creation, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśvara. The origin of original demigods of this creation. Brahmā is the creator, Viṣṇu is the maintainer, and Maheśvara, or Mahādeva, or Lord Śiva, is destroyer. The three deities in charge of three departmental activities. So Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ. That means He's the origin of Brahmā, He's the origin of Viṣṇu, He's the origin of Lord Śiva. Ahaṁ sarvasya pra..., mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate. So therefore, here it is said, hari-toṣaṇam. If we satisfy Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He includes everything. Sarvasya prabhavaḥ. You do not require to satisfy separately other demigods. There is no need.

The example is given: yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ [SB 4.31.14]. Just like pouring water in the root of the tree, automatically you water the branches, the twigs, the leaves, the flowers, and everything. This is the way. Prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇām. You supply foods to the stomach, and automatically the energy will be distributed to other parts of the body. You do not require to supply food to the eyes, to the ear, to the nose. No. Simply supply food to the stomach and the energy will be distributed. Similarly, saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. If you simply satisfy Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then you satisfy all others. Tasmin tuṣṭo jagat tuṣṭaḥ. Just like you know the story, in Mahābhārata, that Duryodhana planned... Duryodhana... Once Duryodhana satisfied Durvāsā Muni very nicely, and Durvāsā Muni wanted to give him some benediction, "Now you take some benediction, whatever you like." So Duryodhana was very cunning. His only aim was how to cheat the Pāṇḍavas. So he said, "My dear sir, I shall ask you some day. Not now." So "All right." So when the Pāṇḍavas were in the forest and Duryodhana's plan was how to tease them. So he approached Durvāsā Muni, "My dear sir, you wanted to give me some benediction. I have come for it." "Yes" "Now, you go to the Pāṇḍavas with your all disciples, sixty-thousand disciples, and you go when Draupadī has taken her food." So Durvāsā Muni one day... Because he wanted to give that benediction, he approached the Pāṇḍavas in the forest. And it is the duty of the kṣatriya to receive the brāhmaṇas. So they were, they were, they had finished their lunch, and Durvāsā Muni came. So how they can deny? They are kṣatriyas. "Yes, my lord. You can, you are welcomed. Just take your bath, and we are making arrangement..." What arrangement they will make? In the forest? So they were perplexed.

So Kṛṣṇa, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati... [Bg. 9.31]. Kṛṣṇa's vow is that He will see always His devotees are protected. So when they were perplexed, Kṛṣṇa came. Kṛṣṇa came that "What is the problem?" They explained, "This is the problem." Then asked Draupadī that "You have already finished..." Because Draupadī had an, a benediction that so long she does not take his (her) lunch, any number of men come, she, she will be able to feed. That was his (her)... But she had finished her lunch. then Kṛṣṇa said, "Just go, find out some foodstuff, any little in the kitchen." They said, "No, everything is finished. There is no food." "No, just try to see." Then, in one pot, they saw a little śāk, a vegetable, was stuck up. So they brought it and Kṛṣṇa took it, immediately. So as soon as Kṛṣṇa took, all the Durvāsā Muni and company, they, they felt that their belly is filled up. Tasmin tuṣṭo jagat tuṣṭaḥ. So they were feeling ashamed that "How we shall go? We cannot take any food?" So they fled away from the Ganges.

So the process is this, actually. If you can satisfy Kṛṣṇa, if Kṛṣṇa says, "All right," then every, everything is all right. Bas. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Somehow or other, you satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. Then you have all perfection. Very simple method. You try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, and your everything satisfied. Every, everything is perfect. Kṛṣṇa also says that. It is not very difficult to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is so kind, He says, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Kṛṣṇa says, "You want to feed Me. That's all right. You collect little flower, patram, a little leaf... Whatever you... Not that all. Any one of them." Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam, a little water, yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Real thing is bhakti, love, devotion. Not that Kṛṣṇa is asking you, "Bring volumes of luci, puri, kacuri, halavā." No. Kṛṣṇa wants your love. Real thing. Bhaktyā. Yo me bhaktyā prayac... Kṛṣṇa is not beggar, neither Kṛṣṇa is hungry, that He has come to your place to eat something. That's not the position, Kṛṣṇa's. Kṛṣṇa wants only your love. Just like father takes the responsibility of the whole family. He works hard day and night to maintain the family. He expects only love from his wife and children. That is the impetus of economic development. Otherwise he's earning daily thousands and lakhs of rupees. It is not that he will eat. He will eat that four cāpāṭis. That's all. Worth six annas. But he works so hard just to be satisfied that his wife, his children love. When he comes at home, he sees them very satisfied.

Similarly, Kṛṣṇa has expanded this family. Ekaṁ bahu syām. He has become so many living entities. What is the idea? Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Because He's ānandamaya, He wants to enjoy the love exchange between the living entities. That is His purpose. Otherwise, why He has created? He wants love. But these rascals, they have forgotten that thing. They are saying, "There is no God. I am God. I am enjoyer." Instead of loving God, they are becoming "God." This has killed the whole situation. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes, and He wanted to reestablish that reciprocal exchange of love which is called bhakti. You love Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa loves you. Kṛṣṇa loves you, even without your love. Otherwise, how you are eating? You, why, you cannot live even for a moment without Kṛṣṇa's mercy. That's a fact. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. So Kṛṣṇa comes.

Kṛṣṇa, when He says, dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya sambhavāmi yuge yuge, this is real dharma. Dharma means dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means the what is enjoined by the Lord, God. What God says, that is dharma. God says, "Do this." That is dharma. Not that you manufacture your dharma. God says, Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... [Bg. 18.66]. This is dharma. Anything beyond this, all nonsense. They are not dharmas. Dharmaḥ kaitavaḥ. Cheating, simply cheating. Therefore Bhāgavata says, dharmaḥ projjhitaḥ atra kaitavaḥ: "All rascaldom dharma is thrown away, kicked out." This is dharma. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. This is dharma.

Therefore here it is same thing is confirmed. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. You are religious. That's all right. But the purpose of religion is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. That is perfection. It doesn't matter. Because it is said, varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. A brāhmaṇa, brāhmaṇa-varṇa, he can satisfy Kṛṣṇa by his tapasya, by his truthfulness, by his knowledge of the śāstras. He can preach the knowledge of the śāstra to the world. He can eat on behalf of God. Therefore according to Vedic civilization, there is brāhmaṇa-bhojana. Brāhmaṇa-bhojana means whatever a brāhmaṇa eats, it means God is, Kṛṣṇa eats through the brāhmaṇa. Therefore brāh..., brāhmaṇa... In Vedic civilization there is no daridra-bhojana. There is no such word. Now they, they have manufactured: refugee-bhojana, daridra-bhojana. But the, the real is brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava-bhojana. Because through the mouth of the brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇavas, those who are real brāhmaṇa... So this is the saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. You may remain a brāhmaṇa. That's all right.

Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was a kṣatriya. He was not a brāhmaṇa; he was kṣatriya. He was not a sannyāsī; he was a gṛhastha, king. His business, he knew how to kill. So by killing he satisfied Kṛṣṇa. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. This is the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gītā. He was unwilling to kill, and Kṛṣṇa was inducing him, "You must kill." And when he agreed to kill, then Kṛṣṇa became satisfied. He became perfect. These are the evidence. The purpose is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. When he was denying to fight, that was his own satisfaction. "I shall not kill my grandfather, my nephews, my brother on the other side. If they die, I shall be unhappy. So what is the use of killing them?" These are all sense gratification, so-called nonviolence. A devotee does not know what is violence and non-violence. He wants to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That's all. They do not know what is morality or immorality. They want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Just like the gopīs. At dead of night, they went to Kṛṣṇa. This is immorality. But they did not know what is morality or immorality. They must go to Kṛṣṇa. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13].

So anyone, in whatever position he may be, it does not matter. Everyone should try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is perfection of life. Always think of Kṛṣṇa, man-manāḥ. "Always become My devotee," mad-bhakta. "Always worship Me," mad-yājī. "Always offer your obeisances unto Me," māṁ namaskuru. "But I have got other religion, Sir. Why shall I think of You only? I have to think of Goddess Kālī. Otherwise I cannot eat meat." Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān paritya... "It is all nonsense. Give up all this nonsense." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. "Simply unto Me." Ekam. "Don't bother with other demigods. They are My servants. You are not to satisfy My servants." Of course, those who are real servants, that is different.

So this is the real dharma, saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. If you, someway or other, can satisfy Kṛṣṇa... Just like Arjuna, by killing, he sat... Killing art is not very good art. But because by killing he satisfied Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa gave him certificate, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me [Bg. 4.3], "Oh, you are My very dear friend." Because Kṛṣṇa's purpose was to kill the demons. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. So Arjuna helped to kill the demons and fulfill the desire of Kṛṣṇa. And therefore he became perfect by killing. So if you do anything which is sanctioned by Kṛṣṇa, or by His bona fide representative, that is real dharma. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13].

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720817SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.14

-

Los Angeles, August 17, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tasmād ekena manasā

bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā

[SB 1.2.14]



(devotees chant responsively)



Prabhupāda: Where is Nandarāṇī?



Devotee: She's in the kitchen, Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: All right. Go on. Any other ladies? (woman chants) That's all. So read the word meaning.



Pradyumna: (reads synonyms) Translation: "Therefore devotees should constantly hear about, glorify, remember and worship the Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān, who is their protector."



Prabhupāda: So tasmāt. Tasmāt, "therefore." It is continuation of the last verse. What was the last verse?



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



Everyone should know how to become perfect. That education is not there. They do not know what is perfection. They do not know that "I am eternal. My struggle for existence is for perfection of life, to come to my original position, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so that I may regain again my eternal, blissful life of knowledge." That is the aim.



So it is required therefore that the social system should be organized in such a way that automatically people become interested in the ultimate goal of life. That is civilization. This is not civilization, simply animal propensities: eat voraciously and sleep twenty hours and have sex life without any restriction and have atom bomb for the defense. That's all, finished, civilization. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat. These things are there in the animals. Just like goats. We have seen goats eating twenty-four hours. Not only goats, they..., all other animals. Even if he is strong animal. That, they are... I told you. Na hi suptasya siṁhasya praviśanti mukhe mṛgāḥ. Suptasya, sleeping lion. Lion is very powerful; he is given the honor of becoming the king of the animals. But still, he has to work for eating. It is not that because he is lion he will be sleeping, and some animal will come and enter into his mouth. No. That is not possible. He has to work.

Similarly, everyone has to work. Therefore there must be systematic work so that whole society may develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the ideal or the goal of life. Without program working... Just like I was hearing that in Japan they are very much, the people have very much liking for working, but, by law, they are being prohibited, "Don't work." So this civilization has been created that they do not know anything more. They are not taught that working is not our main business. Our main business is, as it is stated, hari-toṣaṇam. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. We have to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Or God, whatever you say. But they do not know what is God.

So "There is no God. There is no life." These things are being taught throughout the whole world. You... Cāṇakya... What is...? That Cārvāka theory. Cārvāka theory is that,

ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet

yāvaj jīvet sukhaṁ jīvet



and



bhasmī-bhūtasya dehasya

kutaḥ punar āgamano bhavet



Bhasmī-bhūtasya dehasya. In India, according to Vedic system, the body is burned after death. They are not so foolish to stock and occupy millions of square yards. No. "Body is finished; just burn it," finish. Why stock it in a tomb and occupy so much space? Practical, you see. So bhasmī-bhūtasya dehasya. Bhasmī-bhūtasya means the body being burned, it becomes ashes. So, actually the ultimate form or format of this body are three: either you become stool, or you become ash, or you become earth. Those who are burying underground, after few years the body will become earth. And those who are throwing on the street or on the water, so that body will become stool. Because if you throw on land, some jackals and some animals, some vultures, they will come and eat, and by, after eating, it will be stool. So either ashes or stool or earth. This is the last stage of this body. And we are taking of this stool, ash and earth so much without caring for the real vital force which moving the body. We are very much careful for ash, stool, and earth, not careful of the living force which is moving this body, beautiful body. This body is beautiful, very attractive, very important, so long that spiritual spark is there. Otherwise it is stool, ash and earth. They do not know this.



So this requires intelligence. That intelligence is divided into this varṇāśrama-dharma. There must be intelligent class of men, brāhmaṇa. They are called intelligent class of men. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]. The society must be divided into four classes for cooperation-I have explained yesterday. So at the present moment, two classes are wanting: the brāhmaṇa class and the kṣatriya class. The vaiśya class and the śūdra class and less than śūdra class are there. Because in the Kali-yuga, it is stated, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. Kalau, in this age, most, major portion of the population will be śūdras. Śūdras means fourth-class men. Fourth-class men means śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam. What is that? Paricaryātmakaṁ karma [Bg. 18.44]. Just like dog. A dog, unless it has got a nice master, it is street dog. A street dog. It has no value. Anyone can kill, and it has no shelter, loitering in the street. So śūdra means dog's position. If he does not get a nice master, then he's street dog. In spite of high education, M.A., Ph.D, D.A.C, and this and that, if he does not get any employment, he's street dog. What is his value? Eh? "Oh, I have studied high technical education." But if you do not get a service for using your education, then you are a street dog. Is it not?

Everyone is searching after some service, service, service. So this service attitude means śūdra. Paricaryātmakaṁ karma śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. In the śāstras, therefore, it is said that the brāhmaṇas, even there is some difficult time... Just like nowadays, at the present moment, we are creating brāhmaṇas, but people do not much like us. They do not care for us: "What is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa?" Their street... They are thinking they are beggars. But they are the most intelligent class, brāhmaṇas. They do not honor. So this Kali-yuga, actual intelligent class of men has no honor. A third-class man, fourth-class man, fifth-class man has got honor if he gets some money. That is the system of Kali-yuga. Somehow or other, you gather money and you are fifth-class, tenth-class man-you will be honored. This is Kali-yuga. Not for your qualification, but because you have got money, you are honored. This is going on.

So kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. At the present moment, 99.9%, they are śūdras. Therefore the society is chaotic condition. Therefore in your country, you are the richest country in the world, you are producing hippies, frustration, confusion. Chaotic condition. And if you continue this, then you'll lose all your opportunities. Artificially, you cannot remain opulent for many days. There were so many empires-Roman Empire, British Empire, Moghul Empire. These were artificial. If you systematically follow the Vedic principles as it is ordered by Kṛṣṇa... Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. You must divide the society according to quality and work, four classes of men: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. And less than śūdra, they are neglected. Not neglected, they are incorrigible. But Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice, even those who are incorrigible, they can be devotee. That is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ

[SB 2.4.18]



This movement is so strong that even the fifth class, sixth class... After śūdra, then fifth class, sixth class, go on, unlimited. Only the upper four classes are counted to be really civilized organization. Otherwise, there are so many divisions of...



So, but if the upper four classes are in right order... The same example can be... If your upper portion of the body, the head and hands, you can protect, you can fight. But if the upper portion is cut off, your head is cut off, your hands are cut off, then no more fighting. You fall down. Is it not? So they do not know this science. They're killing the upper portion, the brāhmaṇa class, the kṣatriya class. Formerly, the kṣatriya class, they were being trained. Just like I am now writing notes on Bhāgavatam of the four princes. They were to be given in charge of the kingdom. Before giving charge, they were sent for austerity. And they met Lord Śiva, and Lord Śiva gave them instruction, and for ten thousand of years within water standing, they underwent austerity. Then they came back and took charge of the kingdom. This is kṣatriya.

Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja, at the age of five years old, he left his father's home, went to the forest, and with determination he saw God, Kṛṣṇa, within six months. But after coming back, when he was older, when he became king, oh, he was so powerful that there was some mischief done by the sons of Kuvera, he killed them like anything. You see? He killed them like anything, so that the Kuvera personally requested that "Mahārāja Dhruva, I know that they are criminals, you are doing your duty as king, but I request... Otherwise my whole dynasty will be finished." So immediately, Dhruva Mahārāja accepted a great man's request, Kuvera. And this Kuvera being so satisfied by the behavior of Dhruva Mahārāja that he was prepared to give him any benediction: "My dear king, you can ask me, from me, any benediction you like. You have kept my request." So what Dhruva Mahārāja asked him? He was Kuvera. Kuvera means the treasurer of the demigods. If he wanted that "The whole treasury of the universe should to given to me," he would have given him. But what he asked? He asked, "My dear sir, you are so kind, you are prepared to give me all benediction. Please give me this benediction so that I may be attached to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa."

This is kṣatriya. If required, they'll fight and finish the whole opposite party. Otherwise they are devotees. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna, a kṣatriya. Not that Arjuna was coward. He was sympathetic: "Kṛṣṇa, what is the use of this fighting? The other party, all my relatives, if I kill them, then what do I gain?" Actually, that is the fact. We work so hard, accumulate money for showing to our relatives, to our friends: "Now, just see how I have become rich." "But if they are all gone, then whom shall I show this kingdom?" Thinking like ordinary worldly man. But he was not a coward. Not that he was hesitating to fight, but when he understood that "Kṛṣṇa wants this fighting. Oh, that's all right." Then Kṛṣṇa asked him, "My dear Arjuna, what is your decision?" "Yes." Kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73]. "Yes, I shall fight." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. "Kṛṣṇa wants this fighting. I do not want. I have nothing to... What is my value? Kṛṣṇa wants it. That is value." This is kṣatriya. So finished-the whole grandfather and grandchildren and everything, finished. The other party, Kauravas, not a single person lived.

So this is kṣatriya. And brāhmaṇa, giving direction. All the kṣatriya kings were taking direction from highly learned sages and brāhmaṇas... Just like Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. So these two classes are now wanted. Here is stated, cātur-varṇyam..., eh, varṇāśrama, varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Otherwise, this present human civilization is dead. There must be these two classes of men: brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya. Śūdras and vaiśyas are there. There are so many shopkeepers and workers and laborers. There is sufficient number. Now there is no brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya.

So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to give some benediction to the whole human society. It is not a sectarian so-called religion, sentiment. No. It is a scientific movement. Scientific movement... If you say, "Why you are interested to save the human society?" That is Kṛṣṇa's business. Kṛṣṇa wants, God wants, that "All these living entities, they should come back home, back to Godhead. Why they are suffering?" Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes personally.

paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

[Bg. 4.8]



Kṛṣṇa is very anxious. We are suffering here, rotting here. We are sons of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa does not like to see that we shall rot here. He wants, "Come back home, dance with Me, eat with Me." But these rascals will not go. They will stick here. "No, sir. It is very good here. I shall become hog and eat stool. That is very pleasant."



So this is position. Therefore, because we are Kṛṣṇa conscious, we are servants of God, therefore it is our duty to save this human civilization. You see. Kṛṣṇa wants it. And to save this human civilization, these two classes are required very urgently. So you American boys and girls, you are intelligent, you have got all facilities. At least in your country, create these two classes, brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya. The world will be saved, and you will be saved, and Kṛṣṇa will be pleased. Brāhmaṇa's business means that people should know what is God, what is our relationship with Him. That is brāhmaṇa's... And kṣatriya's business is to give protection to the people so that may all know what is God. That is kṣatriya's... And vaiśyas business is to provide food for them, production. And śūdras is to help all these three classes by their labor. This is social organization. It is not that everyone will become brāhmaṇa or everyone will become kṣat... No. At the present moment, the Communists are trying: "Everyone should be Communist." That is not possible. You cannot make everyone of the same class. No. That is not possible. You have to use your intelligence in such a way that these four divisions can work cooperatively and become perfect.

And that is suggested here, svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. That common platform means how to please Kṛṣṇa. Never mind you are brāhmaṇa, you are kṣatriya, you are vaiśya. But so long we are in the material world, there must be four divisions. The kṣatriyas should give protection; otherwise the demons will disturb. So there is the necessity of war with the demons, for kṣatriya. So these three classes are required, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, to give protection. And as soon as the social system is organized, the perfectional point is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Lord.

Therefore in the next verse it is said, tasmād bhārata... Tasmād ekena manasā bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ, śrotavyaḥ. How you can satisfy God if you do not know God, if you manufacture God? Śrotavya, hear about God, what is God. Don't become nonsense, accept a rascal as God. There is meaning of God, what is God. Not a dog is God. Śrotavya. Śrotavya and kīrtitavyaś ca. And spread that knowledge. Just like you are hearing about God. Now you have to spread it. Kīrtitavyaś ca. Not that "Oh, I have known God. That's all right. Let me be satisfied." No, you must preach. That is another business. Because people are ignorant. They do not know what is God; they are manufacturing God. They're accepting some rascal as God. So what is real God, you must preach. Śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca, dhyeyaḥ. And you should always think of God; then you will get intelligence. If you think of something else, for sense gratification, then it will not be done. Formally, for simply a show, that "I am devotee"-no. Dhyeya. Always thinking of God, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca, and offering worship, just like we have got this in the temple. Chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, that is dhyeya; and pūjyaś ca, and offering worship to the Lord.

So preaching, hearing, always thinking of, and worshiping. These four things are required. Then everything will be all right. It is not official business, that after one week you go and "God give us our daily bread" and go home. No. Nityadā, twenty-four hours we should be business, engaged in this business. Nityadā. What is the meaning of nityadā?

Devotees: "Constantly."



Prabhupāda: Constantly. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. That is required. Life should be molded in such a way that not for a single moment you are without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is real life. That is perfection. Because you have to make your life perfect by satisfying Kṛṣṇa, satisfying God. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. If you want perfection, But if you want again to become cats and dogs, which you have already passed through and now you have come to this human form of body, then you do whatever you like. But if you want to make this life perfect, stop this business of becoming repeatedly cats and dogs and trees and this and that, then this is the process: tasmād bhārata. Ekena manasā. Concentrating fully. Ekena. With one attention. No diversion. Ekena manasā, bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ. Don't be afraid that "If I simply concentrate my mind in Kṛṣṇa, then how other things will go on?" No. Bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ. He is very careful about His devotee. Kṛṣṇa, God, is giving everyone's food, but that is according to karma, according to his quality and position. He's getting food. Just like hog is getting food, but he cannot get more than stool. He cannot claim, "Give me halavā." No, that's not possible. You must eat stool. Because you are, by your karma, you have got this body, hog, you must eat stool.



So those who are under the karma, under the principles of nature's law-that is karma, nature's law-they are different. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ, ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā [Bg. 3.27]. Those who are ordinary living entities, they are being carried away by pull, they are being pulled by the ear by nature's law. But those who are devotees, their position is different. They are under the special attention of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He therefore declares: kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. "My dear Arjuna, you can declare to the world that anyone who is My pure devotee, he'll never be vanquished. I shall take care." Why He is asking Arjuna to declare? Because a devotee's attempt is never baffled. That is Kṛṣṇa's desire. Even His own declaration may be sometimes false, but if a devotee declares, Kṛṣṇa will see, it must be done. It must be done.

Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He was given benediction by a devotee, Lord Brahmā. He tactfully got so many benedictions, "I shall not die in this way, I shall not die in this way, I shall not..." But Kṛṣṇa saw that "This rascal has created some complication. How to kill him?" So to keep the words of the devotee, Lord Brahmā, He did not touch all the conditions proposed by Hiraṇyakaśipu. He did something else and killed him. He wanted that "I shall not be killed by man, by animal." "All right." Then Nṛsiṁhadeva is neither man nor animal. He wanted, "I shall not be killed in daytime or night." "All right." He was killed in the evening, which is neither day nor night. He wanted that "I shall not be killed on land, on water, on air." "All right." He was killed on the lap. This is God. But you may be very intelligent to trick with God, but God is still more intelligent to, I mean to say, cut down all your tricks, and He must put you into death. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. That you cannot avoid. If you, you say there is no God, God will come at the time of your death. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu; he did not believe in God. God came, "Yes, here is God, you see now what is God."

So before meeting God in that way, the best thing is to see God always within the heart. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Those who have got developed God consciousness, he is always seeing God within heart. That should be practiced.

Thank you very much. Begin kīrtana. (end)



670324SB.SF

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.14-16

-

San Francisco, March 24, 1967



Prabhupāda:



tasmād ekena manasā

bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā

[SB 1.2.14]



This verse we have been discussing in last meeting. In order to understand that Absolute Truth, it is the duty of everyone to hear, śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca, and chant; and dhyeyaḥ, means meditating or remembering, dhyeyaḥ; and pūjya, and worshiping; nityadā, regularly. Whom? Bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the master of all righteous persons. He's master of everyone, but the devotees, they especially recognize that Lord is the master of everyone. And the demons, they do not care for God, and God also do not care for them. Let them do their own work and ripe (reap) their own fruit. God does not take responsibility for the demons, but He takes responsibility for the devotees.



Therefore it is the duty of the devotee to hear. The hearing process is Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And kīrtitavyaś ca, and narrate also. Unless one narrates or unless one speaks, one cannot hear. So the two process are going on. Somebody is hearing and somebody is chanting. And then when hear and chant, there must be meditation. If we attentively hear, then there must be meditation. And pūjya. Pūjā means worship. The simple process of worship in this age is this performance as we are doing-chanting, hearing, and offering some fruits, flowers, and showing this candle. This is simple, that's all. There are... According to Vedic literature there are many parapher..., sixty-four items for worshiping. That is not possible in this age. So this is all right.

So this process will make you understand the Absolute Truth. You just follow this principle ekena manasā, with one attention, without diverting your attention to any other subject matter. If you follow this principle, ekena manasā, to hear, to chant, to think of and to worship... This simple process. This is the injunction of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ

karma-granthi-nibandhanam

chindanti kovidās tasya

ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim

[SB 1.2.15]



What is the benefit of this process? The benefit of this process is karma-granthi-nibandhanam. Karma-granthi-nibandhanaṁ chindanti. Chindanti means cut off. What is that, cut off? There is a knot of our activities. Without performing this ceremony, or without following these instructions, to hear, chant, think and worship, we cannot be out of the great knot of our material activities. So long we are engaged in material activities, we are just acting one after another just like filmspool. We have seen film-one picture after another, one picture, one picture one... There are hundreds and thousand and millions of pictures. Similarly, for my past activities I am now in this picture. So my present activity is making another picture forward. Just like in my past activities I created this body. Similarly, by my present activity also I am creating my next body. So this transmigration of soul is going on. But if you adopt this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then karma-granthi-nibandhanaṁ chindanti. This knot, one after another, this will be cut off.



So if it is so nice... Bhāgavata says yad-anudhyāsinā. Simply by following this procedure, yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ, being engaged, karma-granthi-nibandhanam, the spool of the result of our activities one after another, chindanti, is cut off. Kovidāḥ, if an intelligent man is there, tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim. Why an intelligent man should not engage himself in hearing about the topics of Kṛṣṇa? Is there any difficulty? If by this simple process you can cut off the eternal... Not eternal. Without any tracing of history... When my, this spool of fruitive activities has begun, we do not know. The result is that I'm simply transmigrating from one body to another. If this is stopped now, now if I get in my next body my eternal life, eternal knowledge and eternal bliss, why I shall not accept this? Kovida. Any intelligent man, why he shall not accept this process?

Karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54]. There is a very nice verse in the Brahma-saṁhitā. It is said there that,

yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.54]



"I worship, I offer my respectful obeisances unto Govinda." Why? Because He cuts off my entanglement in these material activities. He cuts off. (thumping sound) What is this sound?



Devotee: Maybe next door.



Prabhupāda: Oh. So, and for others? Only the devotees entanglement of fruitive activities cut off, and what about the others? That is said, yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma.



Now there are living entities of different grades. There is one living entity, it is very small, microscopic bacteria. It's name is indra. Don't think that bacteria was unknown in the past. The bacteria's also were known. In the Vedic literatures they were known. So there is one... They have got different names. Not that simply they say "bacteria." So one bacteria is called indra-gopa. It is very small. It is to be seen by microscope. So Brahma-saṁhitā says that beginning from this indra, the indra-gopa bacteria, up to the Indra... Another Indra is, he is called the heavenly king. His name is also Indra. This bacteria is called indra-gopa, and the other Indra, who is king of the heaven, he is called Indra. So Brahma-saṁhitā says beginning from this Indra up to that Indra... Beginning from that bacteria up to the king of heaven, yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma, everyone is enjoying or suffering according to his own activities. Gopam aho sva-karma-bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti [Bs. 5.54]. Bandha, the same thing, nibandhanam. According to the knot of fruitive result, everyone is enjoying or suffering. Karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām. But one who is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and devotional service, his karma-nibandhana is cut off. Karmāṇi chindanti.

So this is the benefit of being Kṛṣṇa conscious, that whatever we are acting in our past life, and according to that we have got this body... Either impious or pious, whatever you have done, that's all right. Don't think that because we are doing some pious activities we shall be out of the bondage of fruitive activity. No. That is also not possible. I have several times explained that if we do pious activity, then the result will be that we shall be able to get our birth in a very nice family, aristocratic family, rich family, pious family, big family. These are the results. Janma. Or janma aiśvarya. Janma means high birth. A very rich man, born in a rich family or high family, that means automatically he becomes a rich man. Janmaiśvarya-śruta [SB 1.8.26], or somebody becomes very highly or great learned man, śruta. And śrī; śrī means beauty. Or one becomes very beautiful. So these things are obtained by righteous activities. And similarly by acting impious activities we become very ugly, we become fool, we are born in a very low family or animal family and we become very poor. These are the results of different activities.

Now why... One may say, "If I get next life in a very rich family and becomes very rich man and becomes very learned man, very beautiful man, why shall I not take this opportunity?" But intelligent man says that "Even if I get such opportunities, the material miseries are there." It is not that because a child is born of a very rich family, he hasn't got to go into the womb of his mother and suffer the consequence. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. The distress of birth, death, disease and old age equally there, either you become born in a very high family or either you born in a very low family, either you're born in India or you are born in America. This suffering, the four kinds of sufferings are everywhere. Not only India and America, they are in this planet, but even if you go to the moon planet or if you go to the sun planet. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ. Even the highest planet. The modern scientist says that if we want to go to the highest planet it will take forty thousands of years. No. Four hundred thousands of years. Something like that they say. By sputnik.

So anywhere you go... Lord Kṛṣṇa says ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. That repetition of birth and death, that will continue. Therefore intelligent person, those who are intelligent, they will take it up: "Oh, why shall I continue this birth and death process? Why not have my eternal life?" If I am, by constitution, if I am eternal, if I am constitutionally blissful and if I am eternally full of knowledge, now I am covered by this material nature, why not take up this process so that this karma-bandhana, this continuous birth and death of transmigration of myself from one place to another, that should be stopped? The Bhāgavata says therefore that yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ karma-granthi-nibandhanam. If one can surpass this chain of birth and death, why an intelligent man should not take up this process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness?

What is that Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Just we are demonstrating. We are hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we are hearing Bhagavad-gītā and chanting, hearing and chanting. Then we are thinking of. Unless you think of... Because whatever we hear and chant, naturally we have to think of. And pūjyaś ca, and offering a little flower and a little fruit and offer our respect to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. He is here. So is there any difficulty? So Bhāgavata says, "Who will not take up this process? Forget what you are. Take this process and you will be relieved of repeated birth and death." Karma-granthi-nibandhanam. Chindanti kovidās tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim. Who is such a fool who will not do this? Or which intelligent man will not do this? It is very nicely put. Which intelligent man will not do this? Rather, who is such a fool who will not do this.

So,

śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya

vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ

syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ

puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt

[SB 1.2.16]



Now this mentality, to have some attraction to hear about Vāsudeva... Vāsudeva-kathā means Kṛṣṇa, to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has many activities. In the world there are many scriptures-undoubtedly they accept God. But there is no information of God's activities. That is the difference between Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures. In Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa is speaking about Himself personally, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also speaking about Kṛṣṇa spoken by Vyāsadeva. Practically the subject matter is the same. In the Bhagavad-gītā the Supreme Personality of Godhead speaking Himself, and in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the compiler, the author, Vyāsadeva, he is speaking of Kṛṣṇa. So kṛṣṇa-kathā. This is full of kṛṣṇa-kathā. These two important Vedic literature is full of kṛṣṇa-kathā. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu... We are worshiping Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is supposed to be... He is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. So He also advised everyone, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-kathā. Tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-kathā. He said that,



yāre dekha tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



He said that each and every one of you, whoever met Lord Caitanya, or whoever is in the chain of disciplic succession of Lord Caitanya, he's advised by the Lord that "You become a spiritual master." How? "Under My order. I give you order that you become a spiritual master." And, then... "I am a fool." "No. You are not fool. You have simply to say kṛṣṇa-kathā."



These two kṛṣṇa-kathā-you have nothing to manufacture. You haven't got to tax your brain by meditation, by speculation. Everything is there. You have simply to place, submit, "Here is kṛṣṇa-kathā. Here is Bhagavad-gītā and here is Bhāgavata. Just please hear." That is your business. You need not become a very learned speculator. Just like there are so many books simply full of speculation. You haven't got to do that. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is giving very simple formula. Yāre dekha tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa means instruction of Kṛṣṇa-instruction given by Kṛṣṇa or instructions spoken about Lord Kṛṣṇa. If you do this then you become a spiritual master.

So it is there. Simply we have to hear. Suppose if you are illiterate, you cannot read Bhagavad-gītā. Or... Of course, many of you, you do not know Sanskrit language, so you cannot read, but there are English translation. But you can hear. Bhagavān, the Lord, has given you the chance of hearing. You have got God-gifted ear. If you can attentively hear, you'll learn everything. Formerly, of course, people were very intelligent. Simply by hearing. They need not take any note or need not read any book, but simply by hearing. So śrotavyaḥ. Therefore in the Bhāgavata it is recommended first thing that you have to hear. Simply by hear. And if you think, you become a spiritual master and you distribute this knowledge.

śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya

vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ

syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ

puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt

[SB 1.2.16]



Now this mentality for hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā, how it is developed? That is also śuśrūṣoḥ. You must be very sincere, śuśrūṣoḥ. And you must be inquisitive to hear. Śuśrūṣoḥ. One who is very eager to hear, he can become, in future, the spiritual master. Śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya, with faith. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. Ruci means taste and vāsudeva-kathā means Kṛṣṇa, the topics of Kṛṣṇa.



I am speaking of you of my personal experience how this eagerness of hearing is a very important thing. When I first met my spiritual master in 1933... Not... I met him first in 1922. Then for several years I was out of Calcutta and I could not meet him. Again next meeting was in 1933. So at that time I was simply inquiring from other disciples of my spiritual master. At that time I was not spiritual master, I mean to say, disciple. "So when His Holiness will speak?" So this information was noted by my spiritual master, and he was pleased to accept me immediately, that "This boy is very nice. He's very inquisitive to hear. He does not go away."

So this is a very good qualification. One who becomes inquisitive to hear, so śuśrūṣoḥ. Śuśrūṣoḥ means one who is very inquisitive to hear; at the same time, to render service. These two qualifications. Śuśrūṣoḥ. Śraddadhānasya [SB 1.2.16], with faith. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. For him the taste for hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā is very easy. And syān mahat-sevayā. And this is also can be possible if we are fortunate enough to come in contact of a great soul, mahat-sevā. Mahat means great. And if we serve him, if we want to please him, mahat-sevayā viprāḥ: "My dear brāhmaṇas," he was addressing, puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt. And puṇya-tīrtha. There are many sacred places. They are called puṇya-tīrtha. There are two kinds of sacred places. Just like if you go to a place... Just like in Vṛndāvana or Kankhara(?). In India there are... In the Christian also you have got your sacred place. The Muhammadans they have got their sacred place, Medina, Mecca. You have got your Jerusalem. Similarly, these, those who are followers of Vedic principles, they have got their several places, sacred places. One... Some of you who have visited India might have seen Hardwar, Kankhar(?), Lakshmanjhula, Prayāga, Vṛndāvana, and Rāmeśvaram. There are many places.

So by serving these sacred places... To serve these sacred places means to... There are many good souls, great souls. So if you can find out such great souls, they are making their performances there. So if you find out some good, I mean to say, transcendentalist, and if you hear from him, then your process of life may be changed. So puṇya-tīrtha-niṣe... Or sometimes such persons, they travel all over the world also. So if you come in contact with such person and if you hear, then the vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ is developed. Then your tendency for hearing about Kṛṣṇa and Vāsudeva will develop. This is the true thing, that you must be very much eager. And when you are eager, Kṛṣṇa will send you. Kṛṣṇa is within you. As soon as He understands that "Here is a person who actually wants transcendental elevation," He makes you contact with such person. Such persons are all over. They are in the world. It is not rare. Of course, in this age it is very rare. But if we are sincere, if we are eager...

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that Kṛṣṇa, or the Supersoul is situated within your heart. He's not very away long, long distant. He's just within yourself, sitting within you. You are also sitting in the heart and the Supreme Lord also as Supersoul, He is sitting there. You are sitting there two, just like friends. That is stated in the Upaniṣad, that two friends, two birds, sitting on the same tree. So this body is the tree, and you are sitting. So as soon as we are sincere, we are eager to develop our spiritual consciousness, He gives us opportunity. Buddhi-yogam. That is buddhi-yoga. Intelligence He gives. What for? Yena mām upayānti te: by which one can attain perfection in understanding the Supreme Lord. This is given by Him. So we have to become serious and very eager. Unless you become eager... God wants to see you, that how much you are eager. So with the development of our eagerness and sincerity to have our knowledge in spiritual understanding, God will help us.



So śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ syān mahat-sevayā. Mahat-sevā means if you, by chance, you get in contact of a great personality, great soul who knows Kṛṣṇa science, you just try to please him. Therefore we, every day in the morning, we sing yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. By pleasing such great soul, the spiritual master, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ, to please him means to please God. Because he is representative of God. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi **. If we cannot please such representative, bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa, then there is no hope. There is no hope of our spiritual advancement. Therefore the first duty in the morning is that dhyāyan stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyam. We have to remember about his glories and we have to offer our respectful obeisances unto him three times at least in a day, or tri-sandhyam. Tri-sandhyam means... In the morning, when the night is being passed, day is beginning, that is first sandhyam, junction. And then when the sun is on the meridian, that is also another junction, and when the day is passing and night is beginning, that is another junction.

So it is the duty of the student to offer respect to the bona fide spiritual master three times respect. So serve, mahat-sevā, because that will, I mean to say, help me in making advance in spiritual knowledge. Syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt. And also by visiting sacred places. So it is not always possible to visit sacred places. It may be very distant place. But when you get chance of a bona fide spiritual master, a great soul, if you try to please him, to satisfy him, that will make you eligible to have taste for kṛṣṇa-kathā, on the topics of Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. Any question?

Devotee: Swamiji?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Devotee: Should one offer his respects to his spiritual master wherever he is at the first time,(?) or should he go to where the spiritual master is to offer his respects?



Prabhupāda: What do you say? I do not follow. What is that?



Devotee: Should a disciple go to his spiritual master directly to offer the respects at least three times, or offer them where he is?



Prabhupāda: Well, if it is possible to go to him directly, that should be taken chance. But if he's not, it is not possible, then his picture or his idea should be offered respect. Yes. But if he's directly available, one should avail of that. Any other question? All right. Let us have kīrtana. You are following the same verse from the book? Yes. (end)





720818SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.15

-

Los Angeles, August 18, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



yad anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ

karma-granthi-nibandhanam

chindanti kovidās tasya

ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim

[SB 1.2.15]



Prabhupāda: In London, they used to put a blackboard and write the verse so everyone could see and chant. You may arrange like that. In big letters, so that they will hear the sound and see. It is practical. All right, word meaning.



Pradyumna: (reads synonyms) Translation: "With sword in hand, intelligent men cut through the labyrinthine knots of reactionary work, or karma, by remembering the Lord. Therefore, who will not pay attention to His message?"



Prabhupāda: So knot. We have experience... (microphone adjusted) Do it nicely. Karma-granthi. Granthi means knot. So... Just like a man, if it is tied very strongly with ropes, hand and legs, he cannot move independently, similarly, we are tied up by the laws of material nature. Material nature. Just like we, when we become criminal, we become... We are always bound up by the laws of the state; either criminal or civil, it doesn't matter. But criminal is more strong. When we are under criminal laws, then it becomes very painful. We cannot violate the state laws, either criminal or civil; it doesn't matter. But if we violate the civil law, there is no such strong punishment, but if we violate the criminal laws, then it is very strong.



Similarly, we living entities, those who are conditioned by this body... This body itself is a punishment. That, these rascal people, they do not know. They are trying to enjoy this body. The body, there are senses... So they are satisfied... The same thing. Just like hog. He has forgotten that he has got a body of hog so that he is bound to eat stool and live in a filthy place, but because he has got the facility of sense gratification with other female hogs-never mind whether sister, mother or daughter-he is happy. This hog's life. The hog is satisfied. It doesn't matter. We are seeing that what is the abominable condition, in a filthy place, he is eating stool. We are conscious that what is the condition of his life, but he is very happy. "Oh," you see, "what a very nice, happy, very life. I am eating very nicely the first-class food and having sex without any restriction. This is life."

So this is called māyā. Prakṣepātmikā-śakti, covering. Āvaraṇātmikā-śakti, prakṣepātmikā-śakti. There are two kinds of energy of material, māyā. One is āvaraṇātmi..., ignorance. One is living very condemned life; still, he's thinking, "I am very happy." Or "We are all right." So that is called āvaraṇātmikā, covered. Real knowledge is covered. And another śakti is prakṣepātmikā. Prakṣepātmikā means if anyone tries to get out of this... Suppose our students are coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, somebody is coming to us, māyā will dictate, "Oh, why you are coming here? There are so many restrictions and so rules and regulations. Better give it up." "Why, yes, what is this nonsense? Give it up." This is called prakṣepātmikā. Māyā is dragging. Because the more one is sinful, the more one is miscreant, the more one is the lowest of the mankind, he, māyā will not allow: "Oh, why this rascal is here? He must suffer under me for more..., sometimes more; then he may be allowed." That is māyā's business. Thankless business. Just like police. Police is nobody's enemy, but when criminal, they punish like that, put him in the jail and beats him with a rod. That is the business of māyā, thankless. Nobody will thank police. When police beats, nobody will, "Thank you very much." No. Nobody is happy. Similarly, māyā's business is very thankless task, but she is engaged by the supreme authority to punish.

So, so long one is not conscious that "What is the position of my life? What I am doing?" that is called knot, tied up very tightly. So here is the medicine. What is that? Yad anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ. Just like if there is very hard knot, you take a sharp knife and you can cut it, then the knot will open, immediately. Similarly, this knot, this materialistic way of life, is very strong. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. And this knot is, the beginning of the knot is sex life. Beginning of this knot. We are tied up by this sex life. The lowest is the hog. There is also the sex life.

So knot begins... Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. The world, we are bound up within this material law of nature-why? Because we have got strong desire for sex. Not only also human society, in animal society also. The central point is sex. Yan maithunādi... These people are working so hard because they have got the aim, "I will enjoy sex life." Just like in your country, the hippies. They have given up everything, but sex is there. They cannot give it up. They have renounced everything, their father's property, their happy life, everything, but the sex is there. They cannot leave it. That is the central point of knot. "Where you shall go, sir? Here is your knot."

Therefore, this knot is very difficult to cut, but here is suggested, "If you take this sword..." What is that sword? Yad anudhyāsinā. Always chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Take this sword. This sword is only remedy. Yad anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ. If you take this sword, then karma-granthi-nibandhanam, this hard knot of karma... Karma means fruitive activities. I am doing something now, so I am creating another body. If I am acting like a dog, then I am creating another body, dog's body, hog's body, tree's body, or even demigod's body. If you act piously, then you create demigod's body. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. But that is also knot; that is not freedom. Just like you are American boys and girls. You are supposed to be born of rich nation, rich father, than us Indians. We are born of poor father. So... But that does not mean that you are free from this knot. That is there. To become...

People are trying that "We shall be happy by becoming materially advanced." That is called durāśā. That is hope against hope. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know that destination of life is to attain Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No. They do not know. They think, "By increasing motorcars, we shall be happy." This is called māyā. That will not help. This motorcar civilization will be finished within another hundred years. It has begun, say, for the last hundred years, and after a hundred years, when... The scientists say the petroleum will be finished within fifty years or like that, so, say hundred years, this motorcar will be finished. So anything we manufacture, the so-called empire, so-called material civilization; it is finished, it will be finished. That is another knot only, that we become captivated. So "What is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement? We must have three dozen motorcar and three dozen wine bottles and this..." This is their civilization.

So this is karma-bandhana. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings therefore,

sat-saṅga chāḍi' kainu asate vilāsa

te-kāraṇe lāgila ye karma-bandha-phāṅsa



This knot, karma-bandha-phāṅsa. Sat-saṅga, this is sat-saṅga. This is sat-saṅga. You are hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the front of Kṛṣṇa and practicing how to become pure. This is called sat-saṅga. And asat-saṅga means this intoxication, illicit sex and drinking, so many things, asat-saṅga. The advertisement, "Come on, here is cigarette, 'Kool,' make your brain cool." (laughter) "By smoking." (laughter) Rascal. They think that "I am smoking..." How it can be cool? But they purchase Kool. This is called māyā. He's smoking fire, and he's becoming cool. (laughter) And the advertisement is going on, and the rascals are captivated by these advertisement, and they smoke, become cool. Yes.



So this is called knot. In so many ways, they are tied up. So actually, if anyone is kovida... Kovida. Here it is used. What is the meaning of kovida? "Intelligent." Kovida means intelligent. So intelligent persons should see to it. Just like it is a little, little intelligent. Just like we can see when the advertisement, we can immediately understand, "What is this nonsense advertisement? He's smoking, and it is cool?" So contradiction. You'll find contradiction everywhere. Because they are not intelligent, they are thinking intelligent. But anyone who is intelligent, they can understand what is the trick.

So when actually one becomes intelligent, then the enquiry is: "Why? Why I am put into this miserable condition of life? I do not want this, and it is forced upon me. I do not want to die; death is there. I do not want disease; the disease is there. I do not want this; it is forced upon me. I don't want war, but they, the draft board drags me to the war. Why these are?" This "why" question must be there. That is intelligence. That is Kenopaniṣad, Kena. There is Upaniṣad, Kena. And Sanātana Gosvāmī, when he approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he also inquired this "Why?" Ke āmi, kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. "Who am I? Why I am put into this miserable condition of life?" That is intelligence. He was minister. He could understand that "I am minister. People adore me as very learned man." He said that to Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Grāmya-vyavahāre paṇḍita, tāi satya māni. "My dear Lord, these common people, my neighbors, because I am minister, and I'm supposed to be educated, I know little Sanskrit, I know little Arabian language, they call me paṇḍita, learned man, very scholar and versed. I, to tell You frankly, I do not know what I am. So what is the value of my education? I do not know." Ke āmi, kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. "What I am."

So this is called intelligence. And cats and dogs, they are suffering; they don't mind. "Oh, I..." They forget. You have got experience. A cat is coming to eat some milk here; you chastise, you... But again it comes, again it comes. Because it is animal. And the difference between animal and man is... Suppose there is very palatable dish. So man, unless he is offered, although he is greedy, although he is hankering after that food, but he's awaiting the invitation, "Yes, you can take." But cats and dogs, without invitation, catches. That is the difference between the man and animal. Animal cannot control; man can control. Although he is hungry, he can control, out of civility: "How can I taste without invitation?" So that is the difference. Therefore, the conclusion is, man's life is meant for control. Not like animal: "I want to eat, immediately catch it." A cat and dog or a cow or a bull-rape. As soon as there is a female, immediately rapes. So there is no punishment. But if you do that on the street, raping, immediately you will be criminal. So that is the difference. The inclination is there, both in the animal and both and in the human being. But a human being supposed to be controlled. That is human life. The more you control, you become perfect. And though, the more you become loose, you are animal. That is the difference.

So they do not know. They want freedom. In the freedom, in the name of freedom, they are becoming animals. That's all. This is the civilization. But here it is said, kovida, intelligent. Intelligent man should take up this sword to cut the knot of our attachment for this material enjoyment. What is that? Anudhyāsinā. Anu means always. Another anu means following. Anu means always, and anu means following. Following means spiritual master or ācārya. Ācāryopāsanam. "How ācārya, how spiritual master dealing, let me follow that." Or, anu, as soon as he becomes accustomed, then anu, anukṣaṇa, always chanting. Anudhyāsinā. Asinā, asinā means by sword. Anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ, karma-bandha-nibandhana. We have to cut up this knot of karma-bandhana. By the karma-bandhana, we are transmigrating from one soul, one body to another. This is not Darwin's theory. I am the soul. I am changing, I am selecting my body, in this life. Not that by nature there is a, I mean to say, gradual evolution. Not evolution, it is already there. This living entity simply enters a particular type of body. Actually, it enters, because... Suppose I am doing something, my next life has to become a dog, that is my punishment. Then I'll have to enter into the womb of a dog mother, and she will give me the body of dog. Then I come out and enjoy like dog. This is the law. This is the law. Not that my body is turning.

So you can become dog; you can become god also. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. So you create your body at the present moment. You have got the facility, the human form of body. Now you can make your choice, whether you are going to be dog or whether you are going to be god. Both. Mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām. "Those who are devotees engaged in My devotional service, they come to Me." And when you go to God, you must have a body like God. Just like if you want to enter into the water, then you must have a body like a fish. Otherwise you cannot enter into the water. Similarly, when you enter the spiritual world, then you have a body like God. And if you don't want, if you want to enjoy unrestricted sense, then you take the body of a hog. So nature is open to everyone. You can select your own. Not that you are forced. You can have your... Therefore it is said, kovida, one must be intelligent to select "What is my next life? How I can get out of?" That is the whole instruction of the Vedas, how we can get out of these clutches of karma-bandhana, the knot of karma, one after another.

So the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, personally says that janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Simply one who understands what is God, or Kṛṣṇa, simply... Not that "Here is a God." No, he must... Tattvataḥ, he must know what is God. Just like the rascal is advertising: "No book. I am God. You accept me." Then how can I accept you God without book? But the people are so rascal, they're accepting,"Yes," and going after him. So they have become so cats and dogs that anyone says that "There is no need of understanding through book, through book of knowledge. I say. You accept me," the rascal will do that. Everything in the scientific world, there is book. In any science you take. Suppose in botany, they are mentioned, "This tree, this is the characteristic. A mango tree, the leaf is like this, the fruit is like this, the taste is like..." Chemical. Take any chemical. There is characteristics. Just like, what is called that, potassium cyanide. There is no taste, and the chemical characteristic, there is no mention of taste, because potassium cyanide is not yet tasted by anyone, because the tasting means immediate death. Potassium cyanide. So chemical, there is "The color is like this, the taste is like this, the reaction is like this."

So everything has got a test. But these rascals, without testing, accepting another rascal as God. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was asked that how to accept one God, He said, "Well, there is in the śāstra mention, the characteristic. According to the characteristic, if it is corroborating, then he is God." This rascal is saying, "No, there is no need of God. Ah, book. Simply I say; you accept it." The people are accepting. How foolish rascals they are. Just see. There must be a test. We are accepting Kṛṣṇa as God not blindly, but by testing. By testing. His character is mentioned in the books. Therefore, we accept God, not by blind faith, but by testing. Although we cannot test, but śāstra gives us the chance of testing. We accept spiritual master by testing, not by blind faith. No. According to the Vedic instruction, tad-vijñānārtham.

tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

[SB 11.3.21]



These are the qualifications, symptoms of guru. Śābde pare ca niṣṇātam. He has got full knowledge in the transcendental science, and without book, how he has got knowledge? Or without hearing from another authority?



So... So one must be intelligent. Then he can become free from this knot, hard knot of material life, by cutting it with the weapon, yad anudhyāsinā. And what is that? Chindanti ko... Chindanti: cuts; kovidāḥ, intelligent. Tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim. Kathā-ratim. One should be intelligent enough to understand or to hear kathā of Kṛṣṇa. Simply you have to do this. Just like you are all sitting here. It doesn't require that you have to pass M.A. examination, Ph.D. examination. God has given you the ear. Simply you sit down and hear from a realized person. The words are there, the message are there. Just like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, especially. Everything is there to understand about God. Simply you have to increase your attachment for hearing. That is, that qualification required. Not that first of all you pass M.A. examination, then you come here and you can understand. No. Simply by hearing, hearing, hearing, you will become expert. Kovida. Simply. That... This process has been approved by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You can remain in your position, but try to hear the transcendental message from realized soul. Then gradually you will be enlightened and you will be free from this knot, this material bondage.

Thank you very much. (end)



721026SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.15

-

Vṛndāvana, October 26, 1972



Prabhupāda:



yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ

karma-granthi-nibandhanam

chindanti kovidās tasya

ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim

[SB 1.2.15]



In the previous verse it is said,



tasmād ekena manasā

bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā

[SB 1.2.14]



These things we have discussed last morning, that we have to engage ourself fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by hearing... (aside:) Not like that. Don't sit like... Śrotavya, by hearing. In other words,



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



These are the devotional process. Hear. First of all, hearing. Hearing means the perfect knowledge, hearing from the authority. Because we are ignorant... Just like we go to the school, colleges, and hear from the teachers, from the professors, similarly, hearing means hearing from the authority, not from the rascals. That is hearing. Just like in the Vedas it is said, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. To hear the right news, the perfect knowledge, you must approach the bona fide spiritual master. Gurum eva abhigacchet. Must! It is not that "I can get knowledge at home. Why shall I go to guru? I do not find any guru."



These things are current very much. "It may be there is no guru." Not at all. You cannot say that. Just like there are imitation coin. You have met with some imitation coins. That does not mean there is no real coin. You are unfortunate. You met with imitation coins. So don't make that calculation that "There is no real coin, all imitation coin." That is nonsense. There is imitation coin, and there is real coin. It is up to you to find out which is the real and which is the imitation.

So Bhāgavata gives you direction that "If you are actually serious about finding out a guru..." Who requires a guru? Who requires? Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. One should surrender unto guru. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. One who is inquisitive to understand the transcendental knowledge... The ordinary man does not require to search out the guru to find out astrology: "Guruji, kindly tell me what will be the price next...?" Not that guru. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. One who is serious to understand about the transcendental knowledge. Uttamam. Udgata-tamam. Beyond this material world. This material world is tama, darkness. So if one is very serious to inquire about the world of light, for him there is need of guru, not for ordinary person. Guru, we should not make a guru as a fashion. Everyone makes a guru, "Let me have a guru also, any kind of..." No. That is not required. Guru is required by somebody who is serious to know about the transcendental world, the world of light. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. The world of jyoti. Na tad bhāsayate sūryo na candra [Bg. 15.6]. That world, where there is no need of sun, moon, electricity.

There is another world. That we get information from Bhagavad-gītā. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. There is another nature, which is sanātana, eternal. This world this material world, is not eternal. Just like we have got this body. This is not eternal. It is temporary. It has got some particular date of his birth and it has got some particular date of his annihilation. Similarly, this gigantic body, universe, it is created at a certain date and it will be annihilated at a certain date. This is material world. But there is another world. That information we get from Bhagavad-gītā and other Vedic literature. Spiritual world. This material world is only one-fourth of the whole creation. Ekāṁśena sthito jagat.

athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



This is only one part. The three-fourths part is the spiritual world. In this world the living entities, they are very small number. All these living entities, throughout the whole universe, fourteen worlds, they are only some limited. But in the spiritual world the number of living entities are unlimited. This information we have to hear. Therefore here it is said, śrotavya. One must hear. Śrotavya.



Therefore Vedic knowledge is called śruti. It has to be acquired by hearing. Śruti. Not by seeing, not by experimental knowledge. That is not possible. Because it is beyond, beyond our sense perception. Acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet. Don't try to understand by false argument, dry argument, which is beyond your conception, beyond your reach. Simply waste of time. Then how to know? Now, śrotavya. You have to hear. That is the only means. The example I have given several times. Just like if you want to know who is your father, it is to be this śrotavya. From where? From the authority, my mother. You cannot manufacture your knowledge who is your father. No. You cannot speculate. That is not pos ... Because it beyond your reach. The father was existing before your birth. So how you can understand father by experimental knowledge? That is not possible. You have to accept the statement of your mother. That's all. Finished. Similarly, Vedas-our mother of knowledge. Purāṇas-our sisters of knowledge. So we have to consult from the Vedas and from the right person. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12], from the guru. Not that you purchase one book, Vedas, from the market, and you become a Vedantist. No. That is not possible. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet. Must go to understand. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34].

These are the injunctions. Śrotavya. This is the process of śrotavya. Tad viddhi praṇipātena. You have to hear by surrendering. First of all you have to find out where you can surrender. Because everyone is big man. Why he shall surrender? So unless he finds out somebody who he can surrender to, then that is the beginning of transcendental knowledge. Śrotavya. So who can be a bigger personality than Kṛṣṇa? So hear from Kṛṣṇa, hear from Vyāsadeva, hear from Nārada, hear from their representative, Nārada's representative, Vyāsadeva; Vyāsadeva's representative, Madhva Muni. Similarly, in that paramparā system... Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayaḥ [Bg. 4.2]. So we have to catch up the paramparā, disciplic chain, bona fide spiritual master, and from him we have to hear. Śrotavya.

Now, in the next verse it is said that yad-anudhyāsinā. Dhyeya. Simply by thinking of Kṛṣṇa, hearing about Kṛṣṇa, speaking about Kṛṣṇa, meditating upon Kṛṣṇa, worshiping Kṛṣṇa, you become perfect. That is assured in the Bhagavad-gītā: man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very simple. We are teaching people that "Here is God, Kṛṣṇa. We can give you the name, address, form, and everything." Yes. Kṛṣṇa says, tad dhāma paramaṁ mama. He is giving His address. Yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]. "Where you go, you don't require to come back." Tad dhāma paramaṁ mama. So Kṛṣṇa is giving information about His abode. So simply you have to qualify yourself to go there. That's all. That qualification is simply man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. "Simply think of Me." And if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa, you become the greatest yogi.

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



He is the first-class yogi.



So we are teaching our people to become the first-class yogi. People are very much attached to the yoga system, mystic yoga system. But the goal of yoga system is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Yogeśvara. By practicing yoga, if you don't find Kṛṣṇa, then śrama eva hi kevalam [SB 1.2.8], then simply you have wasted your time for nothing. For nothing. Yes. That is the version. Ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim. Tapasya, austerity, means to understand Kṛṣṇa. So if we understand Kṛṣṇa, then there is no need of any more tapasya. Tapasya business is finished. But if you do not understand Kṛṣṇa, simply undergoing tapasya, it is simply waste of time.

ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

nārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim

[Nārada-pañcarātra]



So here it is the same thing. Yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ karma-granthi-nibandhanam. Nibandhanam. It is tightly interknotted, our karma-granthi. We had some types of activities in our past lives, and we have got this body. Everyone. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur deha upapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. The different types of body, 8,400,000 species of life, different types of body. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi, 900,000 species in the water. In this way, planets, creepers, serpents, insects, birds, beasts, then human form. This is the process of evolution. So each body is a concession by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is sitting in everyone's heart. You want to do something. Just like for doing something you must have particular type of instrument, similarly, the body means particular type of instrument. So you desire to do something, Kṛṣṇa gives you a particular type with the senses, and you act. This is the change of body. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa. Daiva-netreṇa, by superior examination it is settled up that "This man or this beast is dying..." Of course, for lower than animals, they have got natural process of evolution. But when you come to the human form of body, you have got responsibility. Now you can make your next life better than this or lower than this.



Just like one man is given the chance of become some minister or magistrate. If he does very nice, he is promoted; otherwise degraded. Similarly, this human form of life is meant for understanding God. That is the only business. If we don't understand what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa and our relationship with Him, then we are missing the point. Then we become entangled, entangled. This entanglement is karma-granthi-nibandhanam, by our karma. By different kind of karma, we are becoming entangled. So to unknot this, I mean to say, binding of entanglement, (it) is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, yajñārthe karma, "You work simply for Yajña, for satisfaction of Yajña." Yajña-pati, Viṣṇu, or God, or Kṛṣṇa. Yajñārthe karma, anyatra karma-bandhanaḥ. "If you do not act for Kṛṣṇa, do not act for Viṣṇu, for Yajña, then karma-bandhana." Yajñārthe karmaṇaḥ anyatra karma-bandhanaḥ.

So this is karma-bandhana. This karma-bandhana begins from our attachment to this material world. How our material attachment increases? That is also explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. Mithunī-bhāvam. There is sex impulse between man and woman. There are two classes of living entities, man and woman, or male or female. So the male is attracted by the female, and the female is attracted by the male. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam. But what is that attraction, central point? Sex life. So this mentality, this propensity, is there not only in human body, but in the animal body also, that same propensity, sex life. So... But everyone is searching after, "Where is a male? Where is a female?" And when they are united, the karma-granthi becomes tighter. That's all. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ [SB 5.5.8]. They are searching after, and as soon as they are united, they become tightly knot. Hṛdaya-granthi.

So this is called saṁsāra, this is called material existence. One life after another, one life after another, one life after another. This is called karma-granthi-nibandhanam. So if we want to unknot this tight fitting of our heart... Now, again it is said that as soon as the male-female is united, then further tightening begins. What is that? Ataḥ kṣetra. Ataḥ kṣetra, gṛha, āpta, vitta. In this way, first of all, we are united, husband and wife. Then we want a nice apartment or house, gṛha. Then, to maintain the house, we require a field, field of activity. Generally, formerly, they were agricultural. So you must have income. Ataḥ gṛha-kṣetra-suta. Then children, then āpta, friends. Ataḥ gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ then again, money. In this way, our attachment increasing. Janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. In this way, our illusory position, moha, increases, one after another, one after another. This is called karma-granthi-nibandhanam. Karma-granthi-nibandhanam.

Therefore the Vedic civilization is to educate from the very beginning a child to become a brahmacārī. That is the basic principle of education. Prahlāda Mahārāja said, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha [SB 7.6.1]. Not that "In old age, when I shall retire, I shall see what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That will be very difficult. From the very beginning of life, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān... Especially... There are many kinds of religious principles, but dharmān bhāgavatān. Prahlāda Mahārāja says, "Real dharma is Bhāgavatam," means our understanding our relationship with God, Bhagavān. That is real dharma. Dharmān bhāgavatān. So here the same thing is explained, that yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ. Simply by chanting or hearing or meditating upon Kṛṣṇa, yad-anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ karma-granthi-nibandhanam. This asinā... Just like we require a knife to cut the knot, similarly, if we want to cut the knot of this material existence...

Unfortunately, people do not understand that what is the wrong in the material existence. They haven't got even the simple knowledge. They think it is all right. They are ignorant so much ignorant that dehātma-buddhi, they consider... The bodily concept of life: the body is finished and everything is finished. This is the philosophy going on, all over the world. Big, big professors, philosophers, scientists, they are on this platform of thinking. I met one big professor in Moscow. He is Professor Kotovsky. He said, "Swamiji, after finishing this body, everything is finished." Just see. He is a professor. He has no knowledge that there is life after death. So world is going like that. They do not know what is karma-granthi, what is transmigration, nothing. Simply superficial. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. Blind men, they are leading other blind men. Therefore they are kept in ignorance, and the world is suffering therefore. They do not know what is the goal of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. They are trying to adjust things by illusory energy. That's all. Therefore, andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. It is exactly like the, a blind man is trying to lead other blind men. This is going on.

Therefore this is the process, yad-anudhyāsinā, you have to take one knife. This is knife. What is that? Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. This is knife. If you want to get rid of this entanglement of material existence, one body after another, then this is the only instrument by which you can unknot the knot and come out of the entanglement. Chindanti. This very word is used, chindanti: "It cuts." Chindanti kovidās tasya. Kovida means very intelligent person. Unless one is very intelligent, he cannot take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is not our manufactured words. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. So our test is if anyone is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is either of these: duṣkṛtinaḥ, mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ, māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. This is our conclusion. You may say it is very sectarian, but Kṛṣṇa says. What can I do? (laughter) Kṛṣṇa says.

So therefore, as soon as we find out a person, he has no knowledge of Kṛṣṇa, we put him either of these categories: mūḍhāḥ, duṣkṛtinaḥ, narādhamāḥ, māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. These are their qualifications. Therefore it is said here, chindanti kovidāḥ, he is neither of these rascals: miscreants, mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ, and māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. Kovida, very intelligent. Kovidās tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim. Anyone who has understand that simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, talking about Kṛṣṇa, working for Kṛṣṇa, one can become released from this entanglement, who will not accept it? For example, just see in the Western countries; all the younger generation, they are so much addicted to intoxication. And the government is spending millions of dollars, how to stop it. But they have become animals. But just see how wonderful is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Anyone who is coming to us, immediately, by our restriction... Because as soon as he is initiated, he is made to promise no illicit sex, no meat-eating, no intoxication, no gambling. From that very date he gives up everything. And here are so many samples attending.(?)

So chindanti karma-granthi-nibandhanam. Immediately. It is not story. It is practical. Karma-granthi-nibandhanaṁ kovidās tasya chindanti. They are trying so much. That, we have got very practical experience, that even one cannot give up drinking tea. It is very difficult. Nobody can give up drinking tea. Nobody can give up smoking. And what to speak of meat-eating and gambling and illicit sex. But Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice that even children, boys, young boys and girls, they give up very easily, simply coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So this is a fact: chindanti kovidās tasya, simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, simply chanting about Kṛṣṇa... There is no other medicine. There is no other magic or mystic power. So they are giving up. If we take sincerely Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all these things, entanglements, will immediately be vanquished. That's a fact. Kovidās tasya. Chindanti kovidās tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim.

So this is the easiest process. If one is very, very intelligent, then he takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, and his life becomes successful, he becomes free from so many addictions... This is the result of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. Simply by becoming a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, all the good qualities of the demigods... Demigods... Just like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Nārada. There are many, many demigods. They are good qualified. Otherwise, how they are posted in such exalted position? They are very qualified. So simply by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, all the good qualities of the demigods, or all godly qualities, will manifest. There is no doubt about it. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra... [SB 11.2.42]. They will be reluctant. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. They will find something so nice that they will give up all this nonsense. This is the process. Unless you give something better, how one can give up his bad habits?

Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He delivered Jagāi-Mādhāi. They were all this: addicted to illicit sex, meat-eating, drinking and intoxication, gambling. That was their business. So Nityānanda Prabhu went to deliver them, that "First of all, these rascals should be delivered." Therefore He went there. They were very angry. They hurt Him by throwing one stone on His forehead, and blood came out. Still, Nityānanda Prabhu said, "All right, I don't mind. Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." This is preaching, Nityānanda. But when Lord Caitanya heard it, He became very angry. He wanted to kill them immediately. So Nityānanda Prabhu requested that "In this incarnation You have promised not to accept any weapons. Please become," I mean to say, "kind upon them." This is the person... This is the business of guru. Guru introduces with God and prays to God, "Please excuse him." This is guru's business. And by the request of guru, God agrees to excuse him. This is the process.

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu simply asked them that "I can accept you simply if you agree not to commit any more sinful activities." This is the condition. Not that you go on with your sinful activities and go on chanting also. This is called nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. There are many persons, they think, "Oh, we are expert in chanting. So in the morning let us commit all kinds of sinful activities, and in the evening I shall chant. It will be counteracted." Not that kind of chanting required. That is offense, greatest offense. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. One must give up for good all the propensities for sinful activities. Then take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and it will act. Otherwise, if you go on keeping both the lines, that "Whole day I shall commit all sinful activities, and at night I shall chant..." Just like in Christian church, there is a system, confession at the end of the week. They go to the church and they confess before the priest, "I have done so many sinful activities." So pray something and he says, "All right, excused." Again, from Monday, he begins sinful activities. Yes. Not like that. Once you stop sinful activities, you cannot commit again. Then Kṛṣṇa will save you. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa is not so fool that you simply once surrender to Him and then commit sinful activities and again surrender to Him. No. That will not be allowed. Kṛṣṇa can excuse you once or twice, but if you commit... [break] ...offense, then it will act and people will be benefited. Chindanti kovidās tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim.

So kathā-rati, attraction for kṛṣṇa-kathā. Simply let us hear, let us chant, let us think of Kṛṣṇa. That will make us very much rapidly progressive on the spiritual path.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. [break] Five rasas are primary and seven rasas are secondary. This... (end)



720819SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.16

-

Los Angeles, August 19, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya

vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ

syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ

puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt

[SB 1.2.16]



Translation: "O twice-born sages, by serving those devotees who are completely freed from all vice, great service is done. By such service, one gains affinity for hearing the messages of Vāsudeva."



Prabhupāda: Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ [SB 5.5.2]. In another place it is said, mahat-sevā, rendering service to the pure devotee, mahat. Mahat means who is great soul. Who is great soul? Great soul means who is twenty-four hours engaged in the service of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gītā, the description of mahat, mahātmā, is given there:



mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

[Bg. 9.13]



This is the mahātmā. They are under the daivī-prakṛti. Daivī-prakṛti. There are two kinds of prakṛtis. We have studied in Bhagavad-gītā: aparā-prakṛti, parā-prakṛti. So parā-prakṛti, or nature, transcendental nature, that is called daivī-prakṛti. Just like we are trying to be under the guidance of Rādhārāṇī, daivī-prakṛti. Prakṛti means woman, and daivī, transcendental woman. And those who are materialists, they are under the mahā-māyā, material energy, Goddess Kālī, Durgā. They are the symbolic representation of material energy.



So those who are materialists, they take shelter of the material energy, and those who are transcendentalists, they take shelter of the transcendental nature. So those who are mahātmā, they take shelter of the transcendental prakṛti. So we have to render service to such person who is under the protection of the transcendental nature. That is called mahātmā. A mahātmā, this word you have heard. A mahātmā's description is mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ [Bg. 9.13]. Mahātmā has nothing to do with this material world; he is simply under the care of the transcendental prakṛti.

So śuśrūṣoḥ, śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya [SB 1.2.16]. Those who are engaged in hearing with faith, śraddadhāna... Ādau śraddhā. Without faith, you cannot make any progress. This is the beginning of spiritual life. Ādau śraddhā. "Oh, here is..., Kṛṣṇa consciousness is going on. It is very nice. They are preaching nice." People still, they are praising our activities. If we keep our standard, then they will appreciate. So this is called śraddhā. This appreciation is called śraddhā, śraddadhānasya. Even he does not join, if one says, "Oh, it is very nice, it is very... These people are good." Sometimes they, in papers they say that "These Hare Kṛṣṇa people are nice. We want more of them." They say. So this appreciation is also an, also a lift for such person. If he doesn't hear, doesn't come, simply one says "It is very nice. Yes." Just like small children, a baby, he's also appreciating, trying to stand up with his cymbal. Appreciating. From the very beginning of life, appreciating, "It is nice." He knows or does not know, it doesn't matter. Simply appreciation is giving him a touch of spiritual life. It is so nice. Śraddhā. If they do not go against, simply appreciate, "Oh, they are doing nice..." So development of spiritual life means development of this appreciation, that's all. But degrees, there are appreciation.

So śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. In the previous verse, it has been explained, yad anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ. One has to be engaged always thinking. This is the sword. You have to take this sword of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then you become free. The knot is cut by this sword. So... Now how we can get this sword? That process is described here that you simply, with faith, you try to hear. You'll get the sword. That's all. Actually, our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is spreading. We are getting the sword one after another, simply by hearing. I started this movement in New York. You all know. I had no actually any sword. Just like in some religious principles, they take the religious scriptures in one hand and another hand, sword: "You accept this scripture; otherwise, I'll cut your head." This is also another preaching. But I had also sword, but not that kind of sword. This sword-to give chance people to hear. That's all.

Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. So as soon as he gets a ruci... Ruci. Ruci means taste. "Ah, here is Kṛṣṇa talks, very nice. Let me hear." This very much you get the sword, immediately. The sword is in your hand. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. But the ruci comes to whom? This taste? Because, as I have several times explained, the taste, just like the sugar candy. Everyone knows it is very sweet, but if you give to a man who is suffering from jaundice, he'll taste it's bitter. Everyone knows sugar candy is sweet, but the particular man who is suffering from disease, jaundice, he will taste the sugar candy as very bitter. Everyone knows it. That's a fact.

So ruci, the taste for hearing vāsudeva-kathā, kṛṣṇa-kathā, this materially diseased person cannot taste. This ruci, taste. To get this taste there are preliminary activities. What is that? First thing is that appreciation: "Oh, it is very nice." Ādau śraddhā, śraddadhāna. So śraddhā, the appreciation, this is the beginning. Then sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. Then mixing: "All right, these people are chanting and talking of Kṛṣṇa. Let me go and sit down and let me hear more." This is called sādhu-saṅga. Those who are devotees, to associate with them. This is the second stage. The third stage is bhajana-kriyā. When one is associating nicely, then he will feel, "Why not become a disciple?" So we receive application, "Prabhupāda, if you'll kindly accept me as your disciple." This is the beginning of bhajana-kriyā. Bhajana-kriyā means to be engaged in the service of the Lord. This is the third stage. Then anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt.

As soon as one is actually doing bhajana-kriyā... Bhajana-kriyā means chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and observe the regulative principles. To observe the regulative principles means anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Anartha means all rascal habits are immediately vanquished. Just like we say "No illicit sex." So this is only a rascal habit, illicit. "You can marry a boy or girl. If you like, you can have sex." No. They'll not agree. They will agree to that rascal habit, illicit sex. "You want sex? All right. Take a wife, take a husband." But no, they want illicit, without marriage. Married wife left aside, another illicit. This is anartha, rascaldom.

According to Vedic civilization, because man is very aggressive, so he's allowed to accept more than one wife. He's allowed. Generally, female population is greater than the male population. So the Vedic principle is that every girl must be married by the guardian, father. A father's duty is, as soon as girl is thirteen years old, fourteen years old, it is the duty of the father, or in the absence of father, it is the duty of elder brother to get her married. Some way or other, find out any husband. Yes. So if every girl has to be married, and if the female population is greater, then where to get so many husbands? Therefore it is very nice system that one man can marry more than one wife. That is natural.

So in Vedic system a husband can marry... Why others? Kṛṣṇa, He married 16,000 wives. But not like us. He was present in the house of 16,000 wives by 16,000 forms. Every, each and every wife had palatial building, establishment. Each wife had ten sons. Not that because He has married 16,000, He cannot meet all of them. No. So that is Kṛṣṇa; He is God. But even common man... Just like Kṛṣṇa's father, he had also sixteen wives. Kṛṣṇa is one wife's son. Vasudeva... Subhadrā is another wife's daughter. Balarāma is another wife's son. So in order to stop this rascaldom, that a human, I mean to say, man, he's allowed: "Marry them. Keep them nicely. Give them apartment. Give them nice food, nice dress, nice ornament. You enjoy." But rascaldom means "No, without responsibility I shall make phish, phish, phish" that's all.

So this rascaldom, so long the rascaldom is not gone, illicit sex, intoxication... These are called anartha. Anartha. Unnecessarily they have created this atmosphere, illicit sex, intoxication. What is the use of intoxication? There is no need. Just like in our society there is no intoxication. We don't take tea, we don't smoke. Are we dying for that want of tea or smoke? No. Therefore it is anartha; it is unnecessary. So first stage is appreciation, śraddhā. Second stage is associating with the devotees. Third stage is to be engaged in devotional service. And if one is actually executing the rules and regulations of devotional service, naturally he'll be freed from this rascaldom. Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Then next stage is niṣṭhā, faith. That faith, beginning faith, becomes strong, fixed up. Then ruci this ruci, taste. Just like immediately, the person suffering from jaundice cannot taste sugar candy as sweet, but the sugar candy is the only medicine for him. He is to be given sugar candy, and in this way, as the disease is cured, he comes to this taste stage, "Oh, it is nice, it is sweet." (aside:) Don't do that.

So, to come to the stage of taste, you have to first go through the so many... Not so... Five stages.

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā

tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

[Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]



This ruci. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. Śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya [SB 1.2.16]. So if you continually hear with faith and appreciation, then you will come to the stage of tasting, "Yes." Taste means, if you like it, that is called taste. Not that by force one has to eat something. Unless he has got a taste for it... Just like if we are forced to eat meat, we cannot eat, because we have no taste for it. But another, as soon as you give a plate of meat, immediately, voracious eating. Yes. Because he has got the taste for it. So this taste is required. Then you get the sword, yad anudhyāsinā. If there is taste, then you can very nicely go on chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare,/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Because taste.



Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, he increased the taste. They were liberated souls. Therefore, he is writing that "If I could possess millions of tongue and trillions of ear, then I could nicely chant and hear." And so far we are concerned, because we have no taste, that sixteen rounds is also very difficult job. Because we have no taste. Why there is no taste? Because we are lacking in that previous processes. Bhajana-kriyā.

So one after another, to get that sword, it, they requires this qualification: ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Then there is taste. Now how this taste is created, that is also explained in the next line. Syān mahat-sevayā. Mahat-sevayā. Mahat means... I have already explained. A devotee, pure devotee, whose..., who has no other business than to serve Kṛṣṇa, he is called mahat. So one has to engage himself in the service of the pure devotee. As soon as we serve a pure devotee... As it is spoken by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. Yasya prasādāt. If you satisfy a pure devotee by your service, then, even there is some discrepancies, you get all these qualities. Syān mahat-sevayā rājan. Syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ. Viprāḥ. All the audience members hearing Sūta Gosvāmī, they were all brāhmaṇas. Otherwise, how they will have got taste? Brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava, they have taste. Not the śūdras. Because at the present moment there are śūdras, they are lacking taste. But our propaganda is, by some way or other, even they are śūdras, even they're demons, we are creating the taste. That is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Even there is..., there is no taste for vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ, still, our process is so nice that we create the taste. Nobody was interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but there are thousand now. How? Because we are trying or we have created the taste, by this process.

The process will be explained in the next verses very nicely, but the main principle is to hear. To hear and... That is also natural. If we are pure, then we shall be naturally inclined to hear. Just like child. He is not taught, he is not educated, he has no knowledge, but he is also trying to hear. He's trying to get up and join us. It is natural. Because in everyone's heart that kṛṣṇa-bhakti, or devotional service to Kṛṣṇa, is there. But it has been covered by material dirty things. So this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], to cleanse that dirty things. The more you chant, more you hear, then the dirty things on the heart will be cleansed. And plus, if you engage yourself to carry out the orders, to satisfy a pure devotee... Syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ, puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt... Puṇya, pious. These are pious activities. Tīrtha, tīrtha, a saintly person is called tīrtha. And niṣevaṇāt. In other places also, the same thing is... Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. Mahat-sevām, serving the pure devotee, is the path of liberation. Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. And if we become too much sexually inclined, then it is the path of darkness. Two paths are there. Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam. Not only to become personally very much sexually inclined, if you associate with a person who is sexually inclined, then you will fall down in the hell. Yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam.

So we should be very much careful about this. Married life sex is allowed. Nothing else. That is sinful. Kṛṣṇa says, dharmāviruddhaḥ kāmaḥ. Lust, lust which is sanctioned by religious principles... Sanctioned means... This is sanction: you can have sex life in married life, not otherwise. If you want, more wife. But not more husband. No, that is not allowed. More wife is allowed. A man can have more wives, but woman cannot have more husband. Of course, in special cases, that is another... But generally, this is the rule. This is Vedic civilization. So as far as possible, we shall try to avoid this illicit sex, because that is very detrimental for advancing in the path of spiritual life. Therefore our first principle is no illicit sex. Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam.

So things are difficult, at the same time very easy, provided we are determined that "In this life, I shall go back to home, back to Godhead." So these are the processes. So? Purport?

Pradyumna: "The conditioned life of a living being is caused



by his revolting against the Lord..."

Prabhupāda: That's all right, no time. Now chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





721027SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.16

-

Vṛndāvana, October 27, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya

vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ

syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ

puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt

[SB 1.2.16]



Translation: "O twice-born sages, by serving those devotees who are completely freed from all vice, great service is done. By such service, one gains affinity for hearing the messages of Vāsudeva."



Prabhupāda:



śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya

vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ

syān mahat-sevayā viprāḥ

puṇya-tīrtha-niṣevaṇāt

[SB 1.2.16]



So our purpose is, as described in the previous verses, how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Our present consciousness is absorbed in so many external subject matters. One is self-centered, bodily conscious; some of them are family-wise, family conscious. Some of them, community conscious, society conscious, nation conscious, or international conscious. Utmost. No more, finish their business. But still, you have to extend more and more. "International" means within this u..., within this planet. But what is this planet? It is only insignificant spot within the universe. So if you increase your consciousness more and more, then it may be interplanetary consciousness. But what is this interplanetary? This universe contains millions of planets. That's all right. But there are millions of universes also. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. Not only one universe. This universe which we are seeing, this is only one of them. Caitanya Mahāprabhu compared this universe... One devotee, he requested Caitanya Mahāprabhu, "My Lord, You have come. Please liberate all the people of this universe. And if they are sinful, so all their sins, I may take, but they may be delivered." This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. "Others may be delivered by the grace of the Lord. I may rot in the hell. That doesn't matter." Not that, "First of all I go to the heaven, and others will rot." This is not Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Vaiṣṇava philosophy is, "I may rot in hell, but others may be delivered." Patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ.



Vaiṣṇava is meant for all the fallen souls. Just like a very good example: Lord Jesus Christ. According to the Christian idea, he took all the sins of all people and he sacrificed his life. Very good example. Similarly, Haridāsa Ṭhākura also. There... Nityānanda Prabhu. The Vaiṣṇava is always eager how to deliver all these fallen souls rotting in the hell of māyā. Therefore it is recommended, syān mahat-sevayā. You have to take shelter of a mahat. Mahat means mahātmā or Vaiṣṇava. Sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. That mahātmā, simply by dressing like me with a saffron cloth, does not become a mahātmā. The mahātmā is described in the Bhagavad-gītā:

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



There are many mahātmās, but one who has understood Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the cause of all causes...



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



He's mahātmā. One who knows that Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the origin of everything... Kṛṣṇa also says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



Actually, one who knows things as they are, they understand, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19], "Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the root of everything." Here also it is stated that śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya vāsudeve, vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ [SB 1.2.16]. To know, to become inquisitive about Kṛṣṇa, to know about him, this is required. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



In Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said,

siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

[Ādi 2.117]



Siddhānta, to become a pure devotee, a staunch devotee of Kṛṣṇa, one has to learn about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is, therefore, coming personally to teach us what He is. That is required. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruci [SB 1.2.16]. Our life is meant for becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. Ruci. This ruci is very important thing. Ruci means... Just like we like to eat some favorable food. That is called ruci. Somebody is interested in eating some salty food, somebody's interested some sweet food, spicy food... Just like we have got taste for different types of food, similarly, when we shall increase our taste, propensity for Kṛṣṇa, that is the beginning of our perfection. Before that, we are in the material consciousness. When we increase the taste for Kṛṣṇa, for understanding Kṛṣṇa... This ruci comes when one is actually liberated. This ruci. Tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. First of all, śraddadhānasya. As it is stated here, śraddhā, faith. Kṛṣṇa is... Kṛṣṇa says that mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7], "There is no more superior authority than Me." Mattaḥ parataraṁ na anyat. Na, "Nobody else. I am the Supreme." So when we have faith in this explanation of Kṛṣṇa...



As Arjuna said... Arjuna, after hearing Bhagavad-gītā, he said, sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye yad vadasi keśava [Bg. 10.14], "My dear Kṛṣṇa, whatever You are saying, I accept them in toto, word for word." This is required. Not that I give up this portion, I give up that portion, whatever is to my purpose... Just like sometimes the politicians, scholars, they also try to understand Bhagavad-gītā. Because Bhagavad-gītā is very authoritative book, they want to exploit. They do not understand what is Bhagavad-gītā. Otherwise they would have preached Kṛṣṇa. Because what is Bhagavad-gītā? Bhagavad-gītā is Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, the supreme. That is to be taught. That is to be understood. That is Bhagavad-gītā. Not that keeping Bhagavad-gītā in front, a scapegoat, I become great politician and great scholar and give my own opinion: "In my opinion, it is like this." This is nonsense. What you are? Your opinion? We don't care, we don't care for all these nonsense who gives his own opinion as if Kṛṣṇa left something to be opined by another rascal. This is their business. He becomes greater than Kṛṣṇa, to interpret Kṛṣṇa's words. This is rascaldom. We don't accept.

We accept yad vadasi keśava, following the footsteps of Arjuna, who directly understood Bhagavad-gītā. He said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, whatever You say, I accept them as it is." Then others may say, "Well, Arjuna was Kṛṣṇa's friend. So just to flatter Him, he might have said like that." No. Arjuna gave immediately evidences that "I..., not only I accept You, but great personalities like Vyāsa, Nārada, Devala, Asita, and many others." Authorities. Just like when you speak something in the legal court, you give evidences from other judgement, authorities. That is a good case. Similarly, Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. "My dear Kṛṣṇa, I accept You. You are the Supreme Brahman." Brahmeti bhagavān, paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Brahmeti bhagavān, paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Therefore Bhagavān is paraṁ brahma. Simply impersonal Brahman-realization is not finishing the business. You have to go further, further, further. In the Īśopaniṣad, it is said, "My dear Lord, kindly wind up Your blazing effulgence so that I can see You actually." That is stated in the Īśopaniṣad.

So one should not be, I mean to say, amazed simply by realization of impersonal Brahman. There is further business. Brahmeti paramātmeti. Just like we are experiencing daily the sunshine. So if we become satisfied with the sunshine only-"Now we have come to the light"-that is not perfection. You go to the sun planet. Because from there, from the sun planet, the sunshine is coming out. So the source of sunshine is the sun planet. But unfortunately, it is very difficult to enter into the sun planet. And if you enter into the sun planet, you'll find there is a predominating deity whose name is Vivasvān, god, sun-god. These are the statements. As Bhagava..., Bhagavad-gītā says,

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



So formerly people used to go to the sun planet. It requires such yogic mystic power. Just like Durvāsā Muni. He used to travel all over the universe, and beyond the universe. He reached to the Vaikuṇṭha planets also by yogic power, and he returned within one year. So it is possible. You can go. The yogis, the perfect yogis, they can transfer them to any planet they desire. Any planet they desire. These are stated in the śāstras, in the Bhāgava..., Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, that is the highest perfection of life. Paraṁ Brahman. Paraṁ Brahman. Brahman, impersonal effulgence. Just like the sunshine. Then localized sun, the sun globe. Then further, if you able to enter the sun globe, you'll find there is a predominating deity. There are also cities and palaces-everything, just like this planet. But this planet is made prominently of earth, and that planet is one of the elements, material elements, earth, water, fire, air. So if this planet is made of earth, why not other planet made of fire? What is the scientific reason to deny it? Because I cannot live in the fire, it does not mean other living entities cannot live there. There are different kinds of living entities. Just like you cannot live within the water, within the ocean, but there are other living entities... Just like fish. They live very comfortably within the water. So why should we conclude that there is no life in the sun planet or moon planet? This is not perfect knowledge. From Vedic books we can understand that this moon planet is one of the heavenly planets and people live there. They are demigods. Their duration of life is very long. And one can go to that planet by performing the rituals. They are described. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said, yānti deva-vratā devān. If you are serious to go to the planets where demigods live, you can go. There are rules and regulations, rituals. Just like if you want to pass law examination, you prepare for that examination, and you pass, you become a lawyer. You become an engineer. Similarly, any planet you want to go, you prepare in this life. Don't degrade yourself to become again cats and dogs, but you prepare yourself to be promoted to the other, higher planetary system... As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. You can go there.

Kṛṣṇa says,

yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām

[Bg. 9.25]



So there is another planet... Not another planet, another nature, sanātana. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. There is another nature, eternal nature. That is called Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. Every dhāma, every place, is Kṛṣṇa's. He's the supreme proprietor. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. "I am the proprietor." But there are differentiation, paraṁ dhāma and aparaṁ dhāma. This is aparaṁ dhāma. This material world is aparaṁ dhāma, inferior nature. These are stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. Itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parām. There is another prakṛti, another nature. There is Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Not one, two, but millions, unlimited. And the topmost planet is called Goloka Vṛndāvana. That is mad-dhāma, Kṛṣṇa says, or tad-dhāma.



So all these informations are there. Simply we have to know. Unfortunately, because we are too much materially absorbed, we cannot understand. We cannot understand. Neither we are very much interested to know. So vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. There is no ruci because they are conditioned by the material nature, by the three modes of material nature: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa... Tamo-guṇa is the lowest, rajo-guṇa is the via media, and one who is the sattva-guṇa, he can understand. Therefore the whole Vedic civilization is meant for making people brāhmaṇa. Not to keep him in ignorance, not to keep him in the position of a śūdra. The whole Vedic scheme is that from the lowest grade of li..., existence, one can be elevated to the highest grade. Śudhyanti. Śudhyanti, purification. That is purification. In ordinary life also, there are purificatory methods, daśa-vidha-saṁskāra. That purificatory method begins before the birth, which is called garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. Not that a man, a high-caste brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya or even vaiśya... Especially brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya. Especially brāhmaṇa. He's not meant for giving birth to a child like cats and dogs. He has to observe the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. In the śāstra it is said in a brāhmaṇa family, if the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is not observed, he immediately falls down to the śūdra class.

Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. Because this garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is not observed, therefore it is to be taken, accepted, everyone is a śūdra. But the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to again elevate the śūdra to the standard of brāhmaṇa. This is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Because without brāhmaṇa... Just like without head, what is the value of your body? Brāhmaṇa means the head.

mukha-bāhūru-pādebhyaḥ

puruṣasyāśramaiḥ saha

catvāro jajñire varṇā

guṇair viprādayaḥ pṛthak



Brāhmaṇa means the head. Therefore brāhmaṇa is offered so much respect. Because head, without head, in the head, in the brain, you conceive something, and the hands and legs, they execute the order. Similarly, the head of the society, they should be the brāhmaṇas. They are not interested in capturing political power. No. Brāhmaṇa is to give instruction. We find from Vedic literature. There were committees, privy council committees of great sages and brāhmaṇas. They would give the king advice that "You rule in this way." And if the king is disobedient, sometimes the brāhmaṇas would dethrone them. Or kill them. That was the Vedic system. We find from the life and ruling of Mahārāja Pṛthu, how he was ruling over the world, how he was observing that every community, either brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya or vaiśya or śūdra, they were properly employed. There was no unemployment question. It was the duty of the king to see that not a single man is unemployed. He must be engaged. So they made arrangement like that.



So what is the idea? The idea is to elevate everyone gradually to the position of brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇava and thus make their life perfect. That is the scheme of Vedic civilization. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Not that "Keep the śūdras or the mlecchas in the downtrodden position, and let me advance." No. Everyone should cooperate. Why the śūdras or mlecchas and yavanas should remain as such? Actually, India's falldown is meant by that process. Nobody cared. So many Muslims, they converted, but the higher caste, they did not care. "Oh, they have become Muslims. Reject them." Why reject? Kṛṣṇa says,

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim

[Bg. 9.32]



Why these Muslims were neglected? Why they were not turned into Vaiṣṇavas, just like we are doing? This is the fault of the leaders. Therefore India is now divided, Pakistan and Hindustan.



So if we actually try to understand Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is solution for all the problems of society, of government, and everything. It is not a sentimental movement. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. One must increase the taste for understanding Kṛṣṇa. Just like Kṛṣṇa came. He came not only to dance with the gopīs. He took part in politics. He killed so many demons. He established good government. He showed how householders' life. Kṛṣṇa It is all in our Kṛṣṇa book, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He was lying with His beautiful queens, and as soon as there is cock crow, immediately He would rise, early in the morning, three o'clock. The queens will be disgusted: "Now it is early in the morning. Kṛṣṇa will go away." But Kṛṣṇa immediately gave up the company of the wife and immediately rise and immediately take bath and do the needful as it is enjoined in the Vedic performances. He's ideal gṛhastha. He will give in charity every day thirteen thousands of cows to the brāhmaṇas. Read all these things. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is simply dugdughi.(?) Not dugdughi. It includes everything, all-pervasive. Kṛṣṇa is ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8], Kṛṣṇa is the root of everything. Therefore anything you conceive of, politics, sociology, philosophy, religion, anything, there is adjustment if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥ [Bg. 3.21]. Therefore we want some leading personalities to become Kṛṣṇa conscious so that others will follow. So that others will follow. But if we go some leading personality, minister or prime minister, "Oḥ, we are secular. We have rejected Kṛṣṇa." That's all. Nonsense. What is your value, rejecting your Kṛṣṇa? Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. You are rejected. You have no good qualification. You have rejected Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we reject you. Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. Anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, he has no value. We don't give any value, however he may pose himself as a very great man. No. We say, harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. Mano-rathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ. "Because you are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, you are hovering on the mental plane. Therefore you must fall down." This is the conclusion of śāstra.

So here it is, śuśrūṣoḥ śraddadhānasya [SB 1.2.16]. Just like you all people have gathered. There is śraddhā, that "Let us hear something about Kṛṣṇa, what Swamiji's spoke, speaking." This is called śraddhā. This śraddhā has to be increased. Then when you come to the point of ruci, vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ, that is the beginning of our perfection. At the present moment, there is no ruci, no taste. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. There are so many exalted persons, but they have no taste. They have lost all taste. Vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ. There are two faults. Either people could not preach properly so that they could not create taste of the people in general... It is not the fault of the people in general. It is the fault of the so-called preachers also. Because they could not create taste, they wanted to take the place of Kṛṣṇa. That was their purpose. Imitation of Kṛṣṇa. Imitation of God. That will not do. You have to create taste. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu did. Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, when he first met Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he offered this prayer: namo mahā-vadānyāya, "You are the most munificent incarnation because you are giving Kṛṣṇa. You are giving Kṛṣṇa. You are, You are greater than Kṛṣṇa." Mahā-vadānyāya. Because Kṛṣṇa asked everybody to surrender. He did not give himself immediately. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He's also Kṛṣṇa, in the form of devotee, He's giving Himself, "Take me," without any price.

So vāsudeva-kathā-ruciḥ [SB 1.2.16]. People should be educated how to increase the taste for understanding Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Everyone should come forward. Āpani ācari prabhu jīvere śikṣāya. One should behave himself as Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then he will be able to make others Kṛṣṇa conscious-not by theoretical knowledge, but by behavior. Āpani ācari prabhu jīvere śikṣāya. So this is required. It is a very, very, very important movement. Any leader of the society, any political leader, any social leader, they should study. Our only request is that "Please try to understand this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement." Just like in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā says that caitanyera dayāra kathā karaha vicāra. It is not blindly accepting. Vicāra. Just judge yourself how great important this movement is. Caitanyera dayāra kathā karaha vicāra. Vicāra karile citte pābe camatkāra. If you are sober, thoughtful, you'll find it is sublime. It is sublime.

So that is our request. The people who are leaders of the society, they should take this Kṛṣṇa conscious movement very seriously, study, and then give their judgment. And people will be happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



670325SB.SF

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.17

-

San Francisco, March 25, 1967





Prabhupāda:



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Kṛṣṇa, this sound, transcendental sound. Kṛṣṇa means the highest pleasure. Highest pleasure. Everyone, every living being, is seeking after pleasure, but he does not know how to seek pleasure. Therefore in this material conception of life we are being frustrated in every step for satisfying our pleasure. Because we have no information from which platform we can have pleasure. That we are discussing for the last few weeks, that we are not this body. We are consciousness. Not exactly consciousness. Consciousness is the symptom of my real identity. I am pure soul. I am merged within this material body... And the modern material science, they have no stress of it. Therefore they are sometimes misled about this understanding of the spirit soul. But the spirit soul is a fact. And everyone can understand by the presence of consciousness. Any child can understand. The consciousness is the symptom of the spirit soul. So the whole process now we are trying from the Bhagavad-gītā is to bring one to get him on the platform of consciousness. And if we act from the platform of consciousness, then we may not be pushed again into the platform of this bodily conception. And if we can continue that platform, if we continue to act on that platform of consciousness, then, at the end of this body, not even at the end of this body, even in the presence of this body, we shall be free. We shall be free from material contamination. Our spiritual life will be revived and the result will be that in our next life, next life, after leaving this body, we shall have our full spiritual life eternally.



Spirit is described... We have already discussed on this point that the spirit is eternal. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre: [Bg. 2.20] "Even after the destruction of this body, the consciousness is not destroyed." That continues. Rather, consciousness transferred to another type of body makes me again alive to the material conception of life. And that is also described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. At the time of death, if our consciousness is pure, then it is sure that next life is not material. Next life's pure spiritual life. But if our consciousness is not pure at the point of the verge of death, just leaving this body, then we have to take again this material body. That is the process going on by nature's law. We have got our finer body. This is gross body. The body which you are seeing, which I am seeing, this is gross body. Just like shirt and coat. Within your coat, there is shirt, and within your shirt, there is a body. Similarly, the pure soul is covered by shirt and coat. The shirt is mind, intelligence and false ego. Mind, intelligence and false ego. False ego means that the wrong conception that "I am matter. I am something, product of this material world." This wrong conception makes me localized. Just like because I have taken my birth in America, therefore I think myself American. Because I have taken my birth in India, therefore I think myself as Indian. But as pure soul, I am neither Indian nor American. I am pure soul. Because this is designation. This American, or Indian, or German, or Englishman, or cats and dogs and this and that, black and white, all these are designations. Spiritual consciousness means to become free from all these designations.

So that freedom is achieved when we are in constantly touch with the supreme spirit, Kṛṣṇa. That supreme spirit is Kṛṣṇa. So this assembly which we are trying to conduct is just to keep in touch constantly with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa can be in constantly companion with us. Because He's omnipotent, God is omnipotent, therefore He can be exactly in touch with us by His words. His words and He are not different. That is omnipotency. Omnipotency means in everything relating to Kṛṣṇa has the same potency. Just like here in this material world the..., if you want water, you are thirsty, if you want water, then this water, simply calling, simply saying repeatedly, "water, water, water, water, water," will not satisfy your thirst. Because this word has not the same potency as water itself. You require the water as it is. Then your thirst will be satisfied. But in the transcendental, in the absolute world, there is no such difference. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name and Kṛṣṇa's words and Kṛṣṇa's qualities, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes-everything is Kṛṣṇa. Somebody, some people argues that "Arjuna was talking with Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa was present before him, whereas my case, Kṛṣṇa is not present. So how I can get direction?" That is not the fact. Kṛṣṇa is present by His words, this Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa... Therefore the system is... Of course, here we don't find such facilities, but India, when we speak on the Bhagavad-gītā, or on the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we worship regularly with flower, with other paraphernalia required for worshiping. You see? In the Sikh religion they also, they have no deity, form of the deity, but they worship the book, grantha-sevā. Perhaps some of you who are acquainted with the Sikh community, they, they worship this grantha. Similarly, the Muhammadans also, they worship the Koran. And similarly, in your Christian also, you worship Bible.

So it is a fact that Lord Jesus Christ is present by his words, Bible. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is present by His words. These personalities, either God or son of God, who come from the transcendental world, they keep their transcendental identity without being contaminated by this material world. That is their omnipotency. We are practiced to say that God is omnipotent. Now, this is His omnipotency. Omnipotency means that He is not different from His name, from His quality, from His pastimes, from His instruction, everything. Therefore the discussion on Bhagavad-gītā is as good as you are discussing certainly with Kṛṣṇa. And not only that; Kṛṣṇa is seated in your heart, in my heart also. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61]. God, God is situated in everyone's heart. God is not away from us. He's friendly. He's so friendly that in my repeated change of birth, He's with us. He's trying to see when we shall turn to Him. Rather, He's canvassing. He's canvassing. He's so kind that we may forget Him, but He has not forgotten us. He is with us. Just like the father never can forget the son, however the son may forget the father. That is, that is natural. Similarly, God is the original father of everything, everybody, all living entities. We may have different bodies. That is our shirt-coat. It has nothing to do with our real identity. Our real identity is pure soul. That pure soul is the part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. You'll find in Bhagavad-gītā. And that part and parcel of the Supreme Lord is encaged in this material body. And you'll find in Bhagavad-gītā that the Lord has said,

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



"My dear Arjuna, whatever forms of life you are seeing..." There are eighty-four lakhs species of life. That means eight millions and four hundred thousands of different varieties of life. Not one, two, three or one thousand, three thousand. No. We have not seen. Even the biologists, or the anthropologists, they cannot calculate. But from authoritative, revealed scripture we get this information that there are eight, eight, 8,400,000's of species of life of which human beings, they are divided into 400,000's species of life. And eighty, eighty million, eight million, there are other species of life. But Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, claims that all of them, never mind, either he is bird or beast or man or a snake or whatever he may..., god, or semi-god, demigod, anything, whatever... "There are different forms, but apart from the forms, real identity is that all of them, they are My sons. I am actually bīja-pradaḥ pitā, seed-giving father." Just like the father gives the seed, and the mother receives the seed, and the body is formed according to the mother's body. And when the body is completely formed, it comes out, either from cats, either from dog, either from man, or anything. That is the process of generation. The father gives the seed, and it takes, emulsified, two kinds of secretion within the womb of the mother, and in the first night the body is formed like a pea. Then gradually it develops. There are certain holes, the nine holes. They first of all come out, nine holes. We have got nine holes, two eyes, one mouth, two ears, and penis, and so many things. So when they are fully developed, they come out. And according to their last karma, or action, they get this body and enjoy, or suffer. That is the process of birth and death which is going on. And after finishing this life, again dies, again enters into the moth..., womb of the mother, again gets another type of body, again comes out. This is going on. This is going on.



So we should be very much intelligent that "How long we shall continue this repetition of birth and death and change of body?" Any intelligent man... That is the prerogative of the human form of life. That is the prerogative. He can stop this process, repetition of birth and death. He can get his real, actual spiritual form again and be blissful, full knowledge and eternal life. That is the whole process. So we should not miss this. And the whole thing begins just what we have begun now, now, this chanting and hearing. I wanted to point out that this chanting and hearing is as good as actual association of Kṛṣṇa. That is stated in the Bhāgavata, that śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. This, this process is called kīrtana. Even one does not understand the language, still, by hearing only, he acquires some piety. His, his assets become pious life, even he does not understand. It is such powerful. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ... kṛṣṇa-kathā means topics in, in the matter of Kṛṣṇa. The topics in the matter of Kṛṣṇa, there are two, two kinds of topics. One topic is this, Bhagavad-gītā. It is spoken by Kṛṣṇa. It is spoken by Kṛṣṇa. And another kṛṣṇa-kathā, I mean to..., topics about Kṛṣṇa, is this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That is spoken about Kṛṣṇa. So there are two types of kṛṣṇa-kathā, and both of them are equally potent because it is connected with Kṛṣṇa.

Now, in the Bhagavad-gītā... We find that the Bhagavad-gītā is spoken in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Now, what we have to do with the battlefield? We have nothing to do with battlefield. We are here to have some knowledge in the spiritual atmosphere, and why should we bother about the battlefield? No. Because in the battlefield there... [break] The whole battlefield has become Kṛṣṇized. Kṛṣṇized. Just like if there electric charges, electric current, is in some metal, the whole thing becomes surcharged with electricity, similarly, when Kṛṣṇa is interested in some matter, then the whole thing becomes Kṛṣṇized. Otherwise, there was no need of discussing the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. So that is the omnipotency. Now this omnipotency is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Now, simply by hearing the kṛṣṇa-kathā... That means, kṛṣṇa-kathā means... This... kṛṣṇa-kathā, there are many. All the Vedic literatures, they are full of kṛṣṇa-kathā. And all the Vedas means that is also kṛṣṇa-kathā. Any scripture in Veda, that may appear apparently different, but they are meant for kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kṛṣṇa-kathā. Because you'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā that vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. The whole topics, they are meant for kṛṣṇa-kathā. (aside:) You'll excuse me. I am called by nature. I shall... [break] So kṛṣṇa-kathā... śṛṇvatāṁ kṛṣṇa-kathā. If you kindly simply hear about this kṛṣṇa-kathā, topics on Kṛṣṇa, then what will be the result? Because it is pure, transcendental vibration, the result will be śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi. We have accumulated many inauspicious things within our heart due to our material contamination for many, many births. Many, many births. Not only this birth, but many, many last births. So when we surcharge our heart with the kṛṣṇa-kathā, then the result will be... śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ sthaḥ.



Hṛdy antaḥ sthaḥ. Hṛdy antaḥ sthaḥ means the contaminations which we have accumulated within our heart, that will be washed off. That will be washed off so that your heart will be cleansed of all rubbish things. And, as soon as all rubbish things are cleared off, then we are situated in pure consciousness. Because it is very difficult to understand, to eradicate oneself from all the designation. Suppose I am Indian. Is it very easy...? It is not very easy to take it for granted immediately that I am not Indian, I am pure soul? Similarly, anyone, to not identify with this bodily designation, it is not very easy task. But still, if we go on hearing the kṛṣṇa-kathā, as we have begun here, it will be very easy. It will be very easy. You, you make an experiment. You make an experiment how easily you shall be able to get yourself free from all these designations. And as soon as we are free from the designations... What are the freedom? What are the signs of freedom? The signs of freedom...

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18], bhaktir bhavati, bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī, bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Now, as soon as, not cent percent clearance... It is not possible to clear our, I mean to say, rubbish things within our mind all of a sudden or very soon, all things. Even some percentage of the rubbish are cleared off, then at once it happens that our, the influence of the material nature becomes slackened.



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



The material nature is working in three modes: goodness, passion and ignorance. Now, ignorance is hopeless life. Passion is too much materialistic. Passion means, one who is influenced by the modes of passion, he wants, he wants this false enjoyment. Although... Because he does not know, he wants to squeeze out the energy of the body to enjoy this matter. That is called modes of passion. And modes of ignorance, they have neither passion nor goodness in the modes of darkness of life. And mode of, modes of goodness is that in that position we can understand, at least theoretically, "What I am, what is this world, what is God, what is our interrelation?" This is the, I mean, stage of the modes of goodness. So by hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā, you will be freed from the two stages of ignorance and passion. You'll be situated in the modes of goodness. At least, you'll have the real knowledge, "What I am." Because in the ignorance... Just like animals... Animals, you see, the animal's life is full of suffering. But still, the animal does not know that he's suffering. Or take the case of a hog. Of course, here in your New York City, no hog is seen, but in village, in India, not only villages, sometimes in towns, we see the hog. Oh, how much miserable life they are, living in a filthy place, eating stools, and always unclean, and anyone sees hog and "Unhh! Nasty." But he, the hog, does not know that he's nasty condition. He's very jolly. (laughs) He's very jolly. The person who's in the upper status of life, he can see that "Oh, this is very nasty life!" The hog is very happy by eating stools and having sex intercourse with the she-hog constantly. Oh, it is getting fat, getting... The hog gets very... Too soon, they become very fatty. Because that spirit of enjoyment is there although the nasty enjoyment... [break]



Then he'll understand what is happiness. So you'll be promoted to that stage of life, goodness.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam, daily, as a routine, routine work, if you hear this kṛṣṇa-kathā, then the result will be that naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu, when all this accumulation of dirty things in our heart accumulated for life after life, they'll be cleared off. And as matter of evidence you'll see that you are not no more in ignorance and in passion, but you are situated in the modes of goodness. Then what is, what is that position? Ceta etair anāviddham. Then your mind will not be attacked by the modes of ignorance and passion. You'll be steadily fixed up in the position of goodness. Then, when you are in goodness, then what is your attitude? Prasanna-manasaḥ. You will find yourself joyful in every circumstances of life. You'll never feel yourself morose.



In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find... That is our brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] situation. The Vedas teaches us that "You are not this matter. You are Brahman." Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. Lord Śaṅkarācārya, he preached this gospel to the world that we are not this matter. We are Brahman, spirit soul. So that, when that spiritual realization will be actually done, then your symptoms will change. What are those symptoms? Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati: [Bg. 18.54] "When one is situated in his own spiritual consciousness, then he will have no hankering and no lamentation, lamentation for loss or hankering for gain." Two things are going on in this material world. The things which we do not possess, we hanker after it: "If I get these things, I'll be happy. If I get these things... Oh, I have no money. If I get one hundred thousand millions dollars, then I'll be happy." This is hankering. And when one hundred thousand million dollars you have got... Some way or other, it is lost, oh, you cry, "Oh, I am gone." So either for earning or we hanker, that is also a kind of distress, and when we suffer loss there is distress. But if you are situated in brahma-bhūtaḥ avasthāna, you'll be neither, neither distressed, nor hankering. You'll be in equilibrium. Yasmin sthite guruṇāpi duhkhena na vicālyate [Bg. 6.20-23]. Even if you are situated in the midst of fiery tribulation, you'll not be disturbed. That is the position.

evaṁ prasanna-manaso

bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ

mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

[SB 1.2.20]



Bhagavat-tattva-vijñāna... Bhagavat-tattva-vijñāna means the science of God. The science of God becomes perceivable by such person who is situated in the brahma-bhūta, I mean to say, status. So from that brahma-bhūta status, we have to work, and that work is recommended here,



buddhi-yukto jahātīha

ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte

tasmād yogāya yujyasva

yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam

[Bg. 2.50]



Now, so, so long we have got this material body, we have to work. We cannot stop working. That is not possible. But we have to adopt the tactics of yoga so that even by doing ordinary work in which by destiny or by circumstances I am put into, there is no harm. You'll find in Bhagavad-gītā that even if you find in your own occupation there is... Suppose I am occupied in some business in which I have to speak lie. Without speaking lie, my business cannot go on. Now, suppose if that is the position. Now, speaking lie is not very good thing, and if you think that your business is not very, based on very moral principle, "So I should give up," then Bhagavad-gītā you'll find that "Don't give up." Even if you are put into such circumstances that your livelihood cannot go on without that unfair means, still, you should not give it up, but you should try to make it purified. You should try to make it purified. How it is purified? Now, you should not take the fruitive result of your work. That is meant for God.



So here it is stated that, that buddhi-yukto jahātīha ubhe sukṛta-duṣkṛte. Sukṛta means pious activities, and duṣkṛta means impious activities. In the material platform we are two things, pious or impious. Pious or impious. Either we are doing some pious activities or we are doing some impious activities or we are doing mixed, pious or impious. So Lord Kṛṣṇa advises that if you act with intelligence or devotion of the Supreme... Intelligence means... What is that intelligence? That "I am the part and parcel of the supreme consciousness, pure soul. I am not this body." This is called intelligence. If you identify yourself, "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am this or that," then you are material placed.(?) If you identify yourself that "I am neither American, nor Indian, but I am pure consciousness, I am subordinate consciousness of the supreme consciousness, or, in other words, I am servant of God... God is supreme consciousness, and I am subordinate." That... So for our present understanding, subordinate means a servant. But don't carry out the idea of servant in relation to God. Here nobody wants to be servant. Everyone wants to be master. Because to become servant is very, not very, mean, a palatable thing. So but to become a servant of God is not exactly like this. Sometimes servant of God becomes the master of God. The real position of the living entity is a servant of God, but in Bhagavad-gītā we see that the master, Kṛṣṇa, has become the servant of Arjuna. Arjuna is sitting on the chariot, and Kṛṣṇa has accepted his drivership. Is not the servant of the owner of the chariot? So in spiritual relation we should not carry out the conception of this material relationship. Although the relationship are there. The whole relationship, as we have got experience in this world, the same relationship are there in the spiritual world. But that relationship is not contaminated with matter. Therefore they are pure and transcendental. Therefore they are of a different nature. As we become advanced in spiritual conception of life, then we can understand what is the actual position in spiritual, transcendental life.

So here the Lord instructs that buddhi-yukta. Buddhi-yukta means with the full consciousness that you are not this body. If we act in that way... Now, if I am, I am not body, then I am consciousness. That is a fact. Now, if we act on the consciousness platform, then we can overcome the fruitive result of good work or bad work. It is transcendental stage. It is transcendental stage. It is especially mentioned, buddhi-yukto jahātīha sukṛta-duṣkṛte. That means you are acting on other's account, on the supreme account. You are not liable for loss or gain. When there is gain, don't be puffed up. You should think that this gain is for the Lord. And when there is loss, you, you should know that "This is not my responsibility. It is God's work. He'll see." Then you'll be happy. That practice you have to do, everything on account of the Supreme. That transcendental nature we have to develop. Tasmād yogāya yujyasva yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam [Bg. 2.50]. This is the trick of doing work in these present circumstances. As soon as we work on the platform of bodily consciousness, we become bound up by the reaction of my works. And as soon as I work on spiritual consciousness, I am not bound up either by sukṛti or duṣkṛti, either by pious activities or by, I mean to say, vicious activities. That is the technique.

Karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ. Manīṣiṇaḥ. This word is very significant. Manīṣiṇaḥ means thoughtful, thoughtful. Manīṣā. Manīṣā means thought. Manīṣiṇaḥ, those who are got, those who are thoughtful, not trifling. Those who are thoughtful. Unless one is thoughtful, one cannot understand that he is not this body. Then how, how you can do work for yourself? What is your position? Now, I am consciousness. What kind of consciousness? Subordinate consciousness. I am the part of the supreme consciousness. Then what will be your activities? My activities will be under the guidance of the supreme consciousness. Just like in office, the managing director is the supreme consciousness. Just for example. Now, everyone is working under him, under his direction. So anyone who is working under his direction, they have no responsibility. They have got simply to discharge the duty, either pious or impious, never mind. In the military rank the order of the captain or the commander is there. The soldier has to execute it. Never mind whether it is pious or impious. It doesn't matter. He has to act simply. Then he becomes a, I mean to say, real soldier. If he acts in that way, he gets remuneration, he gets reward, he gets title, he gets honor. He doesn't care. The commander asks him, "Just go and kill the enemy." He goes and kills. He gets reward. But killing, do you mean to say by killing one gets reward? No. For the duty discharged. For the duty discharged. Similarly, here the whole position is that Kṛṣṇa is instructing Arjuna. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme consciousness and Arjuna has to discharge only according to the order of the supreme consciousness. So my, manīṣiṇaḥ. Manīṣiṇaḥ means those who are thoughtful philosophers, those who can take up things by philosophical conclusion, that "I am consciousness. I am the part and parcel of the supreme consciousness. Therefore my duty is to act according to the supreme consciousness." Just like your hand is the part of your body. Now, it is moving according to my consciousness. The hand is not moving in its own way. As I want, that let the hand be moved, let my legs be moved, let my eye be opened and see, so I am dictating and these parts are working. Similarly we are all parts and parcel, parcel of the supreme consciousness. When we train ourself to move and act in according to that supreme consciousness, then we become transcendental to all these pious or impious activities. That is the technique.

So karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ. Manīṣiṇaḥ means thoughtful, those who are thoughtful, those who have understood that "I am the part and parcel of the supreme consciousness and let me act in that way"... Then what will be the result? Just see the fine result: janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam: "Then he becomes free from the bondage of birth and death, no more birth and death." Janma-bandhana. This is a, this is a very strong shackle. You see? Janma. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. The modern scientists, modern philosophers, they do not think about these four things, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi, birth, death, disease and old age. They set it, set them aside. "Oh, let them be happy. Let us enjoy this life, hogs and dogs." This is human life. Human life is meant to make a solution of this bondage: life, I mean, birth, death, disease and old age. If the human civilization has not made a solution of these four things, oh, that is not human civilization. Human civilization is meant for making a complete solution of these things.

So here, in the Bhagavad-gītā, just see how the Lord says that karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi. Karma-jam. Karma-jam means whenever you act, there will be some reaction. If you act good things, there will be a good reaction. If you act bad things, there will be bad reaction. But reaction, either good or bad, that is, in higher sense, all suffering. I have already explained to you another, some other day, that suppose by good action I get good birth, good riches and good features of the body, good education, all these thing I get, but that does not mean that I am free from the material pangs. The material pangs are janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi: [Bg. 13.9] birth, death, old age and diseases. Because you are rich man, because you are beautiful man, because you are educated man, because you are born in a aristocratic family, that does not mean that you have avoided death, old age and disease. So we shall not be concerned with pious activities or impious activities. We shall be concerned with transcendental activities. That will save me from this bondage of birth, death, old age and disease. That should be our aim of life. We should not be hankering after good or bad things. Because everything here, in higher consciousness, everything material... Now, take for example... Suppose you are diseased, suffering from some disease. You are lying on the bed. And you are eating in that stage, you are passing your nature's call in that way, and taking bitter medicines, and always you have to keep by the nurses clean. Otherwise, there is some obnoxious smell. In such a condition you are lying, and some friends come to you and ask you, "My dear such and such, how are you today feeling?" "Yes, I am today feeling well." What is this "well"? He's lying on the bed. He's passing his nature's calls in that way. He's eating bitter medicine, and he, he cannot move. All these inconveniences, and he says that "I am well." Similarly, in our material conception of life, if we think, "I am happy," that is foolishness. That is foolishness. There is no happiness in material life. It is impossible to get happiness. Then we do not know meaning of happiness. Therefore this very word is used, manīṣiṇaḥ. We want to happy, to become by some extraneous, artificial means. And how long it will stand? It will not stand. You'll again come back. Suppose by intoxication you feel happy. Oh, that is not your actual happiness. Suppose by chloroform I am unconscious; I don't feel the pains of operation. Oh, that does not mean that I am out of these pains and pleasures. This is artificial. So real, real pleasure, real life is here, as recommended in Bhagavad-gītā by Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Just see. Karma-jaṁ buddhi-yuktā hi phalaṁ tyaktvā manīṣiṇaḥ. Manīṣiṇaḥ means the thoughtful. "They give up the reaction of, of work, being situated in the platform of consciousness. And the result will be that janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ, this bondage of birth and death and disease and old age, he becomes free from that." Then the next life? Padaṁ gacchanty anāmayam. Anāmayam. Anāmayam means where there is no death, no, I mean to say, old age, no birth, no disease. That is possible. That is called Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha. The Sanskrit word is Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha means vigata-kuṇṭha. Kuṇṭha means anxiety, anxiety. Here, due to our material contamination, we are always full of kuṇṭha, anxiety. Even a bird, when he's eating, he's seeing like this; this way, this way, this way, "Somebody's coming, or kill me. Oh." Full of anxiety. We are also anxiety, anxious. The politician is anxious. So long we are in contamination of this material body, we must be anxious. We must be anxious.

There is a nice instruction by Prahlāda Mahārāja, a great devotee, boy devotee. And he was, from his boyhood, childhood, from his mother's womb, he became a devotee by the grace of Nārada Muni. That is the history. Now, he, he was five-years-old boy, and his father was too much materialistic. And he wanted that his son should be great politician, economist, and so on, so on, just like the materialists want. But the boy, he's a devotee. So father did not like the idea. So one day he called his boy, "My dear boy, come on." He came. A small boy. "Sit down on my lap. All right, my dear boy, will you kindly tell me what you have learned, the best thing in your school?" "Yes, my dear father, I shall tell you." So he said like this, tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt, hitvātma, hitvā ātma-pātaṁ gṛham anda-kūpaṁ vanaṁ gato yad-dharim āśrayeta [SB 7.5.5]. "My dear father..." He's addressing his father, "O the best among the materialists." Now, he's not afraid. His father was very powerful, and there is a story. We shall narrate one day. Now, today is... Very shortly I am giving some instance... So he says, "My dear father, you are the greatest of the materialists, but to my opinion that is the best thing if people should give up this materialistic life and devote himself for searching out God, then he'll be free from the anxiety which is due to him due to his material connection." Just, how, see the nice, that hitvā, tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ sadā samudvigna-dhiyām. Persons who are always full of anxieties. Why? Now, due to their material connection. Asat. Asat means matter. Matter will not stay, however you may chemically try to preserve. Will... It will not stay. Therefore matter's another name is asat. And spirit's another name is sat. Sat means "which exists." Asat means "which does not exist." Antavanta ime dehā nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ [Bg. 2.18]. We have already described that this body, this body is antavat, it has got end, but the consciousness, or the spirit soul, it is not... It is endless. So the endless, I mean to say, ever-existing soul, being contaminated by this body, he's full of anxiety. So Prahlāda Mahārāja thinks that in order to realize his self for self-realization, if he gives up all material engagement and takes to the path of self-realization, that is the best way of his life. And the father became angry. "What nonsense he's taking? A five-years-old boy, he's taking, talking of self-realization. I wanted to make him a great politician, economist. Now he's talking of this nonsense and..." Hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpam. "He's describing that this family life is just like a dark well." If a man is put, dark well... [break]

...be engaged. Be... Whatever you are, that doesn't matter. But act it on the platform of consciousness. And that platform, acting on the consciousness, is, Lord Caitanya has made very easy. Just like there are some note-makers of school books, "Easy Study." So Lord Caitanya has recommended that "You may be engaged in whatever occupation. That may be good or bad. We don't mind for that. But you must hear the kṛṣṇa-kathā. You must continue to hear this Bhagavad-gītā." That is... For this, we are trying to organize this institution, that "You come. Whatever you do, that doesn't matter. Everything will be adjusted by and by." Because, as I have described in the beginning, that śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi [SB 1.2.17]. Everything will be adjusted as our mind becomes clear, clear, clear, simply by hearing. Simply by hearing.

So this process, this association of hearing about the kṛṣṇa-kathā, what Kṛṣṇa is speaking and what is spoken about Kṛṣṇa, if we continue about the, about this process and chanting the Kṛṣṇa name, you'll practically see how much your heart is becoming clearer and clearer and how much you are pro..., making progress towards spiritual realization and real, real identity of pure consciousness.

Thank you very much. Any question?



Mukunda: If a good man, who is passed through the states of being ignorant and passionate and he's really a good man, is walking down the street, let's say, in Delhi or Istanbul or any place, any city. And he sees a very young man beating up on a very old man just for no reason at all. He's just beating up, beating him to death. And the old man is calling out for help and there's a few people standing around. And as he approaches, he, he begins to get stirred by this scene. And being a good man he feels the whip on this other human being's back. Now, as a good man, should he not take sides on the two people quarreling and accept it and just walk on, even though he feels something welling up in him, or should he give way to what would be a passionate desire and try to interrupt and stop this injustice, so to speak?



Prabhupāda: The whole idea is that action, either in ignorance or passion or goodness... We have discussed that point. That doesn't matter. But action should be done from the spiritual consciousness platform. That's all. Then you transcend the reaction. Just like, for example, Arjuna. Arjuna's fighting... This fighting is on the modes of passion, passion. Now, when the, that work of passion, if he does... Now, Arjuna was thinking not to fight, not to fight, because he thought that "Fighting with my brothers, with my relatives, is not good."



Mukunda: Yes.



Prabhupāda: So, from material point of view, it is all right. From material point of view. But the thing is that material point of view, if you do act good work, you have to enjoy the reaction. That is the point. As I have already explained that by your good work, you get good birth, you get good wealth, you get good education, good features of body. But that is not the solution of your problem. Here the whole thing is that how to act. If we act from the material platform, even in the modes of goodness, that is also not solution of my life. But even, even in the spiritual, from the spiritual platform, if we act which apparently may seem to be acts of passion, that is not reactionary. That is not reactionary. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna... Now, the Lord says that you become free from the reaction of your activities. That is the proposition. Now, at the same time, He's inducing Arjuna to fight. Now, fighting is on the platform, on the modes of passion. Does it mean that simultaneously Kṛṣṇa is inducing him to be entangled in the reaction of passion modes? No. That action, even apparently appears to be act, being acted on the platform of passion, it is transcendental because it is direction of the supreme consciousness. So whole thing is that we have to... Just like... Same example can be cited, that a soldier is killing his enemy, and the soldier's rewarded, "Oh, you have killed such a big enemy. You are rewarded." Do you mean to say by killing one is rewarded? But he is not acting on his platform. He's acting on higher consciousness platform, higher order. So if a commander's order can give him immunity from the reaction of being hanged, why not God's command? That is the thing. So we have, we haven't to discriminate whether I am in the modes of ignorance or passion or goodness. No. We have simply to see whether I'm acting under the direction of the supreme consciousness. That is the thing to be seen. Then we are free. Then our life becomes free. That thing, we have to learn. Yes?



Student: Is there...? Am I my brother's keeper? Am I, am I responsible for my brother's actions?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Materially, you are responsible. Because materially you are responsible for all acts, good or bad. That I have already explained. So you may think that you have taken the responsibility of maintaining your brother, but at the same time, you are responsible for all the reactions.



Student: For all the?



Prabhupāda: For all the reactions out of that act. It may be bad or good. That doesn't matter. Our problem is not to be infected with the reaction. If you think that bringing up your brother... It is, actually, it is good thing. You are doing good thing. That's all right. And you'll have the good result of it. But that, having that good result, does not mean that you are free from the reaction. Now, our problem is that we want to be free from the reaction. So long... Now... The same answer is there, that reaction of my good work, that I get good birth, I get good education, I get sufficient wealth or I get good features of body. These things are goodness of this material world. But that does not make solution of the disease in which... [break]...vyādhi, birth, death, old age and disease. The whole problem is that we have to get out of this material existence. So the, from the material point of view, or platform, any act, good or bad, that will have material reaction. And we are, we want to get out of this material reaction. That is our point of view. (end)





720820SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.17

-

Los Angeles, August 20, 1972



Pradyumna:



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Translation: "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is also the Paramātmā in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, does cleanse the desire for material enjoyment in the heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to hear His (Kṛṣṇa's) messages, which are themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted."



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa is very selfish. He says... Here it is said: sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. Anyone who is engaged in hearing Kṛṣṇa's kathā. Kathā means words, messages. So, in the Bhagavad-gītā also, Kṛṣṇa says, mām ekam: "Only unto Me." Ekam. This is required. Although everything is Kṛṣṇa, but according to the pantheist theory we cannot worship everything. Everything is Kṛṣṇa, that's a fact, but that does not mean we have to worship everything; we have to worship Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they say, "If everything is Kṛṣṇa, so whatever I worship, I am worshiping Kṛṣṇa." No. That is wrong.



Just like the same example can be given that in the body, I am this body, everything "I," or "mine," but when foodstuff is to be taken, it is not to be pushed through the rectum, but through the mouth. That is the only one. You cannot say, "The body has got nine holes: two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth, one rectum, one genital-nine holes. So why not push the food in any hole?" That is Māyāvādī theory. "After all," they say, "the foodstuff has to be given to the body, inside the body. So I can push the foodstuff through any hole. There are so many holes." Sometimes in medical science, when it is impossible to push food through the mouth, they push through the rectum. That is artificial. But emergency, they do sometimes. But that is not the way. The real way is that food is required to be given to the body, but it must be given through the mouth, not through any other hole.

Similarly, if we actually want our contact with the Absolute Truth, then we have to go through Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has many forms. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta-rūpam. So... Because nothing is but Kṛṣṇa, everything is Kṛṣṇa's energy, the process is... To contact the Absolute Truth means Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa here says... Not Kṛṣṇa. Vyāsadeva says, through Sūta Gosvāmī, that "Kṛṣṇa is very kind, very friendly to the suhṛt satām." Satām. Satām means devotees. He is very intimately in friendship with devotees. Kṛṣṇa's another qualification is bhakta-vatsala. Here it is also said, suhṛt-satām. Satām means devotees. He is friend of everyone. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. Without Kṛṣṇa being friend of everyone, nobody can live for a moment. You are... Kṛṣṇa is protecting everyone, supplying food to everyone.

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

(Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13)



Eka, that one person, supreme personality... There are... We are all personalities. All living entities, we are all personalities. We are not a homogeneous lump. Everyone has got individual, individuality. So every one of is a individual personality. Everyone. So Kṛṣṇa is the supreme personality. That is the difference. He is also an individual. The only difference is that He is supreme; we are all subordinate. We are dependent on Kṛṣṇa. If Kṛṣṇa does not manage things nicely, then we are doomed. Just like we were walking on the sea beach. Such a vast ocean. We are confident that "The sea waves cannot come beyond this line." We are confident. Therefore we are walking. But actually, the vast ocean, within a second, it can succumbic(?), so many cities. But by whose order it is keeping the honor, "No, not beyond this. You may be very great, that's all right, but not beyond this line, demarcated"? This is Kṛṣṇa's order.



The sun is so big, fourteen hundred thousand times bigger than this earth, and so powerful, blazing fire. You know, those who are scientific men, they know, the sun has got his orbit, and little deviation from the orbit can turn the whole world into snow, and turn the whole world into blazing fire. Where is our scientist friend? Is it not a fact? (Svarūpa Dāmodara makes reply) Yes. It is running under certain orbit exactly, because a little deviation from the orbit will create havoc, catastrophe. Immediately. Either fire or snow. So under whose order the sun is so strictly following the demarcation? Such a big body. Our, in our practical experience, if he has got heavy body, he moves like this. He's not steady. But such a huge body is exactly... According to astronomical calculation, they calculate, some one ten-thousandth part of a second, in this way.

So we have to study this, under whose order... They say there is no God, but how these things, the natural functions, are being performed strictly, without any deviation? That is replied in the Brahma-saṁhitā:

yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



The sun is the eye for all planets. We are very much proud of our eyes. "Can you show me?" What, nonsense, what can you see? Eh? You cannot see anything without sun. You are so much proud of your eyes? You cannot see. Why do you say, "Can you show me?" First of all be qualified to see. Then you can see. But the rascals say, "Can you show me God?" They cannot see even ordinary things if there is no sunshine, and they want to see God. Just see. How much lunatic, crazy. You can see God, but you have to qualify the eyes. Then you can see.



So the sun is our eyes, actually. Not only this planet, all the planets within this universe. Therefore it is said in the Brahma..., yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇām. The gāyatrī-mantra, gāyatrī-mantra, oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ, that is worshiping the sun, sun-god, savitā, savitṛ. So, yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇām. Rājā samasta-grahāṇām. Just like there is king, president, similarly, the sun planet is the king of all planets. (aside:) Those who are standing, they can stand near the wall; don't block. Yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā samasta-sura-mūrtiḥ. All the demigods, they are worshiping. This gāyatrī-mantra... Yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ. Unlimited temperature, unlimited temperature. For millions and millions of years it is diffusing temperature, and if it is little more, we become, ninety millions away, ninety millions of miles away, still, little rising of temperature, we become suffocated. Aśeṣa-tejāḥ, unlimited temperature. And moving, yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ, yasyājñayā, "by whose order," bhramati, "is moving," sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ, "the orbit." Sun has got orbit. Sixteen thousand miles per second moving. But moving how? Not a little deviation. Exactly in the line. Because little deviation will cause havoc. Just the same way: a little pouncing over, the whole sea, finished Los Angeles. You see?

So this is the order of Kṛṣṇa. That is admitted, all Vedas. Yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ, yasyājñayā..., govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So Kṛṣṇa is such powerful. We should know what is Kṛṣṇa. And these rascals, they are becoming incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa personally present. Where is your power like this? If somebody kicks on your face with boot, you cannot do anything, and you are becoming God. You see? So Kṛṣṇa is so powerful, at the same time so kind. Just see His kindness. Simply you hear His words, sva-kathā, kṛṣṇa-kathā. He is speaking in the Bhagavad-gītā. You hear. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "You just become My devotee," Kṛṣṇa says. Man-manāḥ, "Always think of Me." Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, "Just become My devotee." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī, "You worship Me." Māṁ namaskuru, "Just offer your obeisances unto Me."

We cannot do that? Is that very difficult thing? If we hear patiently, with a little attention, and hear Kṛṣṇa's words, what Kṛṣṇa is saying in the Bhagavad-gītā or what is spoken about Kṛṣṇa in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, simply if we hear. We don't require any qualification, any education, any Ph.D., M.S.T, this, that. No. Simply Kṛṣṇa has given you the ears. So you can hear. What is the difficulty? Kṛṣṇa is so kind, If you simply become a little inclined to hear about Him... If you hear and do not understand what Kṛṣṇa is speaking and what is spoken about Kṛṣṇa, you do not understand... Suppose you have no education, you do not understand Sanskrit or even English translation. Still, simply by hearing, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17], by simply hearing, puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Puṇya means pious. We are all sinful. Life after life, we have committed sins, and this body is the evidence that we are sinful, this material body. It may be degrees different, but anyone who has got a material body, he is sinful. So every one of us is sinful, but simply by hearing...

Hearing, this hearing is possible in this human form of life. But even cats and dogs, if they hear, even the trees and ants and insects, they hear, they will also gain the benefit. This transcendental vibration. We human beings, we hear about Kṛṣṇa, we can understand about something that "Kṛṣṇa is saying like this," but the small child, or an animal, or even trees, insects, if they hear this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, they'll be benefited. They will be benefited. This is the fact. Because the vibration... Just like when there is thunderbolt vibration, that vibration has got effect on everything... That is scientific. Everything. Similarly, this vibration of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is so strong that it will benefit anyone who hears. Therefore we are sending saṅkīrtana party. They may understand or not understand, they may appreciate or not appreciate, we are forcing them to become pious simply by hearing this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. It is so nice.

Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. The whole world is full of sinful life. So we are creating the atmosphere, puṇya-śravaṇa. Chanting and hearing. Simply by these two processes. Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Puṇya, pious. So anyone who is coming here, even he does not understand a single word which we are speaking, if he simply hears, he becomes pious. Simply by hearing. Even a child, he becomes pious. And unless we are free from our sinful life, we cannot understand about God.

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



This is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. So those who are sinful, they cannot understand what is God. Therefore the whole world is godless. They are so sinful, their life, their civilization, has been made so much sinful, the four principles of sinful: illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating, and gambling. The whole world is full of these four business. Therefore they are all sinful. He may dress like a very nice gentleman, but he's a sinful man. So he cannot understand. Therefore it is very difficult to convince these rascals about God. They say, "I am, everyone is God, I am God, you are God, God is dead." They are so dull. You see? Therefore our business is to cleanse their heart.



So we vibrate, and Kṛṣṇa helps from within. Kṛṣṇa said, Sūta Gosvāmī said, śṛṇvatām... Those who are giving, who are taking the chance of hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Kṛṣṇaḥ is nominative case. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Anything hearing about Kṛṣṇa, that is also pious. Kṛṣṇa is supposed to be doing something according to our material calculation, killing somebody. Or Kṛṣṇa is dancing with other's wife. According to material calculation, this is not allowed. You cannot dance with the other's wife, not in your country, but that is the Vedic civilization. But Kṛṣṇa did it. Although the gopīs came to dance with Him, captivated by His beauty, but they became purified, puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. If simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa one becomes pious, how they become pious simply by dancing with Kṛṣṇa? This is the theory. Not that Kṛṣṇa wanted some young girls to dance with Him. He can create millions of young girls, immediately. But they're devotees. They wanted to dance with Kṛṣṇa, might be captivated by His beauty. But they wanted Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa gave them chance, "All right, come on. Dance with Me. And be purified." Just try to understand. Just simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, one becomes purified, and what to speak of persons who are dancing with Kṛṣṇa. This opportunity is there. You can dance with Kṛṣṇa, you can play with Kṛṣṇa, you can talk with Kṛṣṇa.

So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving this chance to everyone. Everyone, without any discrimination. So how it is purified? One may say that "Simply by hearing how one becomes purified?" No. Kṛṣṇa helps. Here it is said: hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti suhṛt satām. Kṛṣṇaḥ vidhunoti. Kṛṣṇa helps you. Those who are hearing with attention... Kṛṣṇa is within you, everyone, Paramātmā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Kṛṣṇa is with you. Kṛṣṇa is so kind, Kṛṣṇa is so sympathetic, as soon as He sees, "Oh, this soul..." Because every soul is Kṛṣṇa's son... So He's very much anxious. Just like a father. If a son is in difficulty, the father is more anxious; "How this boy will be rescued from this difficulty?" Similarly, we are suffering in this material world. Kṛṣṇa is more anxious to get us back to home, back to Godhead. Therefore, as soon as He sees, "Oh, he is hearing about Me. Oh, thank you. I shall help you." Immediately He vidhunoti, He washes all the dirty things.

The dirty thing is that "I shall be happy by material enjoyment." This is the basis of dirty things. The rascal does not know that he cannot be happy in any condition, any material condition. Brahmā is unhappy, Indra is unhappy, what to speak of you, you are teeny creature. Nobody can be happy in this material world. They must be always in anxiety because they have accepted something which will never make him happy. Therefore we have to counteract it, these dirty things, that we are trying to be happy in this material world. These dirty things are accumulated within our heart. Life after life, we have selected so many bodies. "Now I shall become tiger. I am eating flesh, but I cannot attack the animal and eat fresh blood." Kṛṣṇa is so kind: "All right I am giving you the chance to become a tiger. You become a tiger. I'll give you all nails and teeth so that you can pounce over immediately. There is no need of opening slaughterhouse; you can directly eat." You see.

So I wanted to enjoy as a tiger, I wanted to enjoy as a cat, as a dog, as a Brahmā. In so many lives, so many planets. But everywhere I have become frustrated. That is the fact. Now, in this human form of life, is the chance to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and make your life perfect.

Thank you very much. (end)



721028SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.17

-

Vṛndāvana, October 28, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Translation: "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā, Supersoul, in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted."



Prabhupāda:



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



There is a English proverb that "God helps him who tries to help himself." That is a English proverb. So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious is not very difficult thing. People have no taste. They do not understand the importance of this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. But this is the only way by which one can become perfect and happy.



It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā that just to become happy and peaceful one has to learn three things.

bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

[Bg. 5.29]



If you want... Because the problem is that we want to be happy and peaceful. Everyone says, "I want peace. There is no peace in my mind." That is a general understanding. Nobody can say that "I am completely happy and peaceful." No, that is not possible. The material world is made in such a way that you cannot feel happy. That is not possible. First of all, we have come to this material world to enjoy sense gratification, but that is not our proper business. Our proper business is to satisfy the senses of Kṛṣṇa, not our senses. So because we have deviated from our original position, therefore it is always a perplexity of our life. But due to illusion we cannot understand it.



Just like a hog is eating stool, living in a very filthy place, having sex without any discrimination, but you see, hogs are very fatty. They feel very happy. Unless one feels very happy, he cannot become fatty. This is a psychology. Yes. We have seen, sometimes, a confectioner, very quickly they become fatty. Because they always smell rasagullā. It is natural. You see. So the hogs, they feel very happy, and get fatty. You see. But actually what is the happiness? He's eating stool, living in a filthy place and no fixity of eating. But still, he's happy.

Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja, when he was asked by his father, "My dear boy, will you kindly let me know what best thing you have learned from your teachers?" So Prahlāda Mahārāja replied,

tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

[SB 7.5.5]



"My dear father..." He did not say "father." He said, "My dear the best of the demons..." His father was a demon, and he was not afraid of his father, although his father was always insisting him, "You give up this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, learn like me, become a very big king, politician." But he would say, "No. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. This is best thing." So that was the fight between the father and the son. So sometimes, after all, he was father, sometimes patting the son. So he replied, "My dear the best of the demons, asura-varya..." Asura means demon, and varya means the best. Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehinām. "I think for any living entity who has accepted this material body..."



All of us, we have accepted this material body. Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehinām asad-grahāt, sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. Because the living entities accepted this material body, asad-grahāt... Asat means "that will not exist." Every living entity is eternal. He must have his eternal body. But purposefully, to enjoy this material world, the living entity has accepted a material body. Not only once, but it is going on continually, one after another. As I am accumulating material desires in this life... Just like I have got this body according to my desires in the last life, similarly, whatever we are desiring in this life, that will be fulfilled in the next life. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. As we desire, ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. Kṛṣṇa is so kind that if you want a tiger's body, Kṛṣṇa will give you. If you want a demigod's body, Kṛṣṇa will give you. If you want a body like Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will give you. Mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. Whatever you want, especially in this human form of life, whatever you desire, Kṛṣṇa will give you chance. It may be very unpalatable, but this is a fact. We have heard from authorities.

That is why in Vṛndāvana there are so many hogs and monkeys and dogs. This is very mysterious thing. The siddhānta, the conclusion is, we get it, information from Bhāgavatam... Just like that, the two sons of Kuvera. What is the? Maṇibandha...?

Devotees: Maṇigrīva.



Prabhupāda: Maṇigrīva...?



Devotees: Nalakūvara.



Prabhupāda: Nalakūvara. They wanted extensively sense enjoyment. They were enjoying. At that time, Nārada was passing. But they were so much intoxicated that they could not cover their body. So Nārada cursed them that "You become a tree." But when they were very much submissive, fell down on the feet of Nārada, "How we shall get...?" he asked them to get the tree life in Vṛndāvana. And because they were put in Vṛndāvana, after some time, they were delivered.



So similarly, those who are executing devotional service, but at the same time cheating... Cheating means outwardly very devotional, inwardly doing all sinful activities. Such living entity is given the chance to become a hog and dog in Vṛndāvana so that the reaction of the sinful activities, they get this body; at the same time, due to their touch with the dust of Vṛndāvana, they become eliminated of all sinful activities and liberated. So these hogs and dogs, they're also very important. They are not ordinary thing. But this is the explanation. The tortoise, the... They have, they have got... Therefore a devotee, when he's punished in that way for the short time, they'll be liberated. Undoubtedly.

There is a statement in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi...

[SB 1.5.17]



Even one falls down, still, there is no loss. Because he'll get the chance. Kṛṣṇa will arrange in such a way. They'll get the chance. So actually, there is no loss. But one must be purified completely. So to get this hog's and dog's life means they are being purified. They are being purified. But without being completely purified, nobody can enter into the kingdom of God. That is not possible. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. So there is another version in Caitanya-caritāmṛta:



anivijñā tare viṣaye khana diba

sa caraṇāmṛtaṁ diye visa bhula iva(?)



If one, by mistake, while executing devotional service, at the same time, keeping his propensity for sense gratification, material enjoyment, then he is rectified in that way.



So we should be very much careful. Careful... It is said, kṣurasya dhārā niśitā duratyayā. The spiritual path, Kṛṣṇa consciousness path, is just like sharpened razor. You take your sharpened razor and shave your cheek. If you are expert, it will be very clean-shaved. But if you are not expert, there is little inattention, immediately cut and blood. Kṣurasya dhārā. This is an example. Durgaṁ pathas tat kavayo vadanti. But the safest way... Here it is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If we attentively hear about Kṛṣṇa, puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, if we hear about Kṛṣṇa, it doesn't matter what I am, but simply by hearing Kṛṣṇa, about Kṛṣṇa, I shall acquire some resultant action of pious activities. Just like there is the Bhāgavata-saptāha. You, within a week, nobody can understand what is Bhāgavata. And the speaker also does not know what he's speaking. But because somehow or other, they're hearing about Kṛṣṇa, there is some pious resultant action. That's a fact.

So śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If we engage ourselves... Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted this process, simply hearing... That is the accepted process, śravaṇam, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu also accepted this process. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. He refused so many other processes of self-realization, beginning from varṇāśrama-dharma, jñāna-miśra-bhakti, karma-miśra-bhakti, karma-tyāga. He, not rejected; he said, "It is external. If you know something more, speak," when He was talking with Rāmānanda Rāya. So when Rāmānanda Rāya quoted a passage from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam which was spoken by Lord Brahmā:

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām



So Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted that people should be given chance, some way or other, to hear about Kṛṣṇa. That's all. These meetings are arranged, these saṅkīrtana parties are arranged... We are sending our men throughout the whole world simply to give them some chance to hear about Kṛṣṇa. This is the process. And it is actually happening very effective. Simply.



When I was coming here, I was in Manila. What is called?

Devotees: Manila.



Prabhupāda: Manila. Yes. Manila, in Philippines. So this Manila, Philippines, they eat dogs. But still they gave very patient hearing to kṛṣṇa-kathā. My last meeting was in a big hotel. Our Sudāmā Vipra Gosvāmī Mahārāja arranged it, and it was very successful meeting. All full of young men. And they came to hear about Kṛṣṇa. And they responded very nicely. They purchased books, they danced, they chanted. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is progressing only on this basis: śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Just give them chance to hear about Kṛṣṇa. We are not bribing them. I have not bribed all these American and European boys to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. I have no money. I, when I went to America, I had only seven dollars. One hour's expenditure in New York. You see. So there is no question of bribing them. But they heard about Kṛṣṇa. I was reading Bhagavad-gītā on the street, on the store, in the park, and chanting. They heard, and they came to me. They became attracted. Why? Because it is said here, hṛdy antaḥ-sthaḥ. Within the heart, hy abhadrāṇi...



People are suffering because they have got so many dirty things within the heart. The most important dirty thing are the modes of material nature. Sattva-guṇa, tamo-guṇa... Sattva-guṇa is also not dirty, but it is mixed with dirty things. And rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa is purely dirty. Rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa is purely dirty. Here, our intelligence is also dirty, because it is mixed up with these modes of material nature. In the material life, the int..., we are using our intelligence... Everyone is using, or..., his intelligence, how to become happy. The whole world is going on, working so hard. There is intelligence, certainly. But that is dirty intelligence. That is dirty intelligence. Dirty intelli...

What kind of dirty intelligence? That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā: duṣkṛtinaḥ. Kṛtī. Kṛtī means very expert, kṛtī. Kṛtī. One who is expert, he's called kṛtī. But here the word has been added: dus. Duṣkṛtī. Duṣkṛtin. Just like one who has discovered the atomic bomb. It has required very nice brain. Unless the scientist is very intelligent, kṛtī, how he could discover such dangerous weapon? So there is intelligence, undoubtedly. But the intelligence has been wrongly used. Duṣkṛtinaḥ. They have discovered something to kill man. But they could discover something which will save man. But that is not possible. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement-which will save man. You can discover something to kill man, but you cannot discover something which will save man. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And it is very easy. Simply by giving some time to hear about Kṛṣṇa. As soon as one sincerely hears about Kṛṣṇa...

Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Kṛṣṇa and I, both are living together within the heart as friends. Kṛṣṇa is so sincere friend that He's trying always to take me back again, back to home, back to Godhead. That is His business. But I am denying, "No, Sir, I shall remain as hog. I shall be happy by eating stool." Kṛṣṇa says, "No, give up this business." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. "I'll give you protection." "No, Sir, I'll eat meat, I shall eat the stool. I have got very good facility for sex life without any discrimination." There are so many so-called... I don't wish to discuss, but sex life is so strong that they cannot give up even in so-called devotional life. So this is dirty things. Actually it is very dirty. But one can give it up if one is very strongly under the shelter of Kṛṣṇa.

yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde

nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt

tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne

bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca



Yāmunācārya says. If one... Kṛṣṇa is Madana-mohana. If one is attracted, actually, by Kṛṣṇa, madana cannot kill him. Kṛṣṇa will save. So the... Actually, the dirty thing is our..., this sex desire. Sex desire increases our attachment for this world.



puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti

[SB 5.5.8]



Everything is there, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The ultimate knowledge to understand everything. Unfortunately, they speak on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, but not scrutinizingly, pointing out what are the defects in our life. They want to enjoy another type of sense gratification. Anyway, we do not wish to discuss. But actually, if we want to get rid of all dirty things from our heart, we must hear scrutinizingly about Kṛṣṇa. This is the prescription given here. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. If you do not understand, it doesn't matter. You simply give vibration, hear the vibration. Just like we are doing. What, in European countries and American countries, they'll understand? But we are sending in every important street. In New York we are sending in the Fifth Avenue, the most important street in the world. Fifth Avenue, New York, we are chanting. We have seen pictures in our Back to Godhead. They are chanting. In London, the most important street, Oxford Street, we send our men. In Melbourne, they're, they're now arresting. I do not know what is the position now. But they are prepared. These boys and girls, so nice that they're arrested sometimes. Just like Kazi was torturing Caitanya Mahāprabhu's party. Of course, now, civilized world, there is no such torturing, but our men are, very often they are arrested and put into jail also. But still, they go. They go every day. Now in London, the police has become disgusted. They don't, do not arrest anymore. Yes. So I say that if you are arrested, why you should be sorry? You go in the jail and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That's all. So that others will get the opportunity to hear about Kṛṣṇa.



So this is our propaganda. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means we are giving chance to people to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. The same thing can be done in India also. But we have got better field of activities outside India, I tell you, frankly. I am very much encouraged. Because the, we get very good response quickly. And they become immediately attached to Kṛṣṇa, as you see the samples here. They have given up, on account of their attachment to Kṛṣṇa, they have given up all their nonsense, or abhadrāṇi. Abhadrāṇi. Abhadrāṇi. This, the principle abhadrāṇi means illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating, and gambling. These are the four pillars of abhadrāṇi. So by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Kṛṣṇa helps. Śṛṇvatām... When Kṛṣṇa sees that "This man, this living entity's now sincere to hear about Me," He helps. Hṛdi... Because He's there. You haven't got to find out somewhere else. You haven't got to go to Himalaya to find Him. He's here. Hṛdy antaḥ-stho hi. So He's also within. And my all dirty things are also within. So as soon as He sees... I am also within. As soon as He sees that "This living entity's now little serious about hearing about Me," He helps. Hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti. He helps you. I cannot get out of these dirty things by my own endeavor. That is not possible. But Kṛṣṇa helps. As soon as we are little serious to hear about Kṛṣṇa, He helps.

Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi taṁ yena mām upayānti te. Kṛṣṇa says. Here, it is indirectly said that Kṛṣṇa helps. And in the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa directly says, "Yes. I give him such intelligence so that he may come back to home, back to Godhead." Yena mām upayānti te. To whom? Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. One who is twenty-four hours engaged in the loving service of the Lord, and satata-yuktā... Satata means twenty-four hours. Not officially. Of course, by official, one may gradually come to the position of satata-yuktānām. Bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam. With faith and love, if one is engaged in the service of the Lord, then Kṛṣṇa says, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam. There are two things, buddhi and buddhi-yogam. Buddhi, ordinary buddhi, intelligence, that is dirty. But when it is yogam... Yogam means connected with Kṛṣṇa. It is called buddhi-yogam.

So we require buddhi-yogam. Not buddhi. If we simply use our buddhi, intelligence, then we continue to become duṣkṛtinaḥ. Buddhi's there, but it is utilized in a misdirected way. That is called duṣkṛtinaḥ. Therefore we must engage our buddhi... Because buddhi is the immediate step before we realize self. First our conception is indriyāṇi, these senses. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ [Bg. 3.42]. We give very much importance to the senses. The bodily concept of life means to give importance to sense enjoyment. That's all. This is bodily concept of life. So indriyāṇi parāṇy āhuḥ. They are very important. Those who are bodily, in bodily concept of life, they are addicted to sense gratification. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ [Bg. 3.42]. And those who are little advanced more, they are addicted to the mental speculation. The so-called jñānīs, mental speculation. Manasas tu parā buddhiḥ. Then again you come to the platform of intelligence. Intelligence, and when the intelligence is purified, hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi, purified, simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, then immediately you are raised to the platform of spiritual life. This is the process.

So,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



He is very intimate friend of the sādhus, of the devotees. He is everyone's friend. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. He's everyone's friend. God, Kṛṣṇa, He's everyone's friend, but He's a special friend for the devotees. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. He says,



samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham

[Bg. 9.29]



Priyaḥ teṣu te mayi: because He's God, He's kind to everyone; without His kindness, we cannot live for a moment. That is a fact. But if one becomes a devotee, He gives special protection. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. So therefore this human form of life is a special prerogative for the living entity, and if we take advantage of it and simply try to hear about Kṛṣṇa, then our life is successful.



Thank you very much. (end)



720821SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.18

-

Los Angeles, August 21, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]



Translation: "By regularly hearing the Bhāgavatam and rendering service unto the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact."



Prabhupāda: So here it is said bhāgavata-sevayā, not bhagavān-sevayā. Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and bhāgavata means in relation with Bhagavān, who has got relationship with Bhagavān. So here it is recommended bhāgavata-sevayā, not bhagavān-sevayā. The idea is that you cannot approach Bhagavān, God, directly. That is not possible. First of all, you have to serve bhāgavata, the devotee bhāgavata.



There are two kinds of bhāgavata: book bhāgavata and devotee bhāgavata. So in the Śiva Purāṇa, there was a question by Pārvatī to Lord Śiva. Lord Śiva and Pārvatī, husband and wife. Pārvatī means the material nature. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. Durgā-devī. Durgā-devī is in charge of this material world. It is called durgā, durgā, just like fort. And the superintendent of this fort is Durgā. You cannot go out of this fort; you are imprisoned. So such Durgā-devī, who is so powerful energy-she can create, annihilate, maintain, sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-she is always sitting by the side of her husband, Lord Śiva, and questioning about spiritual enquiries. Just see. Such powerful deity is also ignorant about spiritual life. So the husband, Lord Śiva, is Vaiṣṇava, and she's always asking, and sitting down underneath a bael tree. She can create so many universes, but for her, no building; only underneath a tree.

So the question was, "Which worship is best?" So Lord Śiva replied, ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param: "My dear Pārvatī, of all methods of worship, Viṣṇu worship is the topmost." There are many demigods' worship, even Lord Śiva's worship, but Lord Śiva says, "Viṣṇu worship is the best." Then he says again, tasmāt parataraṁ devi. "My dear Devi, better than that Viṣṇu worship is tadīyānāṁ samarcanam." Tadīya. Tadīya means those who are in relationship with Viṣṇu, tadīya. Just like His devotee, tadīya. Tulasī-vṛkṣa. Tulasī is tadīya. Or temple tadīya. Preaching tadīya. Tadīyānāṁ samarcanam. This is bhāgavata. So Lord Śiva recommends that "Of all methods of worship, Viṣṇu worship is the best, and better than Viṣṇu worship is to worship His devotee or things in relationship with Him."

Tadīyānām, that is bhāgavata. Here it is also said, tadīyānām, bhāgavata-sevayā. This book bhāgavata, spoken by the devotee bhāgavata, this should be taken very seriously daily. Otherwise you..., we do not understand what is Bhagavān. Therefore it is recommended here: nityam, daily, or constantly, twenty-four hours. We have to mold our life in such a way that twenty-four hours, not a single moment leaving aside, we should be engaged in bhāgavata-sevayā, in the service of Lord's relations. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, the spiritual master, tulasī-devī, the temple, the preaching, the books-these are all bhāgavata. So nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu. If we engage ourself in this bhāgavata-sevayā... Just like we are doing daily, trying to read one verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, discussing amongst ourselves. This is bhāgavata-sevayā. Nityam, daily, regularly. By this process, when the dirty things within the heart, naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu [SB 1.2.18].

Abhadra means dirty things, inauspicious things. What is that inauspicious thing? Inauspicious things means the heart disease for sense enjoyment; this is inauspicious, Different varieties, abhadreṣu. There are three modes of material nature. And multiply it three, mix it again, it becomes nine, and again multiplied, nine by nine, it becomes eighty-one. So these, this... Originally the three... Just like three colors, yellow, red and blue. These three colors, you mix... Those who are artists, those who know the color display... Simply you mix three colors in different way, and it becomes varieties of color. So our heart disease, dirty thing, varieties of sense enjoyment, varieties. So heart is full with varieties of sense enjoyment. Therefore by nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18], by daily, regular worshiping Bhāgavatam, we become free from the dirty things.

In the previous verse we have read that śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi [SB 1.2.17]. We have got abhadrāṇi, so many inauspicious things, within our heart. This can be cleansed simply by hearing the message of Kṛṣṇa from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from Bhagavad-gītā, from the lips of devotees. In this way, when almost the dirty things are cleared off-not all... As soon as all dirty things are cleared off, then we are liberated soul. Immediately love of God, the original consciousness. You become mad. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu,

yugāyitaṁ nimiṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



"Feeling separation of Govinda." How? "One moment is equal to twelve years," yugāyitam. One yuga means twelve years. One moment appearing. Sometimes we have got experience, if we want to see something, it is called expectant psychology. I am expecting something, somebody, that my friend or my lover is coming. So on the door, if there is "koot," "Oh, you have come? No, no. He has not come." The one moment is twelve years. Such kind of separation, when we feel for Kṛṣṇa, that means all dirty things are over. And something for Kṛṣṇa, something for sense enjoyment, that means still the dirty things are there. But the more we engage our time, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, the dirty things becomes cleansed, gradually. Just like when you are hungry, you are given foodstuff, you eat. The more you eat, your hunger is satisfied. You feel strength, you feel satisfaction. Similarly, the more you advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you feel comfortable, released from the material discomforts. In this way, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu. Gradual process.



So naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Not all cleansed, but prāya, say, seventy-five cleansed. At that time, you become fixed-up in devotional service, naiṣṭhikī. There are different stages of devotional service. That I have explained several times. First of all, śraddhā, sādhu-saṅga, bhajana-kriyā, anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. When anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt, all unwanted things are finished, at that time, niṣṭhā, firm faith. So bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. So, so long there are dirty things, our faith and devotion in Kṛṣṇa is not very fixed up, sometimes we deviate, we go away. But then naṣṭa-prāyeṣu, when seventy-five percent of the dirty things are cleansed, then our faith in God becomes fixed up. Bhagavaty uttama-śloke.

Uttama, uttama means udgata-tama. This material world is tama, ignorance, darkness. And Kṛṣṇa is beyond this material world; therefore He is called para. Para means transcendental. So uttama-śloka. So when we offer our prayers to Kṛṣṇa, they are not ordinary words. Therefore those who are not liberated soul, they cannot offer prayers actually. We have to repeat the prayers offered by liberated soul, not by ordinary man. Because he is not yet uttama, he is not yet in the transcendental platform. Therefore we don't allow songs which are not sung by liberated souls like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. They are liberated souls. We don't allow any literature which is not given by liberated soul. Literatures, they are always following Vedic principles. Vedas, the original transcendental literature, and any literature which is produced under the guidance of Vedic literature, that is also nice. That is perfect. Therefore whenever we write something, we give immediately Vedic evidence. We give some Sanskrit verse. This means that we are not manufacturing ourself. What we have heard from the paramparā system, from higher authorities, we are presenting, simply, in our own language, and the evidence is this Vedic verse. This is perfect literature.

So whimsically, we cannot write any poetry for Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. That will create havoc. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says,

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



Any devotional sentiment which is not supported by Vedas, śruti... Śruti means Veda, and smṛti means corollary to the Veda, or things which are written in corroboration with the Vedic ideas... That is called smṛti. Just like Bhagavad-gītā is smṛti. Bhagavad-gītā, the purpose of Bhagavad-gītā is the same as the Vedas, but it is not directly Veda; therefore it is called smṛti. Śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi [Brs. 1.2.101]. The Purāṇas, there are eighteen Purāṇas. Purāṇādi means Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata also. Śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā [Brs. 1.2.101]. Pañcarātra-vidhi, given by Nārada Muni for worshiping the Deity. We are worshiping the Deity under the pañcarātra-vidhi. So Rūpa Gosvāmī says that "Any devotional service which has no reference with śruti, smṛti, purāṇa, pañcarātra, that is simply a disturbance. Simply disturbance, creating disturbance." We cannot manufacture. Sometimes we are questioned, "Can we do this? Can we do that?" Of course, it is good. But there is no need of manufacturing some idea. Whatever idea is already there, follow strictly.



So bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. That fixed up bhakti is required, not oscillating: sometimes this side, sometimes that side. So this can be possible, fixed up devotional service, by nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18], regularly worshiping the bhāgavata-grantha and the devotee bhāgavata. Because without hearing about God authentically, how we can fix up? So we should hear, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. Sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Kṛṣṇa's word is given by Kṛṣṇa. Just like Bhagavad-gītā. Sva-kathāḥ means "His own words." So this is bhāgavata. And sva-kathāḥ, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is also sva-kathāḥ. The Purāṇas also, sva-kathāḥ. Because all these books are given by Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. So that is also sva-kathāḥ. So we have to hear about Kṛṣṇa which is given by Kṛṣṇa. Bhagavad-gītā is given by Kṛṣṇa, and Bhāgavata and other Purāṇas and Vedic literature given by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa. And the method is taught by Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So therefore, everything is Kṛṣṇa's. Kṛṣṇa directly, Kṛṣṇa as Vyāsadeva; Kṛṣṇa as Caitanya Mahāprabhu devotee.

So we have to follow this. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu nityānanda, śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda. Kṛṣṇa is teaching how to approach Kṛṣṇa. That is bona fide. We cannot take any other method. This is the authorized method. The, the person concerned, He is teaching how to worship Kṛṣṇa, how to become devotee. Kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne. Rūpa Gosvāmī said,"Lord Caitanya, You are Kṛṣṇa, but You have appeared as Kṛṣṇa Caitanya." Kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne. Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. "You are distributing love of Kṛṣṇa." How it is possible for ordinary man? "But Kṛṣṇa, because You are Kṛṣṇa, simply You are in the name of Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. So therefore You can distribute. Your thing, You can distribute."

So,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu. A little, maybe; not all. There may be some habitual... But still, even there are some flaws in the beginning, if we fix up our devotion to Kṛṣṇa... That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:



api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

[Bg. 9.30]



kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā

śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati

[Bg. 9.31]



So in the beginning we must be sincere, very sincere, to follow the rules and regulations. But due to our past habits, if there is some flaw, that is excused. Not intentionally. Because I am habituated to something, and I am, although engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, my past habits sometimes becomes manifest. So Kṛṣṇa says, "All right, you try your best. It will be rectified." Kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā. Kṣipram means "Very soon, you'll be dharmātmā, perfect, religious." Kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati: "And you'll be elevated to the eternal platform of peace and tranquillity." Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: [Bg. 9.31] "If one is sincere devotee, he'll be not lost. He'll make progress." But if there is any ulterior motive, then he'll be lost. Māyā is there. The māyā, just like shadow and light, they're side by side. A little crossing the marginal line between shadow and light, you are in the darkness. Similarly, a little crossing of the marginal line from the darkness to light, you are in light.



So Kṛṣṇa and māyā are side by side. As soon as you forget Kṛṣṇa, or as soon as you want to utilize Kṛṣṇa for your sense gratification, it is immediately māyā, darkness. And as soon as you want to serve Kṛṣṇa, immediately it is light. So if we keep ourself on this side, light side, always serving Kṛṣṇa, then there is no possibility of our being in contact with māyā.

daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

[Bg. 7.14]



This māyā is very strong. The same example yesterday we were giving. The sun, little deviation, the whole world, universe, becomes frozen, and little deviation, the whole universe becomes ablaze. This is the position, very... Therefore our position is marginal. We are called marginal energy. We may be dark side or in the light side. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to keep always in the light side. If we always think of Kṛṣṇa, by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then we shall keep ourself on the light side. And as soon as we think of sense gratification, immediately we are on the dark side. So our... We should be very cautious that we may not fall down on the dark side. We can keep ourself in the light side by nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Simply studying Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā, try to understand, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Twenty-four hours be engaged in this way. You'll be on the light side.



Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "Here is the remedy for eliminating all inauspicious things within the heart which are considered to be obstacles in the path of self-realization. The remedy is the association of the Bhāgavatas. There are two types of Bhāgavatas, namely the book Bhāgavata and the devotee Bhāgavata. Both the Bhāgavatas are competent remedies, and both of them or either of them can be good enough to eliminate the obstacles. A devotee Bhāgavata is as good as the book Bhāgavata because the devotee Bhāgavata leads his life in terms of the book Bhāgavata and the book Bhāgavata is full of information about the Personality of Godhead and His pure devotees, who are also Bhāgavatas. Bhāgavata book and person are identical. The devotee Bhāgavata is a direct representative of Bhagavān, the Personality of Godhead, so by pleasing the devotee Bhāgavata one can receive the benefit of the book Bhāgavata. Human reason fails to understand how by serving the devotee Bhāgavata or the book Bhāgavata one gets gradual promotion on the path of devotion. But actually these are the facts explained by Śrīla Nāradadeva, who happened to be a maidservant's son in his previous life. The maidservant..."



Prabhupāda: There is another Vedic evidence:



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



To... Vedic literature, the meaning becomes revealed to a person who has got unflinching faith in God and the spiritual master. Just like Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, he was illiterate, but he became the spiritual master of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī. So the purport of the Vedic literature becomes revealed to a person who has got unflinching faith in God and the spiritual master. Go on.



Pradyumna: "The maidservant was engaged in the menial service of the sages, and thus he also came into contact with them. And simply by associating with them and accepting the remnants of foodstuff left by the sages, the son of the maidservant got the chance to become the great devotee and personality Śrīla Nāradadeva. These are the miraculous effects of the association of Bhāgavatas. And to understand these effects practically, it should be noted that by such sincere association of the Bhāgavatas one is sure to receive transcendental knowledge very easily..."



Prabhupāda: So our principle should be not to disassociate ourself from the devotees. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore sings, tāṅdera caraṇa-sebi-bhakta-sane bās, janame janame hoy ei abhilāṣ: "I desire birth after birth to serve the ācāryas and to live with devotees." So our this association, society's is giving these two opportunity: you serve the purpose or the orders of the ācāryas and live with devotees. Then you will be secure in devotional service. Tāṅdera caraṇa-sebi-bhakta-sane bās. Bhakta-sane bās is very important thing. Even there is little inconvenience, still we should stick to live with the devotees. Then we shall be profited. Go on.



Pradyumna: "...with the result that he becomes fixed in the devotional service of the Lord. The more progress is made in devotional service under the guidance of the Bhāgavatas, the more one becomes fixed in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The messages of the book Bhāgavata, therefore, have to be received from the devotee Bhāgavata, and the combination of these two Bhāgavatas will help the neophyte devotee to make progress on and on." (end)





721029SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.18

-

Vṛndāvana, October 29, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]



Translation: "By regularly hearing the Bhāgavata and rendering service unto the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is described established as an irrevocable fact."



Prabhupāda: Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. Abhadra. We have discussed yesterday, abhadrāṇi: all dirty things. This material life means dirty life. People do not understand it. They think by nice dress and nice apartment and nicely washed body, that is civilization. They do not know what is the dirty things which has attacked him. What is the contamination, that he does not know. Lokasya ajānataḥ. It is said that the fools, rascals, they do not know it.



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām

[SB 1.7.6]



The anartha... In the name of civilization, we have increased so many unwanted things, unnecessarily. This is called anartha. Artha means which is substance. So just like we can give so many examples. When there was no so-called advancement of civilization, people used to eat on utensils made of silver, gold, at least metal. Now they're using plastic. And still, they are proud of advancement of civilization. Actually it is anartha, anartha, unwanted things. At least, in, two hundred years ago in India, there was no industry. I think I am correct. Yes. But people were so happy. They did not have to go two hundred miles or five hundred miles away from home and for earning livelihood. In Europe and America, I see people are going for earning their livelihood by aeroplane, daily passengers. I've seen. From Vancouver, they were coming to Montreal and other places. Five hundred miles. At least fifty miles, one must go. In New York, many people are coming from distant place, Long Islands, crossing the sea, and then again bus, again... Anartha, simply unnecessary. People...



Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that "Who is happy?" He says, "The man who does not go out of home, and who is not a debtor he is happy." Very simple thing. Who does not go out of home, and he's not a debtor, he's happy. So now we see everyone is out of home, and everyone is a great debtor. So how you can be happy? In America the bank canvasses that "You take money, you purchase motorcar, you purchase your house, and, as soon as you get your salary, you give me." That's all. Finished. You take the card... American... What is it called? Am-card? Yes.

Śyāmasundara: Bankamericard.



Prabhupāda: "Bank-card" or something. "Bank-rupt." (laughter) You see? So you take the card and you purchase whatever you like. And deposit your money in the bank. Then again, you are without any money. Simply that card. That's all.



So actually we are creating anarthas. Anarthas means unwanted things. So just like practical example: anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6]. If one is engaged in bhakti-yoga practice, devotional service, immediately the anarthas will be diminished. Just like our students. Since they have joined this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement... They were all Americans, Europeans. They knew how to increase anarthas, unwanted things. It is confirmed. Immediately they have given up the cinema bill, the club bill, the intoxication bill, the gambling bill, and so many bills. And medical bill also. We don't pay very much medical bill. That's a fact. So actually Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice that if one takes to it, immediately he reduces so many rascal anarthas which is not required. Does a man die without smoking? It is anartha, un..., unnecessary. They are habituated by bad association. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ kāmāt krodho 'bhijāyate. By bad association, they learn how to smoke, how to gamble, how to eat... Just like, in India, so-called gentlemen, they go to hotel to taste meat, cow's flesh, how it is tasting. I know, personally, some friends.

So these are anarthas. So Sūta Gosvāmī said that if you want to reduce your anarthas, which are not wanted... Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. If you engage yourself in devotional service of the Lord, then immediately, directly, the anarthas will be diminished. Which is not required, unnecessary. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yoga... Just like in America, the government is spending lots of money, millions of dollars, to stop this intoxication habit of the young men, LSD. But they do not know. How they can be stopped? The government is so rascal that they do not know. Government means full of rogues and rascals. I tell you, frankly. They do not know. Here it is the medicine given, and it is practically happening. Anyone who is coming to us, although he was habituated to so many bad habits, immediately gives up. No intoxication, immediately. But they will not come to patronize this movement. They'll pay their officers and spend lavishly for some nonsense program and plan. Is it not? Yes. Here is the medicine: anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje [SB 1.7.6]. Teach people bhakti-yogam. All anarthas will be vanquished immediately. Anartha. Anarthas means things which are not required. Anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje, lokasya ajānataḥ.

But these foolish people, they do not know. Here is the remedy. They won't consult the perfect knowledge, Vedic knowledge. They won't consult. They will manufacture their own ways. That, this is the... Lokasya ajānataḥ. Because these fools, they do not know, how to get out of the clutches of unwanted things. Therefore vidvān, one who knows, vidvān... Vit means knowledge, and vān means one who possesses. Vidvān. So Vyāsadeva, vidvān, the perfect vidvān, lokasya ajānato vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. Vidvān, Vyāsadeva, has made this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Take shelter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and you know perfectly how you can diminish your unwanted things. And the simple process is, as we have already discussed yesterday, that

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



If you simply hear about Kṛṣṇa,... Kṛṣṇa is speaking Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā. Don't malinterpret. Simply hear as Arjuna heard it. Sometimes some rascals say that "Bhagavad-gītā, Arjuna heard directly, but we do not find now Kṛṣṇa. So how we can hear?" His words are there. Kṛṣṇa is not different from His words. He's absolute. If you read Bhagavad-gītā as it is through the disciplic succession, then you are as good as Arjuna, hearing directly from Kṛṣṇa. There is no difference. But if you ras..., play rascaldom, "This word means this, this word means that, this word means..." This is rascaldom. If you play rascaldom, then you'll remain a rascal. You'll not improve. But if you hear exactly like Arjuna...



As Arjuna said, sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye [Bg. 10.14], "My dear Kṛṣṇa, whatever You are saying, that is all right, in toto. I don't misinterpret." Param, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. This is understanding of... You understand Bhagavad-gītā as it is in devotion, bhakto 'si. Kṛṣṇa instructed Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna. He said that this Bhagavad-gītā, this yoga system is now lost. Yoga-naṣṭaḥ parantapa. "Now I shall again begin that yoga through you. Because you are My devotee." Bhakto 'si. Kṛṣṇa did not go to find out a Vedantist to teach, a so-called Vedantist. "A Vedantist" means he's devotee. Veda. Veda means knowledge, and anta means ultimate. So what is the ultimate knowledge? Ultimate knowledge is described: bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. That is ultimate knowledge. After speculating knowledge life after life, when one comes to the point to surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, that is real knowledge. That is real knowledge. Unless you come to the point of surrendering unto Kṛṣṇa, your knowledge is defective. You may advertise yourself as very learned scholar, but we have got simple formula. Our position is very strong and simple. We... We take the words of Kṛṣṇa and corroborate with Kṛṣṇa's words.

Now, when I see, when we see that one man is not a devotee or Kṛṣṇa, or he does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, immediately we take him belonging to the four classes: duṣkṛtinaḥ, mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ, māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. Immediately we take. It doesn't require much time to test him, what he is, because he has no surrender to Kṛṣṇa and talks all nonsense. There are so many Gītā explainers in our country-simply talking nonsense, minus Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Bhagavad-gītā means minus Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Such rascals have spoiled the whole country, you see. Everyone is so... Politicians, and this, that, all, they are... "Oh, we are student of Bhagavad-gītā." And what do you know about Kṛṣṇa? "Kṛṣṇa is zero." That's all. This is going on. So therefore Kṛṣṇa says, na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. So we have to hear. If we actually want to diminish our anarthas, then we must hear Kṛṣṇa as He's speaking, without any interpretation.

So this is the process of diminishing all dirty things within the heart. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ-sthaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Kṛṣṇa is hṛdy antaḥ-sthaḥ, within your heart. Vidhunoti. He washes all dirty things. Kṛṣṇa is taking charge of washing your dirty things. Simply by hearing about, you... Why don't you take this opportunity? What is this nonsense? Kṛṣṇa simply says that "You hear about, from Me." Satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. "Always chanting about Me, and hearing about Me." Simple process. But the rascals will not take. They will make humbugs, jugglery of words: "This is meaning, this is meaning, this is meaning." Therefore they do not advance. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. The story of anchor. The anchor was not taken, and the whole night they rowed on the boat, and it was where it was there.

Now, the next verse is that if you hear about Kṛṣṇa from Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa's representative, not from bogus men... According to this Vedic philosophy, if somebody speaks about Bhagavad-gītā, but he's not a Vaiṣṇava... Sanātana Gosvāmī has forbidden that "Don't hear from him." Because he will create rascal. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said, māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa [Cc. Madhya 6.169]. If you hear about Kṛṣṇa from an impersonalist, so-called Māyāvādī, then your future is doomed, finished. And Sanātana Gosvāmī has said,

avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ

pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam

śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyaṁ

sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ



Avaiṣṇava. Those who are not following the principles of Vaiṣṇava behavior, professional. There are some professional reciters. That is forbidden. Don't hear from them. Now here it is said, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. It is not said saptāhaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Where this saptāha comes, I do not know. Is Bhāgavata such a thing that by hearing one saptāha he'll understand everything? He cannot understand one word by reading Bhāgavata-saptāha, what to speak of eighteen thousand verses. The whole Vedic knowledge is there. Nigma-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam. What you'll understand? This is profession.



The real prescription is given here: nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Every day or every moment, you should remember Bhāgavatam. Then naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu, the dirty things which are within our heart, that is the... The process is going on to wash the dirty things. And the process is hearing about Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is that, that you hear about Kṛṣṇa patiently and the dirty things within your heart will go away. What is the dirty things? The dirty things is the rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. That will be explained. So by hearing about Kṛṣṇa from Kṛṣṇa or from His devotee, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu, not completely finished... The contamination is there.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,

api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

[Bg. 9.30]



Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu, one who has taken to devotional service, hearing about Kṛṣṇa, he has not become completely perfect even. Because, due to his past habit, he may do something wrong. Just like one was habituated in smoking. And he has taken initiation, and he has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but due to the influence of some friend, he sometimes, suppose he smokes. So if unconsciously induced by others he commits some sinful activity, that is excused. But if he consciously does something sinful activity, that is not excused. Kṛṣṇa says therefore that api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. If he sticks to the devotional service sincerely, but due to his past habit, if he's seen that he has committed something wrong, so Kṛṣṇa said, "Still, he's sādhu." Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ, samyag vyavasito hi... [Bg. 9.30]. Because his faith in Kṛṣṇa is there. Therefore he is sādhu.



Now one may say that "He's not following strictly the rules." But intentionally, if he's doing so, then it is very risky. He'll fall down. But by chance, if he does so, the next line says, kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā. Because he's sticking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he will be again reformed. Kṣipram. Very soon, he'll be reformed. These are, the things are there. Therefore it is said, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu. Not that completely one becomes perfect. Even prāyeṣu, almost perfect, still, almost, not that completely, abhadreṣu, he has, he's trying to give up all bad habits, unwanted things. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. How it is possible? Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Not saptāhaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, officially. This is karma-kāṇḍīya. "I sit down for one saptāha in a year, and then 357 days I do all nonsense." No. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. One has to serve bhāgavata.

Bhāgavata means this, one who is related with Bhagavān. Bhāgavata. From bhagavat-śabda, from the word bhāgavata, bhāgavata. So bhāgavata means the grantha-bhāgavata, the book Bhāgavata, and the devotee bhāgavata. So either you read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... But Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam should be relished, understood through person bhāgavatam. It is recommendation. Svarūpa Dāmodara, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's secretary, personal secretary, he chastised one brāhmaṇa. He wrote something wrong, and after all, he gave him advice that "If you want to study Bhāgavata, then bhāgavata paro giya bhāgavata sthāne(?), try to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from a devotee, not from a professional man who is earning his livelihood by reading Bhāgavata." He must be practical bhāgavata. Then you will gain. Sanātana Gosvāmī has also said that avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam. Hari-kathā, amṛta, nectar, but still, although it is amṛta, it is not to be received from the mouth of a nondevotee. One must be practical devotee, pure devotee. When he speaks, you should receive Bhāgavata, the message of Bhāgavata, Bhagavad-gītā from him. Avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam, śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam. Do not hear. Reject. Professional readers. Reject immediately. Those who are earning their livelihood by the Bhāgavata reading profession, you should immediately reject. This is the injunction. Not that "Oh, here is Bhāgavata. Here is Bhāgavata. I must sit down." No. Sanātana Gosvāmī says no. Śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyam.

Why? Hari-kathā. "He may be whatever he may be, but he's speaking Bhāgavata. What is the harm to hear from him?" One can argue like that. No, Sanātana Gosvāmī says, "Yes, sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ. Milk is amṛta, nice, but as soon as it is touched by the tongue of a serpent, it is, it is poison." Sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ. He has given this very example. Milk is very nice, undoubtedly. Everyone will agree. But as soon as it is touched by the lip of a serpent, you cannot drink it. Then you'll die. Now Caitanya Mahāprabhu has also warned like that, that māyāvādi-bhāṣya śunile haya sarva-nāśa [Cc. Madhya 6.169]. If you hear from a Māyāvādī who misinterprets things according to their whims, so then you'll be spoiled. You'll not get any benefit. And Svarūpa Dāmodara, secretary of Lord Caitanya, he has also the same thing, that bhāgavata paro giya bhāgavata sthāne. Those who are practical bhāgavata, life bhāgavata, from them, from him try to understand Bhāgavata.

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu's instruction, His secretary's instruction, and Sanātana Gosvāmīs... These are mahājana. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. We have to follow the path of great personalities. Not of the fools and rascals. Then you'll get the result.

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

[SB 3.25.25]



This is the process. So nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu [SB 1.2.18]. Not even completely. Because you cannot approach Kṛṣṇa in sinful life. Those who are thinking that "We are living in Vṛndāvana, and I can do all sinful activities because I am living in Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana-rāja will cure me, will purify me." That's a fact. Yes. But if you go on indulging in such sinful activities, then you'll have to live in Vṛndāvana in like the hogs and monkeys. At least one life you have to spend like that. Then you'll be purified. So why should you waste you're time in that way? Dhāmāparādha. If one is committing sinful activities in the dhāma, Vṛndāvana-dhāma, that is a great offense. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. These are the injunction of the śāstras.



So we should be very careful. We should finish our business very quickly. Tūrṇaṁ yateta. Why should we take another risk of become hog and live in Vṛndāvana? Don't take that risk. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. Finish all contamination, dirty things, and become completely pure. Because Kṛṣṇa is paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. He's complete pure. Apāpa-viddham. In the Īśopaniṣad: Kṛṣṇa is uncontaminated, complete. Any contaminated thing goes to Kṛṣṇa, He makes purified. Just like the gopīs. Actually they approached Kṛṣṇa in a lusty attitude, but because He was Kṛṣṇa, He, they become purified. So it is not that we shall purposefully remain impure and approach Kṛṣṇa, but the process is that if you regularly hear about Kṛṣṇa and serve Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or a devotee, then gradually your contaminated things being washed off, bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī [SB 1.2.18]. The result will be bhagavati, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is glorified by uttama-śloka, by transcendental prayers...

Just like Brahma-saṁhitā. This is not ordinary words. All Vedic words, they are not ordinary, mundane words. Just like Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. This is not mundane sound. This is transcendental sound. Golokera prema-dhana hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. Hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana is not a, a, mean, a material sound. Therefore it is effective. But if you contaminate it, it will not be effective. If you take it, Bhāga..., Hari-nāma, purely, without any offense-there are ten kinds of offenses-then it will act immediately. Immediately it will act.

golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana,

rati nā janmilo kene tāy

saṁsāra-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale

juṛāite nā koinu upāy



So this is the upāya. If we actually serious to get out of these material clutches, then we should hear regularly about Kṛṣṇa from a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Then bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī, then your firm steady, steadiness in devotional service will be fixed up. Bhakti... Naiṣṭhikī. Naiṣṭhikī means nobody can, I mean, push out of it. That is naiṣṭhikī, niṣṭhā, firm faith, dṛḍha-vrata. In ordinary case, in neophyte state, if somebody says that "Why you are...?" You'll be surprised. This girl, Śrī Sarasv..., Sarasvatī... Some boy said, "Oh, why you are chanting? This is not very good." He, she gave her (him) a slap. Just see. Naiṣṭhikī. How firmly she is fixed up, although she is a small child. Bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Nobody can deviate him (her). A pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa cannot be deviated. You cannot cheat him. No. He'll give you a slap. Naiṣṭhik..., bhavati, bhavati naiṣṭhikī.



So that is required. Tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ, athāsaktis tato bhāvaḥ, sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ. Anartha, when the... The same thing is described by Rūpa Gosvāmī. As it is said here, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. These abhadra, these anartha... Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Bhakti, when, if one takes seriously to bhakti path, then the test is that he has given up all nonsense unwanted things. Not that he's a bhakta, and still smoking. He's not a bhakta. He's not a bhakta. That is the test. So these things are to be noted very carefully, and to try to associate with devotee. Tāṅdera caraṇa-sebi-bhakta-sane bās. Try to serve the superior ācāryas, Gosvāmīs. Ei chay gosāi jāṅr mui tāṅr dās. Make a conviction, firm determination, that "We shall follow only the, the path chalked out by the Six Gosvāmīs. We shall not deviate." With this determination, if you can go on, everything is clear, and there is no difficulty to become liberated or become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



740926SB.CAL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.18

-

Calcutta, September 26, 1974



Bhāgavata: "By regularly hearing the Bhāgavatam and rendering service unto the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact."



Prabhupāda:



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā...

[SB 1.2.18]



(sound of small children)



Bhāgavata: Go! Celo.



Prabhupāda: Hm.



...nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]



Naiṣṭhikī. Niṣṭhā. From niṣṭhā... Niṣṭhā means "firmly fixed up." Firmly fixed up. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained how one can be fixed up, niṣṭhā. This niṣṭhā stage comes when one is freed from anartha. Ādau śraddhā. Just like you all have come here out of śraddhā, some faith, that "Let us go to the Hare Kṛṣṇa temple, see the ārati, or hear from the swamis." This is the beginning, śraddhā. To create śraddhā, little faith, these centers are established. And one takes to faith, then he gradually advances. Ādau śraddhā. And that śraddhā has been explained by Kavirāja Gosvāmī, what is śraddhā.



That śraddhā, he has said, śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya. Śraddhā means firm faith, viśvāsa, sudṛḍha niścaya, unflinching. What is that sudṛḍha niścaya? Kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya. This is the beginning of śraddhā. Śraddhā means... As in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. If one is agreeable to this condition, that kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile, if one agrees, "Yes, if I surrender to Kṛṣṇa, my all perfection of life is achieved," this is śraddhā. Not that "Kṛṣṇa is also good, and this demigod is also good, you are also good, I am also good. You are also God, I am also God." There is no śraddhā. Just like a chaste woman cannot say that every man is good. She'll say, "Only my husband is good." That is chastity. If some woman says that "Any man is good..." Similarly, śraddhā means to become chaste, pure kṛṣṇa-bhakta. That is śraddhā.

śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

[Cc. Madhya 22.62]



Now practically you can see. These American and European boys, they began with śraddhā. I told them that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]." They accepted it. They did not present so many rascals, that "Here is another God, here is another God, here is another God." No. Kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma... They fixed up their faith. That is their fortune. They had no hodge-podge idea. Therefore they are making progress. Ādau śraddhā. Then sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. That śraddhā, that firm faith in Kṛṣṇa, can be more and more firm by sādhu-saṅga. Sādhu-saṅga means... Who is sādhu? A sādhu means a devotee. Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. Who is sādhu? Sādhu means..., does not mean that having a long beard and saffron-color dress. Sādhu means, mahātmā means, who is pure devotee.



That is the explanation in the Bhagavad-gītā:

api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

[Bg. 9.30]



He is sādhu, even he is su-durācāraḥ. Just like sometimes we find these American, European boys, from our angle of vision, they are deviating little. But Kṛṣṇa confirms, "Even if he's deviating, still, he's sādhu." Why? Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. "Because he does not know except Me, Kṛṣṇa." This is the certificate given by Kṛṣṇa. Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. Samyak... "Oh, he may be sādhu, but not complete." No. Samyag vyavasito hi saḥ. He's complete sādhu. So what is the qualification? Now, bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. The example you can see, how they are making bhajana by the Deity worship. You'll never find in Calcutta such nice Deity worship. Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. They do not know. All these boys and girls, they do not know anything but Kṛṣṇa. So this is the qualification, sādhu.



So we have to associate with such sādhus, who has got unflinching faith in Kṛṣṇa and fully engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. He is sādhu. Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. That is mahātmā. We are after mahātmā. Who is mahātmā? Sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. One who's accepted Kṛṣṇa as everything, such mahātmā is very rarely to be seen. Otherwise, so-called mahātmās, they are loitering in the street: "You are God, I am God, everyone is God." Not that kind of mahātmā. Mahātmā means bhajanti, "He worships Me, Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa is bhajanīya, and we are servant. One who is convinced on this platform, he is mahātmā, he is sādhu. So we have to associate with such sādhus.

Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. They have no other desire. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. They have no other desire. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam, uncovered by the mental speculation or fruitive activities, karma-kāṇḍa. Jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Not covered. If you mix up karma with bhakti, if you mix up jñāna with bhakti, or if you mix up yoga, it is contaminated. It is not pure. Pure devotional service is given by Rūpa Gosvāmī: anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. No desire for fruitive activities or philosophical speculation or yogic, mystic yogic magic. No. Simply how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakti. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. Ānukūlyena. Ānukūlyena means what is favorable, what Kṛṣṇa desires. Just like Arjuna. He did not like to fight. He wanted to be a very nice, nonviolent gentleman. But Kṛṣṇa was inducing him, "You fight." Then later on, he agreed: "Yes, kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73]." This is ānukūlyena. "Kṛṣṇa wants it. Doesn't matter whether it is violent or nonviolent, Kṛṣṇa wants it. I must do it." This is called ānukūlyena, not against the desire of Kṛṣṇa, but in favor of Kṛṣṇa. This is called anukūla, anukūla-sevā. So ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. That is first-class bhakti. Not that "If I like it, then I shall do it." That is not anukūla. That is pratikūla. You like or not like, that doesn't matter. Kṛṣṇa likes it,; you must do it. That is ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam.

So if we associate with sādhu... Sādhu means, mahātmā means, who are fully engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. That is sādhu. That is mahātmā. Therefore it is recommended, ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. And if you associate with sādhu, then bhajana-kriyā. If we... Just like so many thousands of Europeans, Americans, they have joined us on account of sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. First of all they come in the temple and hear for some days. Then all of a sudden he becomes shaven-headed. We haven't to request. He takes a bead and bead bag, although he's not initiated. Then, after some days, he approaches, "Please get me initiated." The bhajana-kriyā. This is called bhajana-kriyā. So we initiate. "Yes, now you are interested, we initiate." We give him hari-nāma: "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." This is the first initiation. "And chant sixteen rounds and observe these rules and regulations." Then, when I see, six months or one year, he's doing very nicely, then we accept him as my disciple, the second initiation. So this is bhajana-kriyā. Then he's admitted to worship the Deity or cook for the Deity, so many things. Bhajana-kriyā.

Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo 'tha bhajana-kriyā tato 'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. If there is bhajana, then he'll be freed from all anarthas. Anartha means unwanted things. Just like one man is smoking. Smoking is not essential for living. If you don't smoke... Just like we don't smoke. That does not mean we are dying. It is an anartha. But anyone who has learned this smoking, he cannot stop it. Anartha. The result of bhajana will be substantiated when anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt, he's no more interested with some unwanted things. We have practiced so many unwanted things. The first of all-illicit sex, making so-called lusty affairs without any married bondage, illicit sex. This is anartha. Why? If you want sex, get yourself married according to śāstra. Then there is no hindrance. According to Vedic civilization, the, a girl must be married. But in every country I see the female population is more than the male population. Then how every girl should be married? Therefore in India more than one wife was allowed. Now it is not allowed. That is the Vedic injunction, kanyā-dāna. The father must get, find out a husband for his daughter. There are many histories, the Kulīna brāhmaṇa.

So anartha. We should not create in the society anarthas, unwanted disturbances. The unwanted disturbance is illicit sex. And meat-eating. Meat-eating... Why one should eat meat? No animal foodstuff. Kṛṣṇa has given so many nice things. Produce. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, annād bhavanti bhūtāni [Bg. 3.14]. Kṛṣṇa never says, māṁsād bhavanti bhūtāni, matsyād bhavanti bhūtāni. Never says. Annād. Anna, anna. Anna means food grain. Produce sufficient food grain. So the... In the village side you go, hundreds and thousands of acres of land is lying vacant. Nobody is interested. Now they are interested (in) opening slaughterhouse. Kill the poor animals and eat, but don't produce food grain. The whole world, this rascaldom is going on. I have traveled over many countries, all over the world. In Africa there are so much vacant land. In Australia there are so much vacant land. But nobody is producing food grains. They, they have kept some cattles, these cows. They are automatically maintained. There is grass. And when they are fatty, take them and send to the slaughterhouse and eat. But the land is lying vacant. The land is lying vacant.

So therefore people are not following the rules and regulations given by God or by nature's own way. They have invented their own way of living condition. Therefore they are suffering. Now we see in Calcutta or any other... Now it is a problem. Everywhere the problem will be food shortage and fuel shortage, power shortage. This is the prediction of many, many great scientists. Because people are committing so many sinful life, they must starve. That is the punishment. That is the punishment. These sinful rascals must be punished. Tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān kṣipāmy ajasram andha-yoniṣu [Bg. 16.19]. These godless persons, dviṣataḥ, envious of God: "Why there should be God? Why Kṛṣṇa shall be God?", envious...

So these are dirty things. We began in this chapter that,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Abhadrāṇi, all dirty things, they are accumulating. So by hearing about Kṛṣṇa... Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. You have to hear... Not that Bhāgavata-saptāha. I don't find this Bhāgavata-saptāha in anywhere in the Bhagavad, Bhāgavata. But they have invented some means for professional reading. Nei. In the Bhāgavata it is said..., not said, saptāha bhāgavata-sevayā. Why it is said, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā? You have to hear Bhāgavatam daily, regularly. That is the injunction of Bhāgavatam. You have to hear from, not from the professional men, professional reciters. Bhāgavata-saptāha, and then, after one saptāha, you do your all nonsense things and he takes some money for livelihood, for maintaining his wife and children. And so many umbrellas, so many suits, so many utensils, and sell in the market, get some money, and maintain them. This kind of bhāgavata-sevā will not help. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu's order is bhāgavata pada giyā bhāgavata-sthāne(?). If you want to realize what is Bhāgavata, then you must go and learn Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from a person whose life is Bhāgavatam, not the professional Bhāgavata reciters.



So here it is said... And who will recite Bhāgavatam daily unless he has dedicated his life for Bhagavān? He's bhāgavata. Grantha-bhāgavata, and the person bhāgavata. Bhāgavata. Mahā-bhāgavata. A person, a devotee is called bhāgavata. And the grantha-bhāgavata. So we have to serve both. We have to hear daily Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the realized person. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. The guru, the devotee, they are bhāgavata. So we have to serve, we have to please them. That is also said in the Bhagavad-gītā. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. If you want to learn the transcendental subject matter, then you must adopt three things. Tad viddhi... First of all surrender. Find out that kind of person where you can surrender. If there is no surrender, it is not possible.

So the, the Vaiṣṇava philosophy begins from surrender. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is the order of Kṛṣṇa. And what is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and His representative? The representative says that "You surrender to Kṛṣṇa." He never says that "You surrender to me. I have become Kṛṣṇa." That is a nonsense, rascal. He will say the same thing. Therefore he's Kṛṣṇa's representative. Kṛṣṇa is personally asking that "You surrender to Me," and it is the duty of the bona fide spiritual master, guru, to say to his disciple that "You surrender to Kṛṣṇa." He'll never say that "You surrender to Me. I have become Kṛṣṇa. Now I have realized soul. I have become Bhagavān." He's a rascal.

So these are the process. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Here it is also, the same thing. The same thing is said in a different way. That is śāstra. Actually, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā... What is Veda? There are four Vedas and 108 Upaniṣads, then Vedānta-sūtra, then so, so many books. All of them are Vedas. And what is the purpose? Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. You read all the Vedas, all the Purāṇas, Brahma-sūtra, Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata. What is the purpose? To understand Kṛṣṇa. If you don't understand Kṛṣṇa, then it is useless. Your so-called study of Vedas are useless. Śrama eva hi kevalam. That is the confirmation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



You are spoiling your energy. You are... Dharma... A brāhmaṇa is executing his brahminical culture very nicely. It is very good. A kṣatriya is doing his duty very nicely. That's all right. A vaiśya, he's dutying... But the test, whether he's perfect or not, or simply working for nothing, wasting his time, what is that test? That is also stated by Sūta Gosvāmī:



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



He must understand whether by executing his... It doesn't matter whether Hindu or Muslim or this or that. Your duty is, by executing your religious principles, whether you are satisfying Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. Tasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭam.



So the Kṛṣṇa personally says that "You surrender unto Me." That is the only business. There is no other business. Simply to see that "Whether I am satisfying Kṛṣṇa?" So that will be possible... Here it is said that naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. Not completely. There are so many dirty things within our heart. If at once it becomes all cleared, then immediately we are liberated person. And that is not possible. Gradually. Gradually, you go on hearing, hearing, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Gradually, all the dirty things will be cleansed. So naṣṭa-prāyeṣu, almost clean. Not purely, not completely clean. Even it is almost clean... Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. How it is cleansed? Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. You serve your spiritual master, the representative of Bhagavān, bhāgavata, and you hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam-these are the two kind of Bhāgavatam-and you do it. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Naṣṭa-prāye... Almost, almost cle... Then what is that? Bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. The result will be that you'll be fixed up in the devotional service.

Uttama-śloka. Bhagavān's another name is Uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloka means selected prayers. Just like Brahmājī is offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead:

cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]



There are so many prayers in the śāstras. So therefore His name is Uttama-śloka. These prayers are composed by not ordinary rascal poet. They are composed by very, very stalwart, great personalities like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and others, Sūta Gosvāmī, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Vyāsadeva. Therefore they are called uttama-śloka, selected poetry. Therefore Bhagavān's another name is Uttama-śloka. He is offered prayers by the great personalities with selected composition of poetry and prayers. So bhagavaty uttama-śloke.



If actually we follow these regulative principles, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18], then gradually our heart will be cleansed. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said. The process is to cleanse the dirty heart. Actually, we are clean. Asaṅgo 'yaṁ puruṣaḥ. We have no business to be contaminated with the material qualities. We do not contaminate. Just like we know... In Bengali we say, tele jale mesera(?). You put oil in the water, it will never mix. Similarly, we are spirit souls, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. We have nothing to do with this material world. But somehow or other, I am in contact. So simply I have to be contactless. That Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. As soon as your heart is cleansed with all dirty things, then bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam, immediately you become out of this contamination, bhava-mahā-dāvāgni.

This contamination means we are in the blazing fire of this material world. Blazing fire. It is, has been... Blazing fire... Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni. Mahā-dāvāgni. Dāvāgni means the fire in the forest. In the forest nobody goes to set fire, but it takes place. Just like we, in India we thought that "By driving away the Britishers, we shall be happy." No. The dāvāgni is so that... That is not the medicine. Medicine is bhavauṣadhi. Medicine is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not that simply changing from this ism to that ism, this political party to this... That is not. Because everyone is imperfect. How they can give you perfect happiness? It is not possible. They are themselves andha. Andha means blind. So if you follow the blind man, how you'll cross? That is not possible. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. Why they are andha? Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know the ultimate goal of life is to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That they do not know. They are manufacturing their own ways of advancing. That will never be successful. They do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. They are thinking, "By adjustment of this material world, we shall be happy." That is not possible. The māyā, the material energy, will not allow you to become perfect unless and until you surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is her business. Therefore it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā,

daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

[Bg. 7.14]



This is the way.



So in this verse it is confirmed... The same thing. In the Vedic literature the same thing is spoken in a different way, in different circumstances. But the ultimate goal is how to know Kṛṣṇa. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. So if we follow this principle, hear Bhāgavatam... Bhāgavatam means the words or the activities of Bhagavān. But the impersonalists, they think the ultimate goal, ultimate truth, Absolute Truth, is not a person. So there is no activity. If one is person, he has got activities. But if one is not person, void, just like a sky... In the sky, there is no activity. The only activity is the sky is covered with cloud, and you cannot see the sun. That is the only activity.

So that kind of activity is not required. Regular, varieties of activities. Therefore we have to hear about Kṛṣṇa. You'll hear about Kṛṣṇa in so many varieties of activities. Bhagavad-gītā, you hear. It's so many activities of Kṛṣṇa. So we have to hear about these. And unless there are activities, what you will hear? Simply "Brahman, Brahman, Brahman... nirākāra." How long you will hear? And how long you will enjoy? That is... There is no enjoyment. Therefore they, these Brahmavādīs, these Nirākāravādī, although by austerities and penances they may rise up to the Brahman effulgence, still, they will fall down. Because we are living entities, we want varieties of enjoyment. We are not satisfied in void, in zero. That is not possible. Therefore śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. One has to hear about Kṛṣṇa, varieties of activities. Varieties of activities. Not nirākāra, without any activities. No. That activity is different from material activity. Janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. Therefore it is called divyam. They are not ordinary activities. They are all transcendental, spiritual activities. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they cannot understand.

So we have got enough matter for hearing about Kṛṣṇa. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa... If we simply sit down and hear, we become pious. And as soon as we become pious, then we can understand what is Kṛṣṇa, what is God. If we are involved or implicated in sinful activities, there is no chance. Therefore anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. By sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83], by association with the sādhus, bhaktas, and by bhajana-kriyā, we'll be seen, a person will be seen that he's no more involved in unwanted things. He's simply interested in executing devotional service. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī [SB 1.2.18]. When we are almost free from all this contamination, then we become fixed up in the devotional service. That is...

Bhagavān said in the Bhaga... Bahavo jñāna-tapasā pūtāḥ. Pūtāḥ. Pūta means purified. So this bhakti process means to become purified, purified. That is... The Nārada-pañcarātra-sūtra also says that,

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



Bhakti can be performed when you are purified. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuk... Upādhi. These are the upādhis: "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am black," "I am white." These are upādhis. This is the description of the skin, not for me. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. I do not belong to the skin. I do not... Because I do not belong to the skin, then so many skin descriptions... Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "I am not a brāhmaṇa. I am not a śūdra. I am not a sannyāsī. I am not a brahmacārī. I am not a kṣatriya." In this way, "not, not, not..." Then what You are? "I am gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]." When you understand that "I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa," that is purification. That is purification. You accept it blindly, or by the process of reading śāstra and Vedas, you have to come to the conclusion: vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. Then you become mahātmā and your life is perfect.



Thank you very much. (end)



720822SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.19

-

Los Angeles, August 22, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



Translation: "At the time loving service is established in the heart, the modes of passion, rajas, and ignorance, tamas, and lust and desire, kāma, disappear from the heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness, and he becomes happy."



Prabhupāda: So rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ. There are three stages, you know: sattva, rajas, tamas. The material world is conducted by three modes-the modes of goodness, modes of passion, and modes of ignorance. Therefore we find varieties of men. So one has to come to the platform of the modes of goodness. Just like illiterate, uncultured, animal-like man is trained up to come, to become civilized. By training, it is possible. Just like, by training, even cats and dogs and tigers, they are also become obedient. That is our practical experience. The tiger in the circus, they play obediently to the orders of the master. So by training, it can be possible. But there are two kinds of training process. One process is scheduled: tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena ca damena ca [SB 6.1.13]. Undergoing tapasya, austerity, brahmacaryeṇa... Brahmacaryeṇa means controlling sex indulgence or sex impulse. Brahmacarya means practically no sex life. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena, damena [SB 6.1.13], by controlling the senses, by controlling the mind. Tyāgena, by giving up in charity. So there are gradual process, but there is another process. Another process means this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Either you practice in this way... Just like if you want to go up, there are two vehicles or process. You go step by step, one step after another. Suppose you have to go one hundred steps. So you have to go step by step. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena damena [SB 6.1.13], practicing. The another process is... (someone making tapping sound) (aside:) Why you are making this sound? Stop it. Another process is the lift. You go by step by step or take the process of lift. Within a second, you come up.



So the bhakti-yoga process is like that. Bhakti-yoga process means if you take to this process, then immediately, very quickly, within a second, you come to the top floor. Otherwise, you have to go by step by step, one step, two step. Although both the process leading to the target, to the topmost floor, the one is very slow and the other is very quick, immediate. Just like another example: if there is fog. You have got experience in your country, sometimes there is fog. You cannot see even a person one yard off from you. So there are so many processes to take precaution in the fog. But somehow or other, if the sun is little strong, immediately, the fog is over. So similarly, to purify ourself... This is the purification process, austerity, penance, controlling sex life, controlling the mind, controlling the senses, giving in charity whatever you possess, everything regulated. This is one process. And the other process is this bhakti-yoga.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Simply by this process, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23], hearing about Kṛṣṇa. This is, we were discussing. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu, simply by hearing. Abhadreṣu, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu, all the dirty things within heart, being almost cleansed, you come to the stage of goodness. There are three stages, three platforms-ignorance, passion and goodness. So simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, you are promoted immediately to the platform of goodness. And as soon as you come to the platform of goodness, then, tadā, at that time, rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ. Because there are three platforms: ignorance, passion and goodness. So you have come to the point, to the platform of goodness, means that you have passed over the other lower stages. If you have come to the college, that means you have passed your school stages. It is to be understood. Therefore we offer sacred thread. The idea is one who has become Kṛṣṇa conscious, he has already passed the stage of becoming a brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa means to come to the stage of goodness. That is brāhmaṇa. Kṣatriya means to remain on the stage of passion. Vaiśya means to remain on the stage of mixture, passion and ignorance. And śūdra means to remain on the stage of ignorance. There are four divisions of the three modes. So when we come to the stage of becoming a devotee, that means we have already passed all these lower stages. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19].



So what are the symptoms of goodness? Kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. Lusty. Lust and greediness. The whole world is moving by lust and greediness. This is the stage of ignorance and passion. Those who are embarrassed with the lower qualities of material nature, they are embarrassed with two things: lust, not satisfied; and greedy, and lobha. "Give me more, give me more, give me more." "Give me..." Anything, he's not satisfied. The whole world, you see... They, sometimes they think that "If I get my income, say, one thousand dollars, I will be satisfied." But as soon as he gets one thousand, he wants one hundred thousand. If he gets one... Just like in your... Everywhere, all over the world, the worker class, they are given increment, but again they undergo strike, "More, more wages, more wages, more wages." So... But as soon as they get more money... Not only... Here in these Western countries, then they'll utilize it for lust. Lust and greediness. That's all. They do not know how to utilize money. That a millionaire is so lusty that... I have seen in Paris. They are going to some clubs. What is the business in that club? Old men, they are going. So lusty that they enter the club by paying fifty dollars, and then there is young women and wine, and that is their pleasure. Lust, kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. One thing, one side, they are not satisfied, even they have got millions of dollars, "Still I want, still I want, still I want." This is one side, greediness, lobha, and the other side is lust. This is called kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye.

So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious means immediately-that is the test-immediately he will become free from lust and greediness. If he's not free from lust and greediness, he is making a show; he's not Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is the test. If one is actually advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then these two symptoms will be visible in his character: no more lusty, no more greediness. He should be satisfied with one wife or one husband. Why hankering after others? That is lusty. That means it is not on the stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness; it is in the material platform. These are the test. Therefore we advise our students, "Voluntarily, you try or you become free from these things: illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating, and gambling." Because indulging in these four things, you'll remain in darkness.

So voluntarily you have to try to give up these bad habits, and at the same time, to maintain yourself on the platform, you have to chant sixteen rounds: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. This is the process. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye [SB 1.2.19]. Then the result will be this: ceta etair anāviddham. Because they are, māyā is attacking you with these... Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Guṇamayī. Guṇa means these qualities, the three modes of nature. The material nature is guṇamayī. Guṇamayī means involved or full of these three modes of material nature, guṇamayī. Maya means... Just like golden. It is smeared with gold or it is gold, you can..., you can say golden. Golden means it is made of gold or it is covered with gold glittering. Similarly, this māyā, this material nature, is made of these three modes of nature, sattva, rajas, tamas. Therefore it is called guṇamayī.

Guṇamayī... Another meaning of guṇa is rope. Just like you have seen rope. There are three layers, they are twisted very strong, and such rope becomes strong. So similarly, these three guṇas, these three modes of nature, are twisted like rope, and we are bound up. You cannot get out. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. If your hands and legs are tied with such rope, then it is very difficult. Similarly, we are all bound up. We are declaring freedom, and so many things, nonsense, we are speaking, but we have forgotten that we are under the grip of this māyā. Immediately, you can be overcome by māyā. Māyā is so strong.

So therefore by this process,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā...

[SB 1.2.18]



This is the process. Nityam, daily. Or twenty-four hours. By studying Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or associating with devotees, bhāgavata-sevayā... Bhakti, bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, bhagavaty uttama-śloke, bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī, devotional service becomes strong and fixed up. Simply by this process, hearing. There is no necessity of education or Ph.D. degree. Simply God has given you these ears and you hear, śṛṇvatām. Hear about Kṛṣṇa from realized soul. This process will make you to be situated on the platform of goodness, and as soon as you are promoted to the platform of goodness, that means you have already surpassed the other two platforms-means ignorance-and the symptom will be... That is clear here. The symptom is that the two things, lust and greediness, will not disturb you. You haven't got to take certificate from anyone, "Just give me certificate that I have become a Kṛṣṇa conscious." You take your certificate yourself, see yourself, whether you are free from lust and greediness. That's the certificate. If you are confident that "I am free from lust and greediness," then I am making progress. Otherwise, (chuckles) I am again in the same, no progress. This is test.



This is test. If we want to cheat others, that is a different thing, that "I have become very advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That is another thing, cheating. But you test yourself by this process, whether you are free from lust and greediness. This is the test. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. And when you become free from these two things, lust and greediness, tadā, ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. Ceta, consciousness, not being attacked by these two nonsense things, ignorance and passion... Ceta etair anāviddham. Viddham means piercing. They are always piercing, pinching, pinching. "Come on, come on." They are always pinching. But if you are actually situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, these things will not pinch you. Tadā, ceta etaiḥ... Because everything is in the heart. Whole thing is cleansing the heart.

So heart is being pinched. "Here is... I am beautiful boy," "I am beautiful girl. Why not come?" So this is pinching. So if you are actually situated on the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not fully, a little advanced, then these things will be visible. Tadā ceta etair anāviddham. And when you stop, when you are able to stop this pinching in your heart by these two modes of material nature, passion and greediness-tadā ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati-prasīdati, then you become joyful. That is the stage of joyfulness.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. When you have come to this status, joyful, no more pinching by these two modes of material nature, joyful, that is called brahma-bhūta stage, the platform of liberation.



So the next stage is brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. So brahma-bhūta stage means na śocati na kāṅkṣati. No more hankering, no more demanding. Na śocati na kāṅkṣati. Because here the business is we hanker after something which we do not possess, and if we lose something which we possessed, then we lament. This is our business. Some... First of all, we possess. Then, by nature, we lose it. When it is lost, then we cry. So these two things are material position, na śocati... But when you come to the brahma-bhūta stage, spiritual platform, then these two things will be absent. Na śocati na kāṅkṣati samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Then you will be able to see everyone on the spiritual platform. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. Then you are learned. You are seeing the cats and dogs and a human being, a learned man, because you don't see the dress, outward covering, tabernacle, but you see, "Here is a spirit soul, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa." That is universal brotherhood. Not by passing resolution with the United Nations and fighting. That is not possible. You have to come to the stage of spiritual platform; then there is question of love, brotherhood, equality, fraternity, otherwise, all bogus propaganda. It's not possible. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. Then real, pure devotional service begins. Then we become completely fit to serve Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa accepts your service at that time.

This is the process, but if we follow the rules and regulations given by spiritual master, śāstra, then gradually, gradually... Therefore we should be very careful. We should be very cautious that māyā may not attack us. Because she is always ready to attack. Rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. Even in goodness also, māyā, there is māyā. Therefore in the material platform, even goodness is not pure. Therefore there is another stage, which is called śuddha-sattva. Goodness is sattva, sattva-guṇa. There is another stage, transcendental stage, which is called śuddha-sattva. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vāsudeva-śabditam. That is called vāsudeva stage, and in the vāsudeva stage, Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, appears. You can see Kṛṣṇa. Not that a rascal inviting everyone, "Come on. I shall show you God, I shall show you God," and some rascals are going there to see God. God is not so cheap. One has to qualify himself to see God. These are the processes.

Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "A living being in his normal constitutional position is fully satisfied in spiritual bliss. This state of existence is called brahma-bhūta or ātmānandi, or the state of self-satisfaction. This self-satisfaction is not like the satisfaction of the inactive fool. The inactive fool is in the state of foolish ignorance..."



Prabhupāda: Yes, just like a cat and dog are sitting silently, very good men. That kind of inactivity is useless. Rather, one who is devotee, he is very active to serve Kṛṣṇa: "How shall I serve Kṛṣṇa more and more? How shall I advance this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement?" That activity, you see; not sitting idly, "I have become Kṛṣṇa conscious." Go on.



Pradyumna: "The inactive fool is in the state of foolish ignorance, whereas the self-satisfied ātmānandī is transcendental to the material state of existence. This stage of perfection is attained as soon as one is fixed up in irrevocable devotional service. Devotional service is not inactivity, but the unalloyed activity of the soul."



Prabhupāda: Soul. This is, this is the activity of the soul. You stop the activity of the body, of the mind; then you must be engaged in the activity of the soul. Actually, the soul is active, not this body and mind. As soon as the soul is out of this body, there is no activity. So the real source of activity is coming from the soul. So how it is that after one becomes liberated, he becomes inactive? That is the theory of the Māyāvādīs. Real activity begins there. Here we are active. We have got so many impediments offered by the mind and the body; and when we actually come to the platform of soul, that is liberated position. The activity should be very nice and very polished, very advanced. Then?



Pradyumna: "The soul's activity becomes adulterated in contact with matter, and as such the diseased activities are expressed in the form of lust, desire, hankering, inactivity, foolishness and sleep. The effect of devotional service becomes manifest by complete elimination..."



Prabhupāda: Sleep and inactivity is a sign of ignorance. The more we are inactive and sleepy, that means we are in the modes of ignorance. And passion means activity for sense enjoyment. And goodness means free from the inactivity of ignorance and the activity of passion, but to see things as they are: "Oh, I am eternal servant of God. So my actions should be to serve God." That is goodness. These are the stages. When one is inactive, lazy, sleeping, that means ignorance. When one is very active for sense enjoyment, it is passion; and when one is neither active like the sense gratifiers nor sitting idly like the ignorant, but he is trying to engage himself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, service, that is goodness. And one who is actually serving Kṛṣṇa, that is transcendental platform, liberated platform. Then?



Pradyumna: "The effect of devotional service becomes manifest by complete elimination of these effects of passion and ignorance. The devotee is fixed at once in the mode of goodness, and he makes further progress to rise up to the position of vasudeva, or the state of unmixed sattva, or śuddha-sattva state. In this śuddha-sattva state only can one always see Kṛṣṇa state, eye to eye, by dint of pure affection for the Lord. A devotee is always in the mode of unalloyed goodness; therefore he harms no one. But the nondevotee, however educated he may be, is always harmful. A devotee is neither foolish nor passionate. The harmful, foolish, and passionate cannot be devotees of..."



Prabhupāda: The... It is said, maṇinā bhūṣitaḥ sarpaḥ kim asau na bhayaṅkaraḥ. Snake. Some snakes are decorated with jewel on the hood. So this materialist, however qualified he may be, just like jewel on the head. The śāstra says, "Do you think that a snake coming to you with a jewel on head is not dangerous or ferocious?" He's as dangerous, as ferocious, as the serpent without jewel. Similarly, any materialistic person, however educated he may be, so-called educated, he is simply a snake, dangerous. That's all. He has no qualification. Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. One cannot have good qualities unless one is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Read.



Pradyumna: "The harmful, foolish and passionate cannot be devotees of the Lord, however they may advertise themselves as devotees by outward dress. A devotee is always qualified with all the good qualities of God. Quantitatively, such qualifications may be different, but qualitatively, both of them are one and the same."



Prabhupāda: Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





721030SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.19

-

Vṛndāvana, October 30, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



Translation: "At the time loving service is established in the heart, the modes of passion, rajas, and ignorance, tamas, and lust and desire, kāma, disappear from the heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness, and he becomes happy."



Prabhupāda:



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



The beginning of the chapter was yena ātmā suprasīdati.



sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

[SB 1.2.6]



So everyone, even in this age, the advanced materialistic persons, they seek after peace, peacefulness of ātmā, or self. Take for example that in Western countries the younger generation, coming from very rich family, rich nation, but they have given up the standard of living as it is observed by their fathers or grandfathers. They do not like it. Because they do not like it. Because they are not satisfied. Yayātmā suprasīdati. There is no satisfaction of ātmā. Therefore they have given up.



Bhoga and tyāga. Bhoga means enjoyment, and tyāga means renunciation. So actually, in this world, some people are very much busy in the matter of bhoga, enjoying, the karmīs. And some people are very much engaged in the business of tyāga, renouncement. These two kinds of activities are going on. One is very, very busy for acquiring things for enjoy, sense enjoyment, and when he's dissatisfied, he cannot fully enjoy, neither he's satisfied, he says, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā, "This world is false. There is no need of this world. The grapes are sour." The same story. The jackal and the grapes. A jackal wanted to eat the grapes, and it jumped many times, but could not approach the grapes. So at last he satisfied himself that "There is no need of the grapes. It is sour." So this brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā is like that. When one is fed up or tired of this world, he cannot enjoy it due to age or other circumstances, at that time, he says, jagan mithyā. Why jagan mithyā? If God is truth, then creation of God is also truth. Why it should be mithyā? But because he has no knowledge, sufficient knowledge of the Vedic instruction, īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam, pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate [Īśo mantra 1], he does not know that creation of God is complete.

There is no defect. When God created this world, he created it perfect. Take, for example, we require water. So in every planet there is sufficient water, these oceans and seas. And they are very nicely preserved, adding with, what is called? Salt? What is the chemical name? Sodium...?

Devotee: Chloride.



Prabhupāda: Sodium chloride. Sodium chloride is preservative. So the water is preserved, mixing with sodium chloride. Just see how perfect arrangement. And the water is evaporated on the sky by distillation, making sodium chloride separated from the water. Distillation means to take the pure water, distilled water. Now, the distilled water is taken on the sky, and as rain it drops on the ground, and it is stored on the mountain-hill. Gradually, the whole year, the water is coming down in this shape of river, and supply is there. First of all, the whole land is moistened with water by rainfall. Then portion, and some of the water is preserved in Iceland, in the shape of ice.



So there is complete arrangement. We have not seen. Paśyati jñāna-cakṣusā. Because we have no knowledge, we do not see how things are nicely arranged by God for our maintenance. Everything is there. Pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. Everything is complete. It is our mismanagement. We, the so-called civilized human beings, we have created problems. We have created problems: "This is my land. This is my country. Why you are coming here?" Then there is fight, there is spoil of things, so many things. Because they do not know, īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1], everything belongs to God. The... Now they have developed the communist idea that everything belongs to the state. But that is also imperfect. There is no peace, still. Sthite sattvam. Ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. What is that? Ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. They do not know that we have to come to the platform of goodness, sattva-guṇa. Then there will be peace.

Because sattva-guṇa means knowledge, rajo-guṇa means passion, and tamo-guṇa means ignorance. So this world is being carried on by these three guṇas. Those who are accepting the tamo-guṇa, they are kāma, lusty, too much lusty. And those who are in rajo-guṇa, they're too much greedy. And those are in the sattva-guṇa, they know things. That is brahminical qualification. Veda jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ. Veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipro brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ. By reading Vedas, one becomes a vipra. Then not only vipra, but when... Vipra means brāhmaṇa. So to become brāhmaṇa by qualification is not sufficient. One must know the Brahman, the Supreme Brahman, Parabrahman. Just like Arjuna understood Kṛṣṇa, paraṁ brahma, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. That is real stage. That is brahminical stage. Don't think that Arjuna was a kṣatriya. He, after studying Bhagavad-gītā, he became brāhmaṇa, because he understood Kṛṣṇa. He says, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. He understood Kṛṣṇa rightly. Others, they, that story of the yājñika-brāhmaṇas... Not story, fact. They could not understand Kṛṣṇa.

When the yājñika-brāhmaṇas were engaged in sacrifice, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were requested by their friends, cowherd boys, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, we are hungry. Please give us some food." They knew Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Kṛṣṇa said that "There is a sacrifice, a great ceremony is going on. The brāhmaṇas, the yājñika-brāhmaṇas, are engaged. Go there and ask some food." So they approached. You'll find this description in the Kṛṣṇa book. So the brāhmaṇas refused, because they could not understand Kṛṣṇa. They thought that "Unless the sacrifice is finished, how the foodstuff can be distributed?" But they were so ignorant, that they could not understand that the person for whom the sacrifice was being performed, He's asking personally. That is ignorance.

So Kṛṣṇa says therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā, nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. Simply by becoming brāhmaṇa, one cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. He must become a devotee. Because Kṛṣṇa is understood by simply devotional service. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Kṛṣṇa does not say that to "By becoming brāhmaṇa, one can understand Me." No. Brāhmaṇa stage is impersonal realization of Brahman. There is no personal realization. When the personal realization is there, he's called Vaiṣṇava, brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava. The brāhmaṇa has got two titles: brāhmaṇa-paṇḍita. Still, in India, a brāhmaṇa is addressed as paṇḍita, however rascal he may be. Because it is expected, when one is born in the brāhmaṇa family, he must be well-learned. These are the six occupational duties of brāhmaṇa: paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana dāna-pratigraha. A brāhmaṇa must be very learned scholar, studying. All Vedic knowledge is meant for the brāhmaṇas. Satyam, tapasya, satyam, śaucam, tapas, ārjavam, titikṣā, jñānam, vijñānam, āstikyam, brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. These qualifications must be there to become a brāhmaṇa.

So in spite of becoming a brāhmaṇa, qualified, śāstra says, ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ. A brāhmaṇa, he is expert in his occupational duties. Ṣaṭ-karma means paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana. Six kinds of occupational duties. But avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇa, uh,

ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ



This is the injunction of the śāstra. In spite of his good qualification, expert in six occupational duties of a brāhmaṇa, if he's an avaiṣṇava, if he has not understood Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then he cannot become guru. Therefore, according to Vedic system, not a brāhmaṇa is accepted as guru, but when he becomes gosvāmī. Gosvāmī means fully controlled in full knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He can become guru.



The... Rūpa Gosvāmī's... That six kinds of control. One who has controlled over his speeches, over his anger, over his tongue, over his mind, over his genital, over his belly, when one has full control over these six things, he's a gosvāmī. Pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt. He can make disciples all over the world. That is the injunction of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. He was himself a gosvāmī. In the beginning, when he was a minister, he was not a gosvāmī, but later on, when he became completely educated by Śrī, Śrīla Mahāprabhu, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, both the brothers, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, they became gosvāmīs. And other gosvāmīs, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, they became their assistants. This Vṛndāvana, the present Vṛndāvana is the excavation of the Six Gosvāmīs. This place where we are sitting, here the Six Gosvāmīs used to assemble daily for discussing on Bhāgavata. Especially it, it is the place of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī's nephew.

So this culture, as, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the progress, the system is described here, it is not that Kṛṣṇa consciousness we have manufactured a type of religious system. No. We don't manufacture. Neither can we manufacture. It is not possible. Defective human being, how he can manufacture religion? That is not possible. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma, the principles of dharma has to be accepted directly from the Supreme Lord. So now the Supreme Lord is helping. We have begun this process.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



First of all, one has to wash off all these dirty things from the heart. Then he can come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not abruptly. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind that even without washing, if one comes seriously to the shelter of Kṛṣṇa's lotus foot, then He takes charge. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



He takes charge. If we... So there are two processes. Either you can go through the prescribed method, as they are described in the Vedic injunctions... Tapasā, brahmacaryeṇa, tyāgena, śamena, damena [SB 6.1.13]. These are the processes. One must undergo austerity, penance, tapasā; brahmacarya, one must be brahmacārī, not unnecessarily using sex life. So tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena damena vā, tyāgena [SB 6.1.13]. Tyāga, renunciation, is required. So this is one process. Another process that if you fully surrender unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa sincerely, then all things are done automatically, immediately. Only by kṛṣṇa-bhakti, one becomes purified, immediately. So that kṛṣṇa-bhakti begins, as we have studied, the previous verses, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. We have to hear patiently, by aural reception. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also accepted this process. This is the process, Vedic process-to hear about Kṛṣṇa.



So naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Nityam. This point we have discussed. The Bhāgavata has to be studied from a person bhāgavata. Bhāgavata-sevayā. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. One has to learn Bhāgavatam from a person you can surrender. Praṇipātena. Paripraśnena sevayā. Two things. There must be service and surrender. And between the two things, surrender and service, there is paripraśna. You cannot ask about spiritual knowledge from a person by challenging. No. That will not help you. Just like Kṛṣṇa (Arjuna). When he was talking with Kṛṣṇa like friend, the problem was not solved. Then Arjuna surrendered unto Kṛṣṇa. Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. He understood that "Simply by friendly talkings and argument, there cannot be any conclusion of spiritual life." One must surrender. He knew it. Gurum eva abhigacchet. Must. Abhigacchet is vidhilin form of verb. Means "he must." There is no other alternative. So therefore Arjuna submitted. And he was also enlightened. So simply by hearing from the authoritative sources, nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, as it is described. But we don't find anywhere: saptāhaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. No. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā.

So nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. Abhadra. Abhadra means the quality of ignorance and passion. They are abominable. Ignorance is most abominable, abominable, and passion is abominable. These two things must be given up. But simply by hearing about Kṛṣṇa, simply by hearing about Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from the person bhāgavatam, one can get rid of these dirty things, namely mode of ignorance and mode of passion. Then the balance is the mode of goodness. There are three guṇa, modes, ignorance, passion and goodness. So if we can, somehow or other, can avoid the lower-grade modes, namely ignorance and passion, then naturally we come to the platform of goodness. That is also not sufficient. Therefore it is said here, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu, almost finished all dirty things. "No, I am now situated in goodness, in brahminical qualifications."

So the śāstra says it is all right. But still it is dirty. Because in the Bhagavad-gītā it is described that that is also a cause of bondage. "I am very learned. I am now become brāhmaṇa." So he does not know that is also this false ego, that "I am brāhmaṇa. I am very learned. I am very advanced." This is also cause of bondage. He does not know that. Simply to become free from the modes of ignorance and passion is not sufficient. One must be free from the modes of goodness also, the so-called goodness. Then you come to the transcendental platform. That is called sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. These are upādhis. "I am a good man. I am a bad man." Both of them are designations. From spiritual point of view, there is no difference between good man and bad man. Caitanya-caritāmṛta says, dvaite bhadrābhadra sakali samāna. So long you are in the material platform, the so-called goodness and badness, they are all the same-because you are in the material platform.

So to become a very good man... Just like an ideal good man was Gandhi. Or somebody else. We are giving because Gandhi's respected all over the world as a very good man. That's a fact. But that is not sufficient. That is not sufficient. Therefore the śāstra says that you should become free from becoming a good man or bad man. You must become a devotee. That is required. To become a good man of this world is not a very good qualification. Therefore it is said here, naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. To become bad man... And if you become a good man, it is partially acceptable, because you have avoided the two other things, namely ignorance and passion. But that is not sufficient. But it is favorable. To become a good man, to become a brāhmaṇa, is favorable. Because to, by becoming a brāhmaṇa, one is able to understand things as they are. He's not in ignorance. Just like a ignorant, a cats and dogs, they are under the bodily concept of life: "I am this body." But a brāhmaṇa is not in the bodily concept of life. He knows, ahaṁ brahmāsmi, "I am part and parcel of Brahman." This knowledge will help him. And here it is said that ce..., tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ... [SB 1.2.19]. So long one is influenced by the modes of ignorance and passion, he is busy in greediness and lusty affairs.

So at least he's free from the lusty desires and greediness. The whole world is working, especially in Western countries, you see... They are working so hard. They have got their nice motorcar, nice roads, and very, very nice ways also, fly over, one road is flying over another road, another road. Very good facility for driving motorcar, and they have got enough motorcar also. Every third man has got a car. But what are these civilization? Kāma and lobha, lustiness and greediness. That's all. The basic principle is lust and greediness. That's all. This is their qualification. So anyone who has become free from this lusty and greedy status of life, he's advanced. He's advanced. Kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. Because these lusty desires and greediness will not help him at any time to realize his self or to realize God. That will not be helpful.

So at least, if he comes to the platform of goodness, sattva-guṇa, then he can at least understand that "I am not this body. I am spirit soul. My duty is different from these bodily activities." Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. The lusty and greediness keeps one always in lamentation and hankering. Na śocati na kāṅkṣ... Na kāṅkṣati. Kāṅkṣā. These people, they have no end of their kāṅkṣā, hankering. One after another, one after another, one after a... Sarva-kāma. In the śāstra they are called sarva-kāma. There is no end of their lusty desires. So naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. By the hearing process, one becomes gradually free from the lusty and greedy platform, and he comes to the platform of knowledge. And at that time he can understand at least that "I am not this body. I am spirit soul. And what is my duty as spirit soul?" That duty, if he understands, that is, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. That is the duty. When he comes to this platform that "My duty is to execute devotional service," that is required. He comes to the platform. Or at least, in between sattva-guṇa and śuddha-sattva. Sattva, sattva-guṇa, without being contaminated by the other two guṇas, modes of nature, namely, ignorance and passion. Pure. That is devotional stage.

So tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye [SB 1.2.19], if we can come to that platform, śuddha-sattva... Sattvaṁ viśuddham. Sattvaṁ viśuddham. When we, our existence becomes completely purified from the influence of these material qualities... The beginning is the modes of goodness. Then at that platform, at least, the other lower-grade modes, namely passion and ignorance, cannot attack us. Ceta etair anāviddham. When a man is in the platform of goodness, he's satisfied in any circumstances. That these boys, European and American boys, they are coming of rich family and rich nation. They are accustomed to so many material advances. Each and every one of them knows how to drive car, and they were driving cars also. They had cars. But now, because they have to come to the platform of goodness, they don't care for anything. They can lie down on the street underneath a tree. Ceta etair anāviddhaṁ sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. Because their heart now cannot be pierced by the desires, lusty desire and greediness. So in this way we have to make progress in spiritual life and advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. [break]



Acyutānanda: "...have already enjoyed sense gratification. So you can take to it."



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Acyutānanda: Most people say to us that "Because in America you have already enjoyed sense gratification, so now you are taking to this."



Prabhupāda: Then the hog would have been the first-class devotee. (laughter) Because he has enjoyed sense gratification without any restriction, without caring for mother, sister, or daughter. Then the hog would have gotten the first-class certificate to become a devotee. That is not... Of course, they think like that, rascaldom, that "Let us finish our sense gratificatory process. Then we shall think of our Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That is rascaldom. You have to give up. Not that... What is that? Haviṣa kṛtam(?)... Or what is that verse? That if you pour ghee on the fire it will increase; it will not decrease. You have to stop. So they put this argument. Especially in India, they are thinking that "Now, first of all, we have to become Americans. And then we shall think of Kṛṣṇa." This is rascaldom. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





740927SB.CAL

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.19

-

Calcutta, September 27, 1974



Nitāi: "At the time loving devotional service is established in the heart, the modes of passion [rajas] and ignorance [tamas] and lust and desire [kāma] disappear from the heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness, and he becomes happy."



Prabhupāda:



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



So the principle is that we have to place our mind, or consciousness, in the sattva-guṇa. That is the first business. Because the material world means sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. Sattva-guṇa is the qualification of pure brāhmaṇa. Śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. Sattva-guṇa. These are the symptoms of sattva-guṇa. Without coming to the platform of sattva-guṇa, or brahminical qualification, one cannot make any advance in spiritual life. Therefore in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we first of all bring anyone to the platform of brāhmaṇa. Therefore, at the time of second initiation, we offer the sacred thread, to recognize him that "He is now brāhmaṇa."



Without becoming a brāhmaṇa, nobody can become a Vaiṣṇava. Or, when one is Vaiṣṇava, it is to be understood that he is also brāhmaṇa. The common word... In India it is said, brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava. Brāhmaṇa should become Vaiṣṇava. Or one who is Vaiṣṇava is already a brāhmaṇa. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. So a Vaiṣṇava not only knows brāhmaṇa, er, Brahman, but he knows Paramātmā and he knows Bhagavān. So Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇa. Simply by knowing Brahman, one can become a brāhmaṇa. But a Vaiṣṇava, not only he knows what is Brahman, but he knows further, what is Paramātmā and what is Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. The Absolute Truth is present in three features: Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. So Brahman realization is the first. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. That is the self-realization: "I am not this body." Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. That is called brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. That is the statement in the Bhagavad-gītā.

Here is, also it is stated that sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. Everyone is hankering after how to be peaceful in mind. Everyone. Everyone says, "Swamiji, kindly say how I can get peace of mind." The peace of mind, how it can be attained is stated here: sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. If you fix up in sattva-guṇa, not in the rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Tamo-guṇa is the life of the karmīs. Tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa. Or rajo-guṇa is actually karmīs, and sattva-guṇa is the life of jñānīs. And after coming to the sattva-guṇa, being peaceful in mind, that is called... (baby crying-pause) ...brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. You have to come to the platform of sattva-guṇa. Then you'll be prasannātmā.

Prasanna means happy mode of life. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. What is the happy mode of life? Na śocati na kāṅkṣati. He does not lament. He does not hanker. Here in the material world we are hankering. We want this... Dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi yaśo dehi rūpavatī bhāryāṁ dehi. Dehi dehi. That is hankering. This is not the stage of brahma-bhūta. Brahma-bhūta stage means na śocati na kāṅkṣati. He does not hanker. Neither he laments. Then samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]. Then bhakti begins, when actually you are in peace of mind. With disturbed mind (you) cannot execute devotional service. Therefore in the beginning, if somebody all of a sudden becomes a Vaiṣṇava and in a solitary place, "I am chanting," that is cheating. How you can be...? How you can chant? You cannot, because your mind is not fixed up. Your mind is not... Na śocati na kāṅkṣati. Unless you are purified, your mind is always disturbed. That is the material condition. The mind must be disturbed.

Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām. Prahlāda Mahārāja says. That is the material symptom. What is the material symptom? Always full of anxiety. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyām. Why? Asad-grahāt. Because he has accepted the temporary position, asat. Asat means "which will not exist." Here everything will not exist. This body, it will not exist. But I have taken this body as everything. "I am Indian." "I am American." "I am the father of this family." "I am the manager of the so big business." And so on, so on, so on, so on. Asad-grahāt. But everything concentrated on this body. So you must be an..., full of anxiety. Asad-grahāt. You accepted this body as fact. But it is not fact. Similarly, the whole world. Asad-grahāt samudvigna-dhiyām. This was a question several times. This is very nice question.

Hiraṇyakaśipu asked his son, Prahlāda Mahārāja, "My dear boy, what you have learned the best thing? You are student." He said, tat sādhu manye asura-varya. He addressed his father, he addressed him as asura-varya, "the best of the asuras." He did not address him as "Father." But he said, "My dear the best of the asuras..."

tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

[SB 7.5.5]



That is the best thing. One is rotting in this family life, which is just like a blind well, andha-kūpa, ātma-pātam. Just like a man falls in the blind well. He has no other alternative than to die, crying, crying. That's all. So he advises, hitvā, "Just give it up." Hitvātma-pātam andha-kūpam, gṛham andha-kūpam. Then where shall I go? Vanaṁ gataḥ. Vanaṁ gataḥ. Vanaṁ gataḥ, "Go to Vṛndāvana, or in the forest." Then how shall I live? No, harim āśrayeta: "Just take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, Hari. He'll give you protection." This is the instruction of Prahlāda Mahārāja.



So here Bhāgavata says, tadā. Tadā means "at that time." At that time. When? It is, in the previous verse it has been explained that,

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]



At that time, when you are fixed up in devotional service. At that time, tadā. Not otherwise. If you have no connection with devotional service, if you are attached to karma, jñāna, yoga, you cannot be fixed up. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta says, bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī sakali aśānta. Here we require... Tadā, sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. Prasīdati means peace of mind, fully satisfied. But bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu... They cannot have peace of mind. It is not possible. Bhukti means karmīs. They're trying to enjoy this material world-more money, more woman, more eating, more, more and more. That is called bhukti. They are not satisfied by enjoying on this planet. They perform various kinds of yajñas so that they may be promoted to the higher planetary systems, Svargaloka, or Janaloka, Maharloka, like that. But Kṛṣṇa says, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ. "You rascal, you are trying to be promoted to the higher planetary system for more and more material enjoyment..."



Certainly there is thousands and thousands times more material comforts in the heavenly planets, in the Candraloka... In the Candraloka... They are trying to go into Candraloka, and according to śāstra, if one goes to Candraloka, he gets ten thousands of years his duration of life, and enjoy. So certainly there are many times more comfortable life, standard of life, very, very high, in the heaven, other planetary systems. But Kṛṣṇa says that any one of the planets you can go, but the material disease will not be relieved, the material disease, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. We cannot understand. This is our real disease, repetition of birth, janma, and repetition of death. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi. And repetition of becoming old. And vyādhi, repetition of being affected by various types of disease. So therefore intelligent man should see that "Even if I go to the Brahmaloka..." When Brahmā was asked by Hiraṇyakaśipu, "Give me immortality, sir," he said, "I am myself not immortal. How can I give you immortality?" So ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna, "My dear Arjuna, you, if you go to the Brahmaloka, many millions of years duration of life, still, you have to die."

So that is the standard of highest perfection. If you do not die, if you do not take birth... If you know what are the miserable conditions of birth, to remain within the womb of the mother... Not only to remain. Nowadays, modern advanced civilization, they are being killed by the mother. Not only abortion, but they are being killed. Now the Western world is very familiar with these things. So just imagine. First of all, you have to remain within the mother's womb, head down, packed-up condition. You cannot move, ten months. And that is also not secure. Even within the... Now this is the... Within the mother's womb you are not secure. At any moment the doctor may advise that "Kill the child." So these are the miserable condition of birth, but we do not remember them. We have to know it from the śāstra. So similarly, at the time of death, coma and... Nowadays it is a very common disease. For seven days or fifteen days he's unconscious, crying.

So this is the miserable condition of death, this is the miserable condition of birth, and between birth and death there are so many miserable conditions. This old age, this disease, so many calamities, catastrophes. So still, we do not want to make a solution of these problems. And the solution is very simple. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. If you simply know Kṛṣṇa, what is Kṛṣṇa, why does He come, why He works like ordinary man-janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ-in truth, in actual fact. Not that "Oh, Kṛṣṇa was born in Mathurā, and then He was taken to Vṛndāvana." This is also knowing. But still, you know what is Kṛṣṇa.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



It is very difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa tattvataḥ, not superficially, but in fact. So Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ. So one who understands Kṛṣṇa in truth, he becomes free. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. These things are there. So why don't you be serious to study Kṛṣṇa, to understand Kṛṣṇa?



But to understand Kṛṣṇa it will require Kṛṣṇa's mercy. Without Kṛṣṇa's mercy... So how you get Kṛṣṇa's mercy?

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



One can understand Kṛṣṇa by being constantly engaged in His service. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānām. Not that weekly once go to the church. No. Twenty-four hours, satata-yuktānām, engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are teaching people how to become twenty-four hours engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. This is our business. We don't allow karma, jñāna, yoga. No. Simply. And that is kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. There is no question of jñāna and karma. That is not pure bhakti. Pure bhakti means anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam, ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Brs. 1.1.11], simply to serve Kṛṣṇa favorably, as Kṛṣṇa becomes pleased. This is bhakti. This is pure devotion.



So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, therefore, teaching pure devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. That will solve all problems. So how one can come to that stage? That is being explained in this portion of the Bhāgavata, that śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Just hear. You haven't got to do anything more. Just hear about Kṛṣṇa. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ... Then everything will be cleared, gradually. This is our purpose. This center is giving chance that you come here and hear about... We, we don't make any flattery to satisfy the whims of the ordinary... We speak from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we speak from Bhagavad-gītā, and present them as it is, without any adulteration. This is our position. If you like, then you make progress. If you don't like, that is your option. But we cannot make any compromise. We must present the śāstra as it is.

And where is the difficulty? Everything is explained here. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. You have to attend Bhāgavata class and serve the bhāgavata person nityam, daily. If you cannot, that is a different thing. But this is the process. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu abhadreṣu. This conclusion comes when one is partially advanced. Naṣṭa-prāyeṣu. Not fully. Then it will come. He'll be ready to serve Bhāgavatam-Bhāgavata, he person bhāgavata and the book Bhāgavata. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Niṣṭhā, I have explained already yesterday. Tadā, at that time, when you are fixed up, "Now I shall devote my life in Kṛṣṇa consciousness," when you come to this conclusion... Nityam. That will come. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā, bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī [SB 1.2.18]. Not deviated. But... Not this worship, that worship, this worship, this worship... No. Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānā yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Those who are worshiping other demigods... That is recommended for the less intelligent class men. Tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām. These things are recommended for the persons who are less intelligent, whose brain is packed up with cow dung, not intelligent persons. Intelligent persons-sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is intelligence.

So when one comes to this conclusion, bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī... Bhakti where? Not that bhakti to this god, that god. No. Bhagavati, unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī. Naiṣṭhikī, without any disturbance. Tadā, at that time. Tadā... What is the result? Rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ... There are three bhāvas: rajo-guṇa-bhāva, tamo-guṇa-bhāva and sattva-guṇa-bhāva. So as soon as you come to the platform of devotional service, the two inferior qualities, namely rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, they become finished. Simply sattva-guṇa remains. Because there are three guṇas. If two guṇas are finished, no more useful, then the other one is there. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. What are the symptoms of rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ? Now, kāma and lobha. Those who are infected with this rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ, they are very lusty, greedy, lobhī. They are not satisfied. The modern civilization is based on rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ. Nobody is satisfied. Everyone is greedy. And lusty. Kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. Kāma. So long you are lusty, so long you are greedy, there is no question of devotional service. There is no question of advancement to spiritual life. So therefore you have (to) come to the platform of sattva-guṇa, where simply knowledge... There is no other thing, ignorance or greediness, only knowledge.

So at that time, it is said, ceta etair anāviddham. Because everything is within the heart. We become greedy, we become lusty on account of distortion of the heart disease, kāma. Tadā hṛdi lobha-kāmau apahinoti(?). That is a heart disease. This kāma and lobha is a heart disease. Actually, you don't require this, but it is a kind of disease. "More and more and more and more and more." Never satisfied. So we have to cure this disease. And this process, simple process, Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given: ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. To cure the heart disease of lusty desires and greediness is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. These are the shastric injunction, and spoken by personalities like Lord Caitanya and other ācāryas.

So we have to follow. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Don't follow rascals and fools. Then it will be useless waste of time. Follow the great ācāryas. Ācāryavān puruṣo veda. One who is ācāryavān, who has accepted ācārya, he knows. Others, all are fools, rascals. Ācāryavān. Ācāryopāsanam. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, amānitvam adambhitvam ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam, ācāryopāsanam [Bg. 13.8]. You have to first of all worship the ācārya. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Guru and ācārya, the same thing. So these are the process. Mahājano yena gataḥ. You cannot manufacture your ways of thinking. What you are? You are most insignificant living entity. And without following the ācāryas, without following the mahājanas, without following the śāstras, how you can teach?

But people are doing that. Without being followed by the ācārya, without being followed by the śāstras, they become guru, they become swami, they become yogi. It is useless. You cannot get... Here are the process, process is given: tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma... [SB 1.2.19]. Tadā means when you are fixed up in devotional service, then you can get out of these infections. These are infections. In... It is so dangerous infection. Infection, anyone can understand nowadays, scientific days. If you infect some disease, you have to suffer. You cannot escape. You infect today somehow or other. Not today, not tomorrow, but some day it will come out. It is called kūṭastha, phalonmukha, prārabdha, pāpa-bīja. Pāpa-bīja, remains as seed, kūṭastha. Then it is fructifying, phalonmukha. Then you suffer, prārabdha. This is called prārabdha-karma, infection.

You are under the complete subjugation of nature. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. These guṇaiḥ. The prakṛti is forcing you to work because you have infected a kind of guṇa. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu [Bg. 13.22]. Kāraṇam. Why one man is born, one living entity is born as a very rich man and one is born as a dog? Sad-asad-yoni. Yoni means mother, and bīja means father. Yathā yoni yathā bījaḥ. So the every living entity is born-bīja and yoni, father and mother. So why there are varieties? Nature is working. Why not one, one kind of living entities? No. Sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu. There are 8,400,000 of species. One has to take. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. You have to change. But why one is in the lower grade birth, why in the higher grade? Now, kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya. These guṇa. These guṇa, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa.

So we have to give up the association of rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. Then there is question of progress. Otherwise it is simply a bluff. Therefore in our society we say, "Don't associate... Don't be infected by these rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa." This meat-eating and illicit sex life and drinking and gambling, they are rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. Kāma-lobha. You see? There is a big fairground. Gambling, tamo-guṇa. They are going there. Thousands and thousands of people are going there for gambling. This is tamo-guṇa. Why? Lobha: "I must get more money. I must get more money." Lobha, kāma. Kāma-lobhādayaḥ. So we have to get out of all this entanglement. Then there is spiritual life. Otherwise don't talk of spiritual life.

So this is fact. Tadā. Tadā means when you are fixed up in devotional service. Tadā, kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ [SB 1.2.19]. We have to get rid of this rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. We have to be fixed up in sattva-guṇa, pure life. Then sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati. If you are situated in the sattva-guṇa, then you will be peace of mind. And that is kṛṣṇa-bhakta. That is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

kṛṣṇa-bhakta-niṣkāma, ataeva 'śānta'

bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī-sakali 'aśānta'

[Cc. Madhya 19.149]



Kṛṣṇa-bhakta, he does not desire anything. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta says, "I don't mind I am born lowborn." No, because he'll chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Lowborn or highborn, he has nothing to do. If one is engaged in devotional service, it doesn't matter whether he's lowborn and highborn. As soon as he takes to devotional service, he becomes above lowborn and highborn. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. He's in the Brahman platform.



So in this way, as they are stated in the śāstra, if you follow, then it is step by step. First beginning is śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Try to hear Kṛṣṇa's message. That is Bhagavad-gītā As It Is. You hear it. You understand it. What is the difficulty? Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ. Don't misinterpret. Hear it as it is. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Hear it and execute it. Where is the difficulty? But we shall not agree to, we shall not hear. We shall not act according to the instruction given. And that is our misfortune. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore says, etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ: "You are so merciful that in this age You have incarnated, You have descended in Your name." Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktiḥ. And in the name there is all potencies. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. There are multipotencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All the potencies are there in the holy name of the Lord. Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. Deśa-kāla-pātra. There is no distinction. Anywhere, either in England or in Vṛndāvana or in Calcutta, you can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Niyamitaḥ smaraṇe. No kālākāla-vicāra, that "This is aśuddha-kāla, this is śuddha-kāla." Anytime. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. You have to chant only Hare Kṛṣṇa.

So this opportunity is there. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, etādṛśī tava kṛpā: "My Lord, You have..., You are so kind, You have given us this chance." Durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. "But I am so unfortunate, I have no attraction for this chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." This is our position. So if you are serious about peace of mind, if you are serious about advancing in spiritual culture, spiritual life, then you must follow what is there in the śāstra and spoken by Kṛṣṇa Himself, spoken by Lord Caitanya Himself. Then life is successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



720823SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.20

-

Los Angeles, August 23, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



evaṁ prasanna-manaso

bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ

mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

[SB 1.2.20]



Translation: "Thus established in the mode of goodness, the man rejuvenated by loving service to the Lord gains liberation from material association, mukti, and comes to know scientifically of the Personality of Godhead."



Prabhupāda: So bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam. Vijñāna means science. It is not concoction, speculation. It is a science. Just like mathematics is a science: "Two plus two equal to four." You cannot make two plus two equal to five according to your whims. No. Anywhere you go, it doesn't matter. Because it is science, so either in America or in India or in England, everyone will accept "Two plus two equal to four." That is science. Science is true everywhere. Not that "I can imagine my God according to my whims; you can imagine your God..." That is going on. No, how you can imagine? There is no question of imagine. This bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam, this truth, this science, can be understood by a person who is mukta-saṅga. Mukta-saṅga, freed from material association. He can understand. Mukta-saṅgasya jāyate. And the condition is evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ. When you are enlightened, engladdened... Because so long we are in the jurisdiction of ignorance and passion, there cannot be any jubilant. There cannot be any enlightenment. Therefore you have to come to the platform of goodness.



As it is stated in the previous...,

tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati

[SB 1.2.19]



Cetas, everything is working within the heart, the whole thing. Heart is the central point of this body. So when the heart is not punctured by the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa and you become situated on the modes of goodness, then you become jubilant. Jubilant means he can understand at that time that "Why these people are working so hard like cats and dogs?" The human life is meant for understanding what is God. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This life is meant for simply understanding what is God. The animal life, they cannot understand. That life is different. But the human life is developed, consciousness is developed. He can understand. This is called goodness. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. How one becomes intelligent? He can study... When he is on the platform of goodness, he can study the nature that "Why I shall work so hard for getting all my material necessities?" This is being supplied by nature. The birds and beasts, they are getting their food, they are getting their mates, they are being protected in their own way, they have got a sleeping nest, apartment. So even an animal, even a small ant... We sit down in the garden, we see, even the small ant it has got family, it has got home, it has got eating. Everything is there. From ant to the elephant. Who is supplying? They have no business. They do not do any business. They have no profession. But they are getting their necessities of life.



Therefore, intelligent person... This is... Goodness means intelligence, prakāśa. And ignorance means darkness. In darkness, we cannot see what is what. So goodness means light. Anyone can see that there are 8,400,000 species of life or forms of life. They are getting their food. They are getting their shelter. They are satisfying their sex. They are also defending without any extra endeavor. By nature, they are doing their own way. So why human being, so-called civilized human being, is so much harassed for these four things? We have got better intelligence. We shall be, rather, more comfortable without struggling for existence than the animals. But our struggle for existence is greater than their struggle of existence. What is this civilization? This is not civilization. Everyone wants peaceful, calm life. Even those who are struggling so hard, big business magnate. Still, at the weekend, they find out some secluded place, nice place, without trouble. That is the nature.

That human nature should be like that, that "Why should we work so hard, simply for eating, sleeping, mating?" This is a wrong type of civilization. But at the modern age, the human society is so made that one has to work like ass, whole day and night, simply for satisfying these four necessities of life. That is also not guaranteed. We thought that in your country... When I was in India, I was contemplating coming to your country. I thought that America is very rich. "There is no problem for eating, sleeping, mating." Actually, there is nil. There is no problem. But the civilization is so made that there is no shelter. They are lying down on the park, on the street. Why? There was no necessity, but they have created such civilization, that a certain section of people are voluntarily, or being obliged, lying down on the street, on the park, no dress, no food, no fixed..., fixed-up sex life. Everything is topsy-turvied. Everything is topsy-turvied. But this is not civilization, this is not civilization. Then how they can understand God? Their mind is always disturbed and full of anxiety.

So first of all you have to come to the stage of tranquillity. Prasanna-manasa. Evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ. Prasanna-manasa means always jubilant. That is... That can be achieved by this process: bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ. By devotional service, not by no other process. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. One can be jubilant only by practicing bhagavad-bhakti-yoga. There are many other yoga systems, karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, haṭha-yoga. Everything you endeavor for spiritual enlightenment, that is called yoga. So there are different types of yoga, but real yoga is bhagavad-bhakti, devotional service. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, yoginām api sarveṣām. "Of all the yogis..." There are different types of yoga systems and different types of yogis also. But Kṛṣṇa says, "Of all the yogis..."

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



"That yogi who is devotee and always thinking of Me, or thinking of Kṛṣṇa within the heart..." Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā. Śraddhāvān, faithful. Bhajate. This is bhajana: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. So he is first-class yogi, who is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and thinking of Kṛṣṇa within his heart, first-class yogi. That is bhagavad-bhakti-yoga. And if he does it nicely, according to the rules and regulations, in the beginning, then he becomes prasanna-manasa, prasanna-manasa, enlightened, engladdened. There is no more any lamentation or hankering.



This is the sign. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. Then you can understand what is God. God is not so cheap: "Come on, I shall show you God. You haven't got to follow any rules and regulations." People want to be cheated. Therefore there are so many cheaters. They take advantage of it. Because they want everything very cheap. That is not possible. This is the stage, prasanna-manasa. Then you can understand what is God. Bhagavat-tattva-vi... Because it is a science. If somebody says, "Come on, I shall teach you the science of chemistry within a second. Give me some money," is it possible? If somebody says, "I shall teach you mathematics. Come on, give me some money.," So why these rascals are misled? If... It is a science; it is not sentiment. It is science. There was... Understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead without reference to these scientific books, Vedic literature, it is simply a disturbance, simply rascaldom. Simp... Because they are creating disturbance, always, cheating some people. They are cheated. They do not get anything. Create some disturbance. That is the instruction of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[Brs. 1.2.101]



Utpāta, utpāta means disturbance. So many rascals, without reference to the Vedic literature, revealed scriptures, Śruti-smṛti. These are Vedic literatures, śruti-smṛti-purāṇa, pañcarātra-vidhi. Without reference to all these books, if anyone poses himself that he has understood God and devotional service, it is simply a disturbance, creating disturbance. That's all. Śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi... [Brs. 1.2.101]. Because it is a science. How you can manufacture it? It is not that thing.



Therefore any religion without scientific understanding through philosophy, it is simply sentiment. It is not religion. And philosophy without religious understanding is mental speculation. That is also useless. Philosophy which does not search ultimately what is truth, what is God, that philosophy is mental speculation. And the knowledge of God without philosophy is simply sentiment. They should be combined. To understand God, our relationship with God, our duty, everything should be understood, scientifically. Bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam. Therefore this word has been used, vijñānam. Viśeṣa-jñānam. Jñānam, ordinary knowledge, and vi, when the this word is added, vi, meaning viśeṣatā, particularly, for practical application... This vijñānam.

So this vijñānam, this science, can be understood by mukta-saṅga, who is freed from the lower modes of material nature, especially tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa. So do not be befooled by so many rascals that bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam, the science of God, understanding is so cheap that anyone can give you by simply one day's association with some rascal. You see. This is not so possible. Yes, it has to be studied, it has to be practiced. It has to be realized. So this vijñānam is being stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore in the beginning, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. All rascaldom going on under the name of religion, cheating religion, they're completely kicked out from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Simply on scientific understanding we are presenting what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not for sentimentalists. Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "In the Bhagavad-gītā [Bg. 7.3] it is said that out of many thousands of ordinary men, one fortunate man endeavors for perfection of life. Mostly they are conducted by the modes of passion and ignorance, and thus they are engaged always in lust, desire, hankerings, ignorance and sleep. Out of many such manlike animals, there is actually a man..."



Prabhupāda: Manlike animals. They show with two hands, two legs, but actually they are animals. Four-legged. Two legs have been transformed into two hands. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Out of many such manlike animals, there is actually a man who knows the responsibility of human life and thus tries to make life perfect by following the prescribed duties. And out of such many thousands of persons who have thus attained success in human life, one may know scientifically about the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: Yes. So it is not so easy to understand Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye, yatatām api siddhānām: [Bg. 7.3] "Those who have endeavored for perfection of life, out of many such persons, one can hardly understand Kṛṣṇa." It is not so easy. But it is by Kṛṣṇa's grace. Kṛṣṇa being very compassionate with these fallen souls of this age, He appeared as Lord Caitanya and distributed Kṛṣṇa. That is His prerogative. That is His right. If Kṛṣṇa wants to distribute Himself freely, that is a different thing. Otherwise, it is not so easy to understand Kṛṣṇa. Just like to earn one million dollar is not so easy. But if you are fortunate, you meet somebody who can distribute million dollars at a time, that is a different thing. Therefore Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu was recognized by Rūpa Gosvāmī, namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te: [Cc. Madhya 19.53] "My dear Lord, You are the most munificent of all incarnations. The other incarnations, people could not understand, but You are freely distributing Yourself." Kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne. Kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ. Therefore we have to follow the footsteps of Rūpa Gosvāmī, rūpānuga. Then we can understand Lord Caitanya. And if we get favor of Lord Caitanya, we can very easily understand Kṛṣṇa. This is the process. Go on.



Pradyumna: "In the same Bhagavad-gītā (18.55) it is also said that scientific knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is understood only by the process of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga..."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Here also it is confirmed: bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ. It is not said, "By mystic yoga, by haṭha-yoga, by jñāna-yoga, by karma-yoga." No. Bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ. If you want to understand the science of God, then we have to adopt this devotional service. Not by other yogas. Otherwise, in Bhāgavata it would have been said "By karma-yogataḥ, by jñāna-yogataḥ, by haṭha-yogataḥ, by dhyāna-yogataḥ." No. It is clearly said, bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ. Bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-saṅgasya jāyate [SB 1.2.20]. If you are still after jñāna-yoga, dhyāna-yoga, you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, God. It is clearly said. In the Bhagavad-gītā also, it is clearly said, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Simply through devotional service.



So if you want to know God, then you have to follow the prescribed rules and regulations of bhagavad-bhakti-yoga. It is very simple. It is made very easy, especially in this age: simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. It's so made easy, but we are so unfortunate that we do not take advantage of this. Etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu laments, "My dear Lord, You are so compassionate and merciful upon us that in this age You have descended in Your, as Your name, and one can chant this name without any regulation, without any regulation." Niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. Any time, any circumstances, one can chant this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Kṛṣṇa has become so liberal. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi: "My dear Lord, although You are so much merciful upon me, still, I am so unfortunate." Etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam, "I am so unfortunate," durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani na, "I could not be attached to chanting of mantra. Oh, I am so unfortunate." You see? The things have been made so easy, actually, but unfortunate class of men, they cannot take to it.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721031SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.20

-

Vṛndāvana, October 31, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



evaṁ prasanna-manaso

bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ

mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

[SB 1.2.20]



"Thus established in the mode of goodness, the man rejuvenated by loving service to the Lord gains liberation from material association, or mukti, and comes to know scientifically of the Personality of Godhead."



Prabhupāda:



evaṁ prasanna-manaso

bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ

mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

[SB 1.2.20]



So the Absolute Truth is scientific knowledge. It is not sentiment-"I accept somebody as God by votes." That is not bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam. One must know what is the definition of God. It is not that somebody comes forward with a long beard and says, "I am God," and we rascals accept him as God. No, not like that. It is vijñānam. Vijñāna means science. Without scientific knowledge, one cannot understand what is God. Bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam. And who can understand this vijñāna, this scientific knowledge? Mukta-saṅgasya. One who is liberated from the contamination of the three modes of material nature, he can understand.



Those who are contaminated with tamo-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, they can create their own God. There are different types of "God" also. In one sense everyone is God. God means the controller. So everyone is to some extent a controller. But as I have explained several times, real controller means who is not controlled by others. That is God. If I am controlled by the material nature, daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā... [Bg. 7.14]. Birth, death, old age and disease, if I am controlled by these conditions of nature, then how I can become God? God is never controlled. Therefore one who can understand God must be free from the contamination of this material nature. Mukta-saṅgasya.

This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



When one has realized Brahman, prasannātmā, prasannātmā, brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā... Here also it is said, evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ. The same thing you will find everywhere. There cannot be any contradiction. Prasanna-manasa and prasannātmā, the same thing. So how one can become prasannātmā or prasanna-manasa? That is described here. Bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. If you accept bhagavad-bhakti-yoga, devotional service to the Lord, you shall be prasanna-manasa. You shall be always feeling jolly. If I am not jolly, if I am not prasanna-manasa, that means māyā has attacked me. A bhagavad-bhakta shall never be aprasanna, not joyful. Always joyful. If he is actually in contact with Kṛṣṇa, how he can become morose? No. If he is morose, if he is unhappy, that means māyā has attacked him. This is the test.



Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī says, utsāha. We shall be always enthusiastic. But we cannot become enthusiastic artificially. There must be bhagavad-bhakti-yoga. Just like these visitors in the temple, see how much enthusiastic they are. They are rising early in the morning, going to take bath in the Yamunā, and they are visiting so many temples, especially this Dāmodara temple, because it is Dāmodara month. And from five o'clock or before that, three o'clock, they are enthusiastic. They are not sleeping very nicely. That means lack of bhagavad-bhakti-yoga. It is māyā. So you must be very careful. Test. If we cannot rise early in the morning, that means we are under the clutches of māyā. This is the test.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore says,

jīv jāgo jīv jāgo gauracānda bole

kota nidrā jāo māyā-piśācīra kole



Sleeping is very dangerous. It is to be understood that I am under the clutches of māyā, the more we sleep, because the symptom of tamo-guṇa is laziness and sleep. This is the symptom of tamo-guṇa, laziness and sleeping. And symptoms of rajo-guṇa-very active, but just like monkey. Monkeys are very active, but all injurious. Wherever they will sit, they "Gata-gata-gat-gat-gat." Not a single moment they are inactive, but all foolishness. That is passion. And goodness means knowledge. So in the previous verse it is described how to come to the platform of goodness. When one comes to the platform of goodness, then he becomes prasanna-manasa, because he is not attacked by the modes of ignorance and passion, means laziness, sleep and foolishly active. Foolishly active is more dangerous than less active. Because if one is dangerous, it is better not to become very much active, because... Just like this monkey. You will find always very active, but nobody likes them. As soon as a monkey comes, everyone drives them away: "Get out! Get out! Get out!"



Therefore we should not be lazy and sleepy, at the same time not foolishly active. We must come to the real standard of life, goodness. Then we can begin our devotional service. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



After being brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20], after understanding clearly ahaṁ brahmāsmi, one can take to transcendental loving service of the Lord, not before. Before, if we take bhakti-yoga... Of course, we shall become gradually brahma-bhūta also... Bhakti-yoga is so nice that it does not depend on any condition. Ahaituky apratihatā. Apratihatā means not under any condition. You can begin, in whichever position you are, you can begin immediately. You can begin hearing about Kṛṣṇa from any point. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. It doesn't matter. And if you follow strictly the bhagavad-bhakti-yoga process, then automatically you are situated above goodness. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26].



Anyone who has taken seriously devotional service... Vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ, janayaty āśu vairāgyam [SB 1.2.7]. Liberation means knowledge and detachment. Knowledge, full knowledge means that "I am not this body, I am spirit soul, and my bodily activities are not congenial for my ultimate goal of life. I must engage myself in spiritual activity." This is called jñāna and vairāgya. When one knows that he is not body, then why should he work hard day and night for maintaining this body? That is knowledge. And karmīs, they are trying to maintain this body. Sometimes karmīs also take to bhakti-yoga. Not bhakti-yoga, so-called bhakti. But their aim is how to maintain this body nicely. That is also accepted. Akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ [SB 2.3.10]. Because if you take to bhakti-yoga even for maintaining this body nicely, that is also very nice, because gradually, due to the influence of bhakti-yoga, you will come to the platform of mukta, mukta-saṅga. Bhakti-yoga is so strong.

Therefore śāstra recommends that either you are karmī, either you are jñānī, either you are yogi, you take to devotional service. Your all desires will be fulfilled. That is the injunction.

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.10]



This is the recommendation. It is all-inclusive. If you have got desire like the karmīs or the jñānīs or the yogis, you take to bhakti-yoga. Bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ. You will become prasanna-manasa. You will be engladdened. You will come to the platform of joyfulness. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Spiritual life means ānandamaya. There is no displeasure. Always ānanda. That is spiritual life. Spiritual life means ānanda, and material life means anxiety. You can distinguish. If you are always put into anxiety, that is material life. And if you are always jolly, that is spiritual life. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt.



So here it is, the same thing. Because one has taken to bhakti-yoga, he must be prasanna manasa, very joyful. If you are full of anxiety, how you can understand the science of God? That is not possible. So evaṁ prasanna manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. By execution of bhakti-yoga you come to the platform of transcendental bliss, prasanna-manasa. Transcendental, spiritual life means eternal, blissful life of knowledge. That is spiritual platform. And material life means temporary life of miserable condition. Temporary life of miserable condition. That is material life. And spiritual life means eternal, blissful life of knowledge. This life is temporary, but when we are transferred to our spiritual life that is eternal. Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1].

We are also part and parcel of sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. Vigraha means form. Sac-cid-ānanda does not mean impersonal. That is foolishness, another foolishness. Ānanda cannot be impersonal. You can make experiment. Suppose if you are put into a big room without any man coming there, so you cannot feel very comfortable for long time. You will feel lonely. You shall try to come out. Just like we have got experience. Everyone has got experience, when we rise very high in the sky, but we cannot remain in that condition more than, utmost, eight to ten hours. Then we become very restless. Although it is very high in the sky, but we cannot remain in that way. Therefore śāstra says,

...āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

[SB 10.2.32]



One who does not take shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, he may rise up very high by austerity and penance, but he cannot remain in that position. He may give up artificially this material world, jagan mithyā, but he has to come down again to this mithyā jagat and open schools and hospitals, because he cannot remain in that impersonal way. That is the experience. All so-called brahmavādī, they say that "We have become liberated" but not liberated. That is simply concoction, vimukta-māninaḥ. They think like that. Actually they are not liberated. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. Without being liberated, when one speaks that "I have become liberated," that means aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ: the intelligence is not clear. He does not know what is liberation. Liberation means prasanna-manasa, full of joyfulness, that is liberation. Evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ, bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam [SB 1.2.20]. Tattva means truth. You have to understand Bhagavān in truth.



So that, to understand in truth, that is a science. That is not sentiment. Vijñāna. In another place Kṛṣṇa says, to advise Brahmā, catuḥ-śloki-bhāgavata [SB 2.9.33/34/35/36], jñānam... In the Bhagavad-gītā also. Jñānaṁ sa-vijñānam. Jñānaṁ me parama-guhyaṁ yad vijñāna-samanvitam. The jñānaṁ me parama-guhyam, the knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very, very confidential. Jñānaṁ me parama-guhyaṁ yad vijñāna-samanvitam. It is not sentiment. It is full of scientific knowledge. So when we understand the truth, the Absolute Truth, scientifically, that is called bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam. That bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam is understandable by a person who is liberated. One who is very busy, anxious with politics, sociology, humanitarianism, one who is very busy always in politics, how he can become interested or how he can understand bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam? That is not possible.

Therefore these are the tests to understand. A politician may pose himself that he is very advanced in spiritual life, but when we see that he is more interested in politics than in Kṛṣṇa, then we can understand what is his position. These are the tests. Or politics or sociology or anything, a pure devotee is always interested how Kṛṣṇa would be satisfied. Just like Arjuna. Of course, when one is interested in that way, all other things, subordinate things, they come within. Just like Arjuna was a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, but at the same time he was a politician also. So, but the first interest is to become Kṛṣṇized, how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, not that "For political purpose I love Kṛṣṇa." No. You love Kṛṣṇa, and your all problems, political, social and other things, will be solved. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You don't require to attempt for political reason and make Kṛṣṇa consciousness secondary. Therefore we say that if people, not all, if some percentage of the whole population of the world become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then all the problems of the world will be solved. We don't expect that cent percent people will be Kṛṣṇa conscious, but simply a few percent, say five per cent. If the people of the whole population, they become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then the face of the world will change-īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]-because if the leaders, they understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness and act accordingly, the others will follow. Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥ [Bg. 3.21]. Itaraḥ janaḥ, common men, follows the leaders.

So evaṁ prasanna-manasaḥ. How to become happy mood of life, that is described here. Bhagavat-bhakti-yogataḥ. One has to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And mukta-saṅgasya, bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-saṅgasya jāyate. Nobody can understand Kṛṣṇa unless he is liberated from the influence of the modes of material nature. You can read the purport.

Pradyumna: "In the Bhagavad-gītā [Bg. 7.3] it is said that out of many thousands of ordinary men, one fortunate man endeavors for perfection in life. Mostly they are conducted by the modes of passion and ignorance, and thus they are engaged always in lust, desire, hankerings, ignorance and sleep. Out of many such manlike animals, there is actually a man who knows the responsibility of human life and thus tries to make life..."



Prabhupāda: So human being in the modes of ignorance and passion, they are animals. They are not considered as human being. They are animals. Rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ, kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye [SB 1.2.19]. So actually a person is considered to be human being when he comes to the platform of goodness or he acquires the quality of a bona fide brāhmaṇa. Then he is considered as human being. Go on.



Pradyumna: "...and thus tries to make life perfect by following the prescribe duties. And out of such many thousands of persons who have thus attained success in human life, one may know scientifically about the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: Yes. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Because we are coming from animal by the evolutionary process... According to śāstra, it is said that... The Darwin's theory says from monkey. That is also fact, that after monkey the living entity comes to the human form. Somebody says after lion. Somebody says after cow. So from the animals, we, the human form is developed. So unless that human body also reformed, so he remains animal. That reformation required, saṁskāra, reformation, enlightenment, cultural life. That cultural life culminates when one actually becomes a brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava. That is real cultural life. Not by birth but by cultivation of knowledge, education, advancement, spiritual knowledge, one comes to the platform of brāhmaṇa.



So manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. This is the platform of siddhi. But nobody is interested to become a brāhmaṇa, qualified. Everyone wants to become a śūdra. Kalau śūdraḥ sambhavaḥ. Especially in this age nobody is interested. Just like we are asking people to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and give up the habit of illicit sex life and intoxication and gambling and meat-eating, and people laugh, that "What is this? This is the life. If we give up these things..." Especially in the Western countries, they think it is denying the primary necessities of life. They say. Some of my students, they left our association because they could not follow these principles. They are complaining that "Prabhupāda is denying the primary necessities of life." Therefore it is said, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu [Bg. 7.3]. It is very difficult to give up these four bad habits. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. But this is the path of perfection. But they are not interested in perfection. They want to rot as hogs and dogs in this world. That is their purpose. And therefore Kṛṣṇa says, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. Nobody is interested to become brāhmaṇa. They are interested to become dogs and hogs. That is their interest.

Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. And yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3]. It is not that coming to the platform of a qualified brāhmaṇa, one can understand Kṛṣṇa. That is also not. Still, you have to go farther. Brahma-bhūta. Brahmā jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ. Brāhmaṇa can understand Brahman. He can understand that he is also part and parcel of Brahman. But that understanding is not sufficient. He has to go further, to become a Vaiṣṇava, to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, as person. Vaiṣṇava means to understand the Absolute Truth as person, not imperson. In the brāhmaṇa state, even they understand Brahman, that is impersonal view. But one has to go far above. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. One has to make progress from the Brahman platform to Paramātmā platform, then to the Personality of Godhead understanding. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3]. Somebody is trying to come to the platform of brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage. That is called siddha state. But yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaścid vetti māṁ tattvataḥ [Bg. 7.3]. So they also cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa can be understood only by this process, bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ.

evaṁ prasanna-manaso

bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ

bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ

mukta-saṅgasya jāyate

[SB 1.2.20]



One has to become liberated from the brahminical stage also. Then he can understand Kṛṣṇa.



So Kṛṣṇa understanding is not so easy. It is very difficult. Kṛṣṇa says. But by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, because He wanted to distribute Himself, Caitanya Mahāprabhu is giving us Kṛṣṇa freely... Kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. Rūpa Gosvāmī says that namo mahā-vadānyāya. Kṛṣṇa was also not so liberal. He simply asked us, "Surrender," but He did not distribute Himself. But in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu He distributed Himself: "Take Me, take Me, take Me. Without any price, take Me." This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is Kṛṣṇa, and He has come in the form of Caitanya, Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, to distribute Himself. Therefore He is recognized, namo mahā-vadānyāya, "the most munificent." No other incarnation, even Rāmacandra or Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa, they were not so liberal. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu is so liberal. Pāpī tāpī jata chilo hari-nāme uddhārilo. They distributed Himself through the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

So these Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, the Westerners, they are understanding Kṛṣṇa. It is very, very difficult subject matter. But because we are trying to understand Kṛṣṇa through Caitanya Mahāprabhu, therefore it has become easy. Otherwise it is very difficult subject. Otherwise Kṛṣṇa Himself said, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati sidd... [Bg. 7.3]. It will take... But as we are fallen, Kṛṣṇa is also as much liberal also, this age. So if we still, you do not take advantage, then how much unfortunate we are, we can consider.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



720824SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.21

-

Los Angeles, August 24, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś

chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi

dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

[SB 1.2.21]



Translation: "Thus the knots of the heart and all misgivings are cut to pieces. The chain of fruitive actions, or karma, is terminated when one sees the self as master."



Prabhupāda: So bhidyate means cut into pieces. What is that? Knot. Hṛdaya-granthi. Hṛdaya means heart, and granthi means knot. So our everyone's heart is knot. What is that knot? The knot is sex. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. This is knot. The material enjoyment begins There is, everyone's heart, man, woman... Man wants to have woman; woman wants to have man. This is searching after. And some way or other, if they unite, the knot becomes tied up, very strong. That is called knot. Then as soon as the knot is there, then house, then land, then gṛha-kṣetra-suta, children. Then friends, then money. In this way, one after another, one after another, we become knotted in so many things. This is called knot. Hṛdaya-granthi, one after the other. Just like, to make it tight, you give one knot, again a knot, another knot, another knot, another knot, to make it secure. So this is our position. This material world, we are knotted in so many ways, and we are creating more knot. In this life... (tapping sound in background) Who is making that sound? Oh...



So we have to cut down this knot. We are bound up in this material life by so many knots. So the process of cutting down, we have begun: yad anudhyāsinā. What is that verse? Yad anudhyāsinā, yes.

yad anudhyāsinā yuktāḥ

karma-granthi-nibandhanam

chindanti kovidās tasya

ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim



The fifteenth verse, we began, yad anudhyāsinā. These knots are there. The whole world is working so hard on account of being knotted in so many ways. But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if you take this sword, and carefully work, then all these knots will be cut off. You will become free. The living entity, soul, is bound up the subtle body and gross body on account of these knots, attachment. And different attachment. And Kṛṣṇa is giving us facilities as we want. If you want a human body, you get it. If you want animal body, you get it. If you want tiger's body, you get it. You want Brahmā's body, demigod's body, you get it. That is going on. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni [Bg. 3.27]. You are, God is within you, and you are hankering after something, God is noting down: "All right." Even if you forget, He'll give you. "You wanted this facility. Now here it is. You can take." Kṛṣṇa is so kind.



We are being harassed by getting these different types of body and engagement according to the body. That we can understand. We are not happy. One after another. Because our main business is sense gratification. So we cannot enjoy all these senses fully in one kind of body. There is some defect. Just like we are trying to gratify our senses by flying to another planet, moon planet. This is another sense gratification. We are meant for this planet. We are bound up by conditions. Artificially we are trying to go there. And making plans, so many plans: "There will be intermediate station, and the petrol will be carried from here," and this and that. So many things. Simply spending money. Just like childish. The child, they spoil their time and energy in certain playing. Similarly, this is going on. Because it is a sense gratification. That's all. Simply mere sense gratification: "Let us go, how it is, moon planet." You have no business there. You cannot do there anything. You cannot live there, but still, "Let us go, let us go. And spend all the money, taxpayers' money, spend like water." This is going on.

So if you actually want to go to moon planet, there is clear process:

yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām

[Bg. 9.25]



That Easy Journey... Long time ago, I think sometimes in 1960, so one gentleman met me: "Sir, your book, Easy Journey... So we shall go there?" "Yes, we shall go." "And again I shall come back?" "No, no coming back." So "Then what it is?" That means he want to sense gratification. He wants to go to moon planet or to any planet, come back, and become boast amongst his friends, "You see, I have gone there." (laughter) That is his business. Actually, he doesn't want to go there, neither he has got power to go, but he wants to satisfy his senses that "I shall go there and come back and show my chest very swollen, that 'I have gone to the moon planet.' " Eh? That one aeronautics, he first went with that, what is called, capsule? And he was greeted all over the world. He went to India also. Our rascal leaders, they also greeted him. Kruschev and others. What? "He has gone round." And it was published in the... When he was rounding, then he was seeing, trying to see, "Where is my Russia? Where is my Moscow?" So the attraction is here, in Moscow.



Just like there is a proverb. The vulture goes very high, three miles, four miles high. It is very difficult for us to fly, single-handed. But the aim is, "Where is a dead body?" He's looking forward, "Where is a dead body?" The aim is, not very good. He's looking after some dead corpse to eat. That is his business. But he has gone very high, four miles high. Similarly, all these so-called rascal scientists, their aim is how to stuck-up in this knot of material existence, and they are trying to become so many things. You see? Hṛdaya-granthi. Real attachment is here. Just like the hog; the real attachment is the stool. But he's getting very fat, "Oh, I am so happy." You see? So this is going on. Nature is very clever. Just to make you attached to stool, she gives you certain body, type of body, hog. You become very pleased: "Oh, I am so happy. I am living in heaven." Sometimes actually Indra, the king of heaven, he was cursed to become a hog, and he was, he became hog. He had so many kiddies, wife, and living in filthy place, eating stool. So Brahmā came that for his absence, the management in the heavenly kingdom is not going nice. So he came: "Indra, now please come with me." "Where shall I go to, sir?" "Heaven." "What is that? I cannot go. I have got responsibility. I have got my wife, my children, and I am happy here. I do not know what is heaven."

So this is the attachment. Even if you say... Just like what we are, we are doing? We are canvassing, "Please come with us, go, let us go." Just like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, rādhā-kṛṣṇa bolo, saṅge calo, ei-mātra bhikhā cāi. So Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that "Kindly chant 'Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa' and come with me. We are going back to home, back to Godhead." Nobody is interested. "What is this 'Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa' nonsense? We are very happy here." Knot. Even if you describe, "Oh, here is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. You see how nicely They're dressed and They enjoy. Just see dancing here." They're... They don't care for it. "Oh, we are very happy here. Why shall I go to Goloka Vṛndāvana?" "You will not be able to stay here." "Oh, that's all right. As long as I can stay, let me enjoy this stool." That's all. Attachment. This is called attachment. Attachment is so strong that even if you explain that "You will go back to home, back to Godhead. Your father is Kṛṣṇa, all-powerful. You can enjoy there blissful life, eternal life," "No. It is better here."

So by Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, if people take to it seriously and become advanced... The same process, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17], simply hearing about Kṛṣṇa, as we are doing. Then, gradually, we come to the platform of goodness, and the lower modes of material nature, namely ignorance and passion, cannot disturb us. We become situated in goodness. And then, gradually, this stage comes, evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. You become engladdened, you become joyful, by discharging devotional service. And the knots, you will be no more interested with this rascal life of material existence. Bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiḥ.

Just like if you are, just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja wanted the kingdom of his father, but actually when he saw Lord Viṣṇu before him, he said, "Sir, I do not want anything." Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42]. "My dear Lord, I have no more any aspiration of this kingdom or that kingdom, that kingdom." This position comes. It is just like that... You are hungry, but if you are given food, if, when your belly is filled up, you will automatically say, "No, no, I don't want any, anything more. That's all right." Kṛṣṇa consciousness is like that. Actually, we don't want to eat. We have nothing to eat. I am spirit soul, you are spirit soul. It is our material hankering. In order to maintain this body, we require some material things to eat. Otherwise, as spiritual soul, I or you don't want to eat anything. There is nothing to be eaten. Therefore the eating propensities should be satisfied by eating Kṛṣṇa's prasādam, so that you gradually become spiritualized and your eating propensities may be diminished. Just like the Gosvāmīs. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau **. Nidrāhāra. These are our necessities, sleeping, eating. Nidrāhāra and vihāra, and sex enjoyment. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau, conquered. Conquered. Because in spiritual life there is no need of eating, there is no need of sleeping. That is a different thing. So nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as we have discussed, gradually will bring you to that stage where no more knot for the material attachment. Bhidyate, bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ. Saṁśayāḥ. Now everyone is... We are speaking that "You are not this body; you are soul..." The people cannot understand. They are in doubt, "Oh, how is it I am soul? I am this body." But as soon as you come perfectly in spiritual consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the doubts will be over: "I am spirit soul, I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa." Then that will be fixed up.

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś

chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi

dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare



We are bound up by karma, by karma acting. In this life, I am acting in such a way so that I am preparing my next life. Again, next life, I shall act in such a way, I shall prepare my next life. In this way, one after another, one after another, one after another. But if we take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and if we simply act for Kṛṣṇa, yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9], simply if we act for Kṛṣṇa, there will be no more karma-bandhana. Then one after another, that will be finished.



Karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54]. In the Brahma-saṁhitā this is, that "Those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, their karma, their action of, resultant action of karma, is stopped." How it is stopped? Kṛṣṇa gives you assurance in the Bhagavad-gītā: ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. "I shall give you protection from all kinds of resultant action of your sinful life. You just surrender to Me." Kṛṣṇa can do everything. Just like king can give you, excuse you. Although by law you are condemned to death, but if you appeal to the supreme executive, the king or the president, if he likes, he can excuse you. Similarly, by nature's law we cannot be freed from the resultant action of our sinful life. That is not possible. But if Kṛṣṇa desires, if Kṛṣṇa is pleased upon you, He can excuse, He can excuse you. Chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ, kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi. How cāsya karmāṇi? Dṛṣṭa eva ātmani īśvare. Because, at that time, actually when you are Kṛṣṇa conscious, we'll always see Kṛṣṇa ātmani, within mind, within heart. That very seeing is, what is called, immunity from all sinful activities. Then you become free, go back to home, back to Godhead.

Thank you. (devotees offer obeisances) Begin. [break] (initiation ceremony) Thank you. Your name is Rūpa-nārāyaṇa dāsa. Rūpa-nārāyaṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (Prabhupāda chants japa) So what are the rules and regulations?

Devotee: No meat, fish or eggs, no intoxicants, no gambling or mental speculation, and no illicit sex.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Māyāpura-candrodaya. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's name. (japa)



Devotee: No meat, fish or eggs, no intoxicants, no gambling, and no illicit sex life.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Nitāi-gauracandra dāsa. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (japa)



Devotees: Jaya! [break]



Devotee: ...sex, eating of fish, meat or eggs, no intoxicants.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Madana-mohana dāsa. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (japa)



Devotee: Richard.



Prabhupāda: (japa) Hm. What are the rules?



Richard: No meat, fish, or eggs, no intoxications, no illicit sex, and no gambling.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Rādhā-gopīnātha dāsa. (japa) What are the rules and regulations?



Devotee: No meat, fish, or eggs, no illicit sex life, no intoxicants, and no gambling.



Prabhupāda: So you are Vṛndā-devī dāsī. Vṛndā-devī? Yes. Vṛndā-devī is another name of tulasī. (japa) So what are the rules?



Devotee: No illicit sex life, no intoxications, no gambling, no mental speculation, no intoxicants...



Prabhupāda: Hm, what is the name?



Devotee: ...no meat-eating, meat, fish or eggs.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Mathurā-mohana dāsa. Hare Kṛṣṇa



Devotee: Thank you very much, Śrīla Prabhupāda. (japa)



Prabhupāda: ...rules? What are the rules?



Devotee: No illicit sex, no fish, meat or eggs, no intoxicants, no gambling.



Prabhupāda: All right. Your name Ravīndranātha (pause) dāsa. (laughter)



Devotee: Mark Prabhu. No, Paula. (japa)



Prabhupāda: What are the rules?



Devotee: No illicit sex, no meat, fish or eggs, no gambling and no..., intoxication.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Paramahaṁsī-devī. (laughter) Don't laugh. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (japa) (end)





721101SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.21

-

Vṛndāvana, November 1, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.:)



bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś

chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi

dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

[SB 1.2.21]



Translation: "Thus the knots of the heart and all misgivings are cut to pieces. The chain of fruitive actions, karma, is terminated when one sees the self as master."



Prabhupāda:



bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś

chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi

dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare



This is complete liberated stage. In the previous verse it has been spoken, bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-saṅgasya jāyate. The science of God, bhagavat-tattva, the science of Absolute Truth, becomes manifest to the liberated soul. We find sometimes that one man is posing to have very much advanced in spiritual understanding or a great devotee, but mukta-saṅga..., he's not mukta-saṅga; he cannot give up smoking biḍi. You see. These are the small tests. One who has actually tasted spiritual life, his unwanted things of life would at once diminish. There is no need. Anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. Anartha. Anartha, things which are not wanted, which has no meaning. So mukta-saṅga means no material attachment. That is mukta-saṅga. When one is actually liberated, these are the signs.



Bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiḥ. Our material life begins by a knot in the heart. What is that knot? That is sex desire. This is the knot. A man is hankering after a woman, and a woman is hankering after a man. This attachment is the beginning of material life. Everyone, not only human society. In animal society, in bird society, in beast society, you'll find this sex attachment. This is the hṛdaya-granthiḥ, beginning. Therefore, according to Vedic civilization, the first teaching to a student is to give him lesson how to become brahmacārī. How not to become attached in sex life, that is called brahmacārī. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa [SB 6.1.13]. Tapasā, to become brahmacārī, to become..., abstaining from sex life, it requires tapasya. It is not so easy thing. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa damena śamena [SB 6.1.13]. One has to practice how to control the mind, how to control the senses. This is brahmacarya. Tapasya. It requires tapasya. At the present moment, the students are, what to speak of tapasya, they are given all kinds of luxuries. So how there will be brahmacārīs? It is not possible. Especially in the Western countries, the boys and girls, they are educated in one place, co-education, and they live in the same building, and there are so many things. You know, better than me.

So there is no brahmacārī. There is no brahmacarya. That means the knot in the heart, sex desire, is more and more increased. It is not decreased. But if one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by practice, one comes to the point of giving up all these unwanted things. Chidyante, bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiḥ. I have several times explained to you that this knot of the heart is the sex desire. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam. Sex desire, mithunī-bhāvam etam. Tayor hṛdaya-granthim. And when they're actually united, that knot becomes more and more tight. But if one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then gradually, bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiḥ, that knot, sex desire... That is the test whether one's sex desire has diminished. That is the test. Bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiḥ. Bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ. Saṁśayāḥ. We are now in hazy conclusion, what is our position. We do not know. We do not know what is God, what I am, what is our relationship. Everyone is speculating. There are, therefore, there are so many parties. The jñānī party, the yogi party, the karmī party. Generally... and within each and every party there are hundreds and thousands of parties. So when one actually becomes free from the knot, or the knot is cut off, the attachment for material desires is cut off, at that time, he can understand what is his position, what is his position.

Therefore two things must go on in parallel lines. One side, a person should cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness and, another side, he should try to give up all the unwanted things. That will help him. You cannot continue both the things. Just like when a person is diseased, he's given medicine. At the same time, he has to act, not to take this, not to take that. That is the way of treatment. Not that whatever you like, you can eat; whatever you like, you can do, at the same time you become spiritually advanced. This is all nonsense. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa [SB 6.1.13]. One has to practice tapasya. Tapas. Tapas means a little inconvenience, voluntarily accepting inconvenience. Just like brahmacārī lies down on the floor. A sannyāsī also, they follow the same practice as far as possible. Taking bath three, thrice daily, and so many rules and regulations are there. But at the present age, it is not possible to follow all the rules and regulations, but at least everyone who is interested in advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness must rise early in the morning, before four. And take his bath and become cleansed, perform maṅgala-ārātrika and study. These are tapasya. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena ca damena ca tyāgena [SB 6.1.13]. Tyāgena means renouncement. I like something, but voluntarily I should give it up. That is called tyāga. Of course, one who takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness seriously, Kṛṣṇa helps him to become qualified in these matters. So bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ.

Now unless one is taken to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness practice, he has got so many doubts. "Why I shall do this? Why I shall do that?" But when he is raised to the platform of goodness, as it is expressed, mukta-saṅgasya jāyate, bhagavat-tattva-vijñānam [SB 1.2.20], when he understand the science of God, automatically he becomes disinterested with these unwanted things. Kṣīyante ca asya karmāṇi. Karmāṇi, karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54]. We are bound up in this material existence due to our karma. According to my past karma, I have got this body, and again, as we are acting in this body, I am preparing forward my next body. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. We have got varieties of body, varieties of body. Not that because we are all human beings... We have got common factors-two hands, two legs, one head-but each body is different from the other body. You won't find one pair of body exactly of the same nature. That is not possible. Because everyone's karma is different. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa. According to our karma, we get different types of body. So we have to stop this karma. We have to stop this karma. How you can stop this karma? Yajñārthe karmaṇaḥ anyatra karma-bandhanaḥ. If we simply act for Kṛṣṇa, then we get rid of the resultant action of karma. Yajñārthe karma. Whatever you do, you do for Kṛṣṇa. Yajñārthe. Yajña means Viṣṇu. Kṛṣṇa's the origin of viṣṇu-tattva. So whatever you are ordered to do for Kṛṣṇa, you are not bound up by the karma. Otherwise, good or bad, you are bound up by the resultant action of karma.

So when one is actually in the liberated stage... Liberated stage means to remain fixed up in devotional service, bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ... Otherwise it is not possible. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. You can stand liberated on the platform of devotional service. As soon as you deviate from devotional service, immediately the māyā is standing. She'll capture you. You can see practically. There is sunshine, and just next to the sunshine, there is darkness or shadow. So little deviation from the sunshine there is shadow. And little deviation from the shadow, you go to the sunshine. Both things are side by side, māyā and Kṛṣṇa. Māyā means absence of Kṛṣṇa. Shadow means absence of light, sunshine. So if you always keep in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no shadow of māyā.

kṛṣṇa-sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra



Kṛṣṇa is just like sunshine and māyā is just like darkness. So wherever there is sunshine, there cannot be any possibility of darkness. So you keep always yourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then there is no possibility of māyā. And māyā means to engaged in fruitive activities.



Tṛtīya-karma, karma-saṅgaḥ anya tṛtīya-śaktir iṣyate. Māyā... So long we are in māyā, we have to engage ourself in fruitive activities, karma. Therefore here it is said, kṣīyante ca asya karmāṇi. One who is liberated, being engaged in devotional service, his karma, fruitive activities, stop immediately. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said,

yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.54]



Yas tu indra. Indra means the King of heaven. And there is another indra, indra-gopa. It is a, it is an insect, very small. That is called indra-gopa. So it is said, "Beginning from that Indra, the King of heaven, down to this indra, the small insect," yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma, "everyone is enjoying, suffering according at the karma." The, that Indra, the King of heaven, is... You can become the King of heaven, provided you have got a mass of pious activities. You are promoted. Just like if you have got sufficient education, you can become high-court judge. It is not very difficult. Similarly, this Indra, Candra, Brahmā, big, big demigods, they have got all these posts on account of their great pious activities. Puṇya. Puṇya-karma. Similarly, the hogs and dogs and other animals, they are due to the pāpa-karma, impious activities. So both of them are resultant action of our karma.



So everyone is suffering or enjoying the resultant action of his karma. Yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-bandhānurūpa. Bandhana. As he's bound up by the resultant action of karma... Bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam āta... They are getting different results of their karma. It is very easy to understand. But for the devotees it is said, karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54], those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness in devotional service, their karma is cut off. There is no resultant action. Just like you know chick peas. Chick peas, if you sow on the ground, it will fructify into a plant. But the same chick pea, if it is fried and you sow on the ground, it will not fructify. So our karma should be fried up by devotional service. Then it will not produce any result. And Kṛṣṇa also says in the Bhagavad-gītā, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. So there is no resultant action of a devotee's activity. Therefore here it is said, kṣīyante ca asya karmāṇi. Unless you have completely finished your resultant action of karma, you cannot be promoted to the spiritual world. You have to accept a type of material body so long karma will go on. Therefore in another place, Bhāgavata, it is said that people are engaged as karmīs, and Ṛṣabhadeva says na sādhu manye. One is engaged in karma. It is not very good.

...na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

[SB 5.5.4]



By karma only we are getting different types of body, although it is temporary. But as soon as we are encaged in this body, we become subject to threefold miseries of life.



So for a devotee, there is no more karma, or there is no more material body. Kṛṣṇa also confirms in the Bhagavad-gītā, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. After giving up this body, a devotee, he does not get anymore birth in this material body. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. In his spiritual body, he comes back home, back to Godhead. So the same thing is expressed here: kṣīyante ca asya karmāṇi dṛṣṭa ātmani īśvare. He sees, ātmani dṛṣṭa, he realized his relationship with God, īśvare. He realized that "I am eternal servant of God, eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa." Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. He realizes it. And because he realizes it, he engages himself in that way. That is the perfection of life.

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś

chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi

dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare



Read the purport.



Pradyumna: "Attainment of scientific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead means seeing one's own self simultaneously. As far as the identity of the living being as spirit self is concerned, there are a number of speculations and misgivings. The materialist does not believe in the existence of the spirit self, and empiric philosophers believe in the impersonal feature of the..."



Prabhupāda: This is doubt, whether there is soul or not. Chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ. There are so many doubts for the material scientists. Somebody says, "There must be something." Somebody says, "No, there is no soul. It is the combination of matter. The life symptoms come out." There are so many theories. So actually, when becomes enlightened by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, his all doubts are moved. Go on.



Pradyumna: "...and empiric philosophers believe in the impersonal feature of the whole spirit without individuality of the living beings. But the transcendentalists affirm that the soul and the Supersoul are two different identities qualitatively one..."



Prabhupāda: This is also another doubt. Because the impersonalists, they think, ghaṭākāśa-poṭākāśa. Just like the sky. The sky is within the pot, and the sky is outside the pot. So when the pot is broken, the inside sky becomes one with the outside sky. That is their theory. So these doubts are also dissipated when one comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That this poṭākāśa means the sky within the pot, no, ghaṭākāśa, the sky within the pot, it cannot be made analogy with the sky in the pot and outside. Because they are individual souls. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that they are part and parcel of God sanātana, eternally, not that they have been cut off. Just like the sky within the pot is walled by the wall of the pot, but actually we are not walled. We are individual. Every, every one of us are individual. We are not surrounded by some material wall. This material wall is supposed to be this body. Actually, we are individual, and therefore, because we are individual, according to our individual karma, we have got different types of body. So these are the doubts. When one become completely, I mean to say, cognizant with the Kṛṣṇa consciousness science, his all doubts are removed. Go on.



Pradyumna: "There are many other theories, but all these different speculations are at once cleared off as soon as Śrī Kṛṣṇa is realized in truth by the process of bhakti-yoga. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is like the sun, and materialistic speculations about the Absolute Truth are like the darkest midnight. As soon as the Kṛṣṇa sun is arisen within one's heart, the darkness of materialistic speculations about the Absolute Truth and the living beings is at once cleared off. In the presence of the sun, the darkness cannot stand, and the relative truths that were hidden within the dense darkness of ignorance become clearly manifested by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, who is residing in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. In the Bhagavad-gītā (10.11), the Lord says that in order to show special favor to His pure devotees, He personally eradicates the dense darkness of all misgivings by switching on the light of pure knowledge within the heart of a devotee."



Prabhupāda: This is another advantage of the devotee. Because Kṛṣṇa shows a special favor to the devotee. Although He's equal to everyone, He's specially, I mean, inclined favorable to the devotees. Teṣām eva anukampārtham aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ. There... He takes special care. He says, samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu [Bg. 9.29]. Although He's equal to everyone, still He's specially inclined to the devotees. For the devotees, he gives special instruction from within. Yena mām upayānti te. This is the special advantage of a devotee. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Therefore, because of the Personality of Godhead taking charge of illuminating the heart of His devotee, certainly a devotee, engaged in His service in transcendental love, cannot remain in darkness."



Prabhupāda: So there is no question that a devotee will remain in darkness. Sometimes it is argued that mostly devotees are not very much educated. It doesn't matter. This external, academic education has no value for spiritual advancement. So here it is said, ahaṁ nāśayāmy ātma-bhāvasthaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is within everyone, and if every, anyone is purified, Kṛṣṇa takes charge and He instructs. And who can be greater instructor than Kṛṣṇa? Therefore it is wrong theory that devotees are ignorant. They're full of knowledge. If one is actually a devotee, there is no lack of knowledge. That's a fact. Go on.



Pradyumna: "He comes to know everything of the absolute and the relative truths. The devotee cannot remain in darkness, and because a devotee is enlightened by the Personality of Godhead, his knowledge is certainly perfect. This is not the case for those who speculate on the Absolute Truth by dint of their own limited power of approach."



Prabhupāda: Yes. One can speculate about the Absolute Truth to certain extent. Therefore, generally, these speculators become impersonalists. Because they cannot go beyond that. But that impersonal knowledge is not complete. As we have several times stressed on this point, one has to go further, onward: realization of Paramātmā, realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But they stop only in impersonal view. That's all. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Such knowledge is called paramparā, or deductive knowledge, coming down from the authority to the submissive aural receiver, bona fide by service and surrender. One cannot challenge the authority of the Supreme and know Him also at the same time. He reserves the right of not being exposed to such a challenging spirit of an insignificant spark of the whole, subjected to the control of illusory energy. The devotees are submissive, and therefore the transcendental knowledge descends from the Personality of Godhead to Brahmā, and from Brahmā to his sons and disciples in succession. This process is helped by the Supersoul within such devotees. That is the perfect way of learning transcendental knowledge. This enlightenment perfectly enables the devotee to distinguish spirit from matter, because the knot of the spirit and matter is untied by the Lord. This knot is called ahaṅkāra, and it falsely obliges a living being to become identified with matter. As soon as this knot is loosened, therefore, all the clouds of doubt are at once cleared off. He sees his master and fully engages himself in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, making a full termination of the chain of fruitive action. In material existence a living being creates his own chain of fruitive work and enjoys the good and bad effects of those actions life after life. But as soon as he engages himself in the loving service of the Lord, he at once becomes free from the chain of karma. All his actions no longer create any reaction."



Prabhupāda: That's all right. Have kīrtana. (end)





720825SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.22

-

Los Angeles, August 25, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



ato vai kavayo nityaṁ

bhaktiṁ paramayā mudā

vāsudeve bhagavati

kurvanty ātma-prasādanīm

[SB 1.2.22]



Prabhupāda: (interrupts devotees chanting verse) The word, not "vay", it is vai. (chanting resumes)



Pradyumna: Translation: "Therefore all transcendentalists have been rendering loving service with great delight to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, from time immemorial because such devotional service is enlivening to the self."



Prabhupāda: So "therefore." The word is "therefore." "Therefore" means after concluding something, then we say "therefore." When we talk, when we argue, when we come to the conclusion, then we say "therefore." Or when our argument is strong, then we say "therefore." So this "therefore" means that one is firmly convinced. As it is described in the previous verse, bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ. Sarva-saṁśayāḥ. Saṁśaya means doubtfulness.



Now this morning we were talking with our scientist friend whether the ultimate source of everything... First of all, the conclusion is that everything is, are, relatively situated here. Just like some gentleman, he is son of another gentleman, relative. Then his father is also son of another gentleman. So our... this world is relative depending one thing upon another. Nobody is self-independent. This is going on. Then... So find out the original source of everything, that original source, whether it is sentient or insentient? The conclusion is original source must be sentient. Because in this, our experience, experimental knowledge, we see something matter and something living. I am seeing here is a small ant and here is a big stone. The big stone is insentient. It cannot move. For millions of years you wait, whether the stone will move-you cannot see. No, it will not move. Because it is insentient. Whereas a small ant, it is going. You just check its marching. It will struggle. It will struggle this way, this way, this way. And ultimately you have to give way. This is sentient. Therefore sentient is superior.

There are two things within our experience: one, matter, not sentient; and another sentient. So this... Now, I am seer. Or sometimes I control both these things. But I am not supreme controller. But I can observe that there are two things, sentient and insentient, and I am observing. So, for the time being, I am superior of both the sentient and nonsentient. So the conclusion is the ultimate source of everything, ultimate knower, ultimate analyzer, must be a sentient. It cannot be insentient. That is experimental knowledge.

So in this way, this, our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, bhāgavata-dharma, it is not sentiment. We can explain how God created. Sometimes it is, in Bible, it is said, "God said, 'Let there be creation,' and there was creation." But they cannot explain. Therefore in the modern age, scientifically advanced, they do not take it. But we can explain. Our bhāgavata-dharma can explain how, simply by desiring, there is creation. So here it is said: chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ. Chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ. One, by this, following this bhāgavata-dharma, studying from Bhāgavata, the ultimate knowledge of everything, one can become completely doubtless that God is a person, He is sentient, He is the supreme director, He's the supreme knower, He's the supreme physist, the supreme chemist-everything, supreme.

Just like Kṛṣṇa lifted the mountain, giri-bara-dhārī. Jaya rādhā-mādhava kuñja-bihārī gopī-jana-vallabha giri-bara-dhārī. When there was torrents of rain, Vṛndāvana was being overflooded, and all the inhabitants became so much disturbed. They were seeing to, looking to Kṛṣṇa, because they did not know anything beyond Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes, I am lifting this mountain. Let it become a big umbrella of the whole state, or whole village." The atheist will say these are all stories. No. They're not stories. Because God is supreme, He is supreme physist, He knows how to make this mountain weightless. He knows the art. Just like so many gigantic planets are floating in the sky. That is a fact. Now who is floating? You cannot float even a small thing in the air, but such gigantic... Not only one, millions and trillions, they are floating. Who has made it possible, floating? So, God can do that. Therefore He is called all-powerful, the great.

So if Kṛṣṇa is God, then floating or make this mountain weightless, is it very difficult task for Him? No. He entered the ocean. Unless He knows the physical laws how to enter the ocean... It is technique only. Modern scientists, they are also entering, by machine. They're floating by machine. That is also physical science. So, if you know the physical science still more perfectly, you can float in the air without machine, you can enter within the water without machine, you can lift the mountain without machine. It is a question of perfect knowledge. (knocking sound) What is that knock, sound?

So here it is said that when you are actually advanced in spiritual knowledge, in devotional service, then chidyante sarva-saṁśayaḥ. Saṁśaya means doubtfulness. Sometimes... Yes. Generally, "Oh, these are stories. Kṛṣṇa lifted a mountain." Because atheists say and we say, "Yes, maybe." But no. You must be firmly convinced, yourself, if you are Kṛṣṇa conscious, that "Yes, Kṛṣṇa did it." It is possible because He knew the physical science very perfectly. He knows and He, He can know, He can do it. One thing into another. Just like electrician, he can turn cooler into heater, heater into cooler. Because he knows the science. You cannot do that. So don't study Kṛṣṇa thinking yourself as Kṛṣṇa, that "I am also Kṛṣṇa." No. That is the defect. Everyone thinks that frog philosophy. Frog philosophy, he has got experience of three-feet well, and he has been informed that there is Atlantic Ocean. He's simply imagining, "How it is possible? How it is possible?" He is thinking maybe little more, four feet, five feet, six feet, ten feet, and as soon as ten feet he's burst. Because he has no more knowledge. But how the three-feet well can be compared with the Atlantic Ocean? That he does not know.

So we are think..., we have got limited energy, creative energy, so-called scientific knowledge, so-called other knowledge. Limited. Because our senses are limited. And we are thinking that God may be a little bigger than me, Kṛṣṇa? But as soon as it comes to the point that He, He can lift the mountain and the world, the planet, then they doubt. That is saṁśaya. But actually, if you are advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you must be free from all doubts. You must know perfectly well what is Kṛṣṇa. So that is also possible by devotional service. Just like Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā: bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. "If one wants to understand Me perfectly..." Kṛṣṇa cannot be understood perfectly, but still, just to drive away our doubts... Because we have got so many doubts. So that doubts can be also dissipated bhaktyā, by bhakti.

How? Why not by knowledge? Because there are three ways: karma, jñāna, bhakti. By knowledge, scientific knowledge, Kṛṣṇa cannot be known. Why bhakti? Why Kṛṣṇa is prescribing bhakti? No. By knowledge, so-called knowledge, you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the so-called scientists, they are in doubts. It is not possible. If you think that "I shall speculate. Through knowledge, I shall understand God," that is not possible. Because God is unlimited; your knowledge is limited. How you can know God? How the bhaktas-they are not scientists, not educated very much-how they can know? Yes, they can know. How? That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ tam...

[Bg. 10.10]



Dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ tam. Tam means "unto Him." Whom? Bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam. Those who are engaged in devotional service with love and faith. Because God is within you. You haven't got to search out where is God. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām, hṛdy antaḥ-sthaḥ [Bg. 18.61].



We have begun this chapter śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ... [SB 1.2.17]. (aside:) You are sleeping, this boy... Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. Anyone who is engaged in hearing about Kṛṣṇa... To whom? To Him, not those who are sleeping. Those who are actually hearing, śṛṇvatām. Śṛṇvatām means hearing, not sleeping. To such person. Bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, and engaged in devotional service. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam, "I give intelligence." It doesn't require... If he's sincere, if he's actually a devotee, Kṛṣṇa will help him. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpā. Guru is secondary, another mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is helping within and without. That without help is guru, Kṛṣṇa's representative. So Kṛṣṇa is always ready to help us, and when Kṛṣṇa is helping us, it is very easy to understand Him. Therefore a devotee is beyond all doubts. Beyond all doubts. There is no doubt. Not that blindly we are accepting Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No. We have got all our arguments, scientific, philosophical, anything. Then we accept Kṛṣṇa. That acceptance is nice. That is uttama-adhikārī.

Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, madhyama-adhikārī and uttama-adhikārī. There are three stages of devotees-lower class, middle class and first class. The first-class devotee is without any doubt. The third-class devotee, he's accepting, he's accepting: "Here is God," that's all. But he has many doubts. The second class, he, although he has got doubts, he's accepting on the authority of Vedas. That is second class. And the first class, he knows perfectly well that "Here is God." That is the, the sarva-saṁśayaḥ. Chidyante. They are beyond all doubts. "Yes, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here is Kṛṣṇa. In this temple here is, my Lord is standing. He has very kindly, mercifully, He has come to accept my service." That is first-class devotee. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. As soon as He saw Jagannātha in the temple, immediately fainted. "Here is My Lord; I was searching after."

So there are stages. So those who are first class... Here it is stated ato vai kavayaḥ. Kavayaḥ means first class. Ato vai kavayo nityam. Perpetually, eternally. Bhaktiṁ paramayā mudā. Devotional service. Transcendental, paramayā. The devotional service... For the third-class devotee, the devotional service is also third class. And the, although third class, first class, second class, we are distinguishing, it is not ordinary material first class, second class... Even in the spiritual world there is such divisions. The same division. Just like in the light, in the sunlight, there is division: the sunshine, the sun globe, and the sun-god. There are three divisions. It is not that because you are in the sunshine you know what is the sun globe or what is sun god. That is another stage. Similarly, just to become a devotee on the devotional service, there are stages. Stages. That is kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, madhyama-adhikārī. So uttama-adhikārī, uttama-adhikārī means first class. He's firmly convinced, "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Nobody can deviate. He can convert others to understand Kṛṣṇa, that He's the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But nobody can convert him that Kṛṣṇa is not God. That is not possible. That is first class.

So here it is said: ato vai kavayo nityaṁ bhaktiṁ paramayā mudā vāsudeve bhagavati. Therefore those who are actually in the knowledge of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, science of God, they're firmly fixed up in the devotional service of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. Vāsudeve bhagavati. Then what about the third class? The third class also, if he stick to the devotional service according to the rules and regulation, vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ... [SB 1.2.7]. Prayojita means "just begun." Janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam. Then that devotional service to Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, will gradually help him how to become vairāgya, how to become detached with material attraction, and how to acquire knowledge about Kṛṣṇa. Everything will come.

So for the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, we must stick to the principle. Gradually, everything will be revealed. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. In the beginning, because we have got blunt material senses, we cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa, what is Kṛṣṇa's service. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi... What is Kṛṣṇa's chanting of name. We are thinking that this is chanting, just like we chant so many vibrations, this is also like that. We cannot understand. But if we take up all this devotional service in right earnestness to serve the Lord, then everything will be gradually revealed. That is required. But if we become slack in following the rules and regulations, then we remain the third class. We cannot raise ourself to the second class, first class position. Therefore all doubts remain. This is the position.

Thank you very much. Chant. (end)



721102SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.22

-

Vṛndāvana, November 2, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.:)



ato vai kavayo nityaṁ

bhaktiṁ paramayā mudā

vāsudeve bhagavati

kurvanty ātma-prasādanīm

[SB 1.2.22]



Translation: "Therefore all transcendentalists have been rendering loving service with great delight to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, from time immemorial because such devotional service is enlivening to the self."



Prabhupāda:



ato vai kavayo nityaṁ

bhaktiṁ paramayā mudā

vāsudeve bhagavati

kurvanty ātma-prasādanīm



Bhaktim ātma-prasādanīm. Devotional service is ātmā, means self, or mind also, even body... Ātmā means the body, the mind and the self also. So ātma-prasādanīm means if you want to satisfy your mind, if you want to satisfy your self, or even you want to satisfy your body... We are living in three stages: bodily concept of life, mental concept of life and spiritual concept of life. Those who are grossly in ignorance, they are thinking in terms of bodily concept of life; those who are little more advanced, they are thinking in terms of mental or psychological concept of life; and those who are still more advanced, they are thinking in terms of spiritual concept of life. The spiritual concept of life, as it is described before: vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam [SB 1.2.11]. Tattvam means truth. The truth is spirit, not this matter. Matter is truth, subordinate to spirit. On the basis of spirit, the matter grows, just like our body has grown on the basis of our spiritual existence.



So spiritual realization is the ultimate goal of our life. Jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yaś ceha karmabhiḥ. We have discussed these verses previously. This human form of life, jīvasya tattva-jijñāsā... Jijñāsā, about the truth, inquiry about the truth, that is the main business of the living entity. But lower than human being-animals, birds, beasts, trees, aquatics, insects-they have no privilege to inquire about the Absolute Truth. It is in the human form of life one can inquire about the Absolute Truth. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. So when one is actually inquisitive about the Absolute Truth, he realizes three transcendental subject: brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11].

So ultimately one has to reach to the platform of Bhagavān, Vāsudeva. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. One who reaches to the point of understanding Vāsudeva, he is the perfect mahātmā. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. According to Vedic description, mahātmā means one who has reached to the point of Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who has reached... All of them are transcendentalists, kovidāḥ, men of knowledge, but one who has reached to the point of understanding Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he's called mahātmā. Mahātmā is a very common word in India. Any saintly person is called a mahātmā. But according to Vedic description, a mahātmā is he who has reached to the point of understanding Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In another place it is stated:

mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes

tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam...

[SB 5.5.2]



There are two ways. Our life, they are going in two ways. One way is liberation, and the other way is bondage. Just like you have seen the reel. The reel is rolling. One way it is rolling to roll the thread, and another it is giving way to the thread. Similarly, we can lead in two ways, our life, either towards liberation or towards darkness of bondage. This, our human life, by gradual evolutionary process, we come to the human form of life. Now we can move it two ways, either towards liberation or towards bondage. We do not know, modern education. There is no such information what is called bondage and what is called liberation. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know. There is no such education, that students may understand what is Viṣṇu, what is God, what he is, what is his relationship with God, Viṣṇu. These things are unknown to the modern educationist.



The śāstra therefore says,

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni-baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



Uru-dāmni-baddhāḥ. Uru means very strong. Dāmni means rope. Just like if your hands and legs are tied very strongly, it is very difficult for you to move. Similarly, by the laws of nature, every living entity is bound up very strongly, īśa-tantryām, by the laws of the Supreme Lord. We are bound up. We cannot deviate. We cannot violate the laws of nature. Everyone can experience. A little violation, little deviation from the laws of nature, we accept some suffering. That is our daily experience. Suppose we are eating, but if we eat little more than we digest... The laws of nature is that you can eat as much as you can digest. But if you eat more than you can digest, immediately, by the laws of nature, you suffer from indigestion. You cannot violate. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Nobody can violate the laws of nature.



So we have discussed how to get out of the laws of nature-mukta-saṅgasya jāyate. Mukta-saṅga means one who has become freed from the three modes of material nature. After being freed from the laws of material nature or by the three modes of material nature, then we can talk of vāsudeva-bhakti. But one can become free from this bondage of material nature simply by devotional service to Vāsudeva. That is being stressed in this chapter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the very beginning.

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



If we simply learn how to render devotional service to Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ. This is actually translated into English as Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Everything for Kṛṣṇa. So that Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if we take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then janayaty āśu vairāgyam. Āśu, very soon, one becomes detached from this material bondage. Janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ jñānaṁ ca. And jñāna, knowledge, real knowledge.



In the material knowledge, that is the cause of bondage. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said,

anitya saṁsāre moha janamiyā

jaḍa-vidyā jato māyāra vaibhava



Material knowledge, advancement of material knowledge, means more and more bondage. And advancement of spiritual knowledge means more and more liberation. But our problem is how to liberate ourselves from this material bondage. We are bound up. Just like I am a spirit soul, you are spirit soul, but we are put into this material bondage. Because we are in material bondage, therefore we have no freedom. People do not understand this. Just like spirit soul is described as sarva-ga. Sarva-ga means the spirit soul can go anywhere he likes. But due to this material bondage, because we have this material body, we are checked. Even we cannot go to the other planet. But we have got instances... Just like Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni is traveling all over the universes, not only within the material world, but in the spiritual world, because he has got spiritual body. There is no material bondage.



These are very subtle matter, but one can realize if he meditates upon it. The yogis, they can, because they become, by yogic process, they become a little free from this material body, therefore they can transfer from one place to another very quickly. Even those yogis who are on this material platform, on this planet, they travel very quickly. There are many yogis still in India who take bath in four places daily in the, early in the morning. They take bath in Jagannātha Purī, in Rāmeśvaram, in Hardwar. In this way, four places they take bath. There are some books about the yogis. These things are written there. And actually we met some yogis and they said how quickly they can go from one place to another. That we can understand from our experience. Just like the mind. Mind is so swift that in a second the mind can reach thousands of miles away.

So the spirit soul is still more subtle. And the speed of spirit soul is very, very great. Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Tyaktvā deham. "Just after giving up this body, he immediately comes to Me in the spiritual world." These are the Vedic statement. You can try to understand. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti: [Bg. 4.9] we accept another body immediately after death. It is said just like go forward, when the first step, you find it is secure, you take up the second step. Similarly, as soon as the next body is arranged by superior arrangement, we give up this body and enter into another gross body. Immediately. Immediately we are transferred to a mother's womb for manufacturing another gross body. This is the law.

So here Kṛṣṇa says, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. If the living entity does not enter into another gross body, then where does he go? So Kṛṣṇa says, mām eti. "He comes to Me." Now just imagine what is the speed of spirit soul, just after leaving this body after death, he immediately goes to Goloka Vṛndāvana, or at least where Kṛṣṇa is there. Mām eti. Kṛṣṇa's nitya-līlā, that has been described in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, how Kṛṣṇa's nitya-līlā is going on. Kṛṣṇa is present in a bhauma-līlā in one of the universes every time. The Lord Caitanya has given the example as the movement of the sun. The sun is moving, and the twenty-four hours into sixty minutes, into sixty seconds... The... All these time changes are there, every time. Just like our sunrise was, say, at six-thirty, or six. This six thirty, passed here, but somewhere else it is now six-thirty. Again when it will pass six-thirty there, in somewhere else there will be six-thirty. Similarly Kṛṣṇa is passing from one universe to another, and when He's visible in this universe, we find Kṛṣṇa's appearance.

So Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has informed us that those who are competent, those who have become competent to associate with Kṛṣṇa, as Kṛṣṇa says, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti... [Bg. 4.9]. This mam eti, that spirit soul goes to Kṛṣṇa first of all within some universe where Kṛṣṇa is having His pastimes, bhauma-līlā. He goes there. Then just like when a person is trained up as apprentice, then he's given the post. Just like a magistrate, after passing the examination, I.C.S. examination, he's trained up under some magistrate, and then he's given the post. Similarly, a living entity, when he is actually eligible by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by development of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then immediately after giving up this body, he's transferred to that universe where Kṛṣṇa is there. Bhauma-līlā. And after his being trained up thoroughly, then he's transferred to the original Kṛṣṇaloka, Goloka Vṛndāvana. (aside:) These boys may be given some prasādam. These boys who have come. Come here, boys! Ask them. Come here. One in hand... (Śyāmasundara is distributing rasagullās in background) Why...? Give them one in hand.

So the, my point is that how swift is the spirit soul that either he goes to one of the universes... One of the universes means there are millions and trillions of universes. That we do not know. We have got information of this universe, materially. But from Vedic literature, we get information there are millions and trillions of universes like this. We can see only one universe. We get this information from Brahma-saṁhitā: yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. This very word is used. Jagad-aṇḍa means "one universe." And koṭi, koṭi means "millions." So there are unlimited number of universes also. And in each universe, koṭiṣu vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam, in each universe, there are millions and trillions of planets, each different from one another. This is the creation. So just imagine that what is God's creation, how He attains every universe continually. His līlā is going on. As soon as in one universe the Kṛṣṇa's birth, appearance, is finished, immediately in another universe His birth takes place. This is called nitya-līlā. Exactly like... The same example: as soon as six-thirty, morning, finished here in India, immediately the six-thirty of the sunrise in some other place. Six-thirty another place. another... The six thirty is going on. It is very easy to understand. The six-thirty or seven-thirty or eight, nine, whatever you take, that is going on. That is called nitya-līlā. Kṛṣṇa's līlā is going on. So just imagine how many universes are there.

So the spirit soul has got immense power, immense power. That is only fragment of Kṛṣṇa, part and parcel. Now, just you can imagine what is the power of Kṛṣṇa. A..., a small, fragmental portion of Kṛṣṇa... Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. The living entity, he has got so much potencies. And what potency Kṛṣṇa has got, who is full of spiritual potency? So actually if we want to be happy, as part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, we must join Him. That is our value. This example I have given several times, that a small screw of a machine has got immense value when it is attached with the machine. The same small screw, when it is detached from the machine, it has no value. Not even a farthing. Similarly, we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. Our value is in full when we join Kṛṣṇa, when we dovetail our activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then it is valuable. Otherwise the so-called progress is simply illusion. There is no progress. It is simply illusion. Ato vai kavayo nityaṁ bhaktiṁ paramayā mudā.

Therefore if we actually want happiness, pleasure, then we must dovetail our activities, devotional service, with Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. Vāsudeve bhagavati kurvanty ātma-prasāda... It is for your interest. It is not for Kṛṣṇa's interest. Kṛṣṇa can create millions of living entities like you. He doesn't require your service. He's complete. But if you want your satisfaction, then vāsudeve bhagavati, bhaktiṁ kurvanty ahaitukīm. Then you have to dovetail yourself in devotional service to Kṛṣṇa. That is intelligence. Otherwise foolish, ignorance, illusion.

Thank you very much. (end)



720826SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.23

-

Los Angeles, August 26, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sattvaṁ rajas tama iti prakṛter guṇās tair

yuktaḥ paraḥ puruṣa eka ihāsya dhatte

sthity-ādaye hari-viriñci-hareti saṁjñāḥ

śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ

[SB 1.2.23]



Translation: "The transcendental Personality of Godhead is indirectly associated with the three modes of material nature, namely passion, goodness and ignorance, and just for the material world's creation, maintenance and destruction, He accepts the three qualitative forms of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva. Of these three, all human beings can derive ultimate benefit from Viṣṇu, the form of the quality of goodness."



Prabhupāda: So material world means the three qualities. Material world is going on under three energetic energies: sattva, rajas, tamas. We have explained several times, we see varieties of living entities, varieties of trees, varieties of everything. Anywhere you go, you simply find varieties. Some of them you like, some of them you do not like. So these varieties are due to these three material modes of nature, sattva, rajas, tamas.



So when creation has taken place, the things should be managed properly, so Kṛṣṇa Himself, He expands into three forms for management. One form is Lord Viṣṇu, one form is Lord Śiva and the other form is Lord Brahmā. Brahmā creates, Lord Viṣṇu maintains, and Lord Śiva destroys. Because in the material nature, you cannot have anything permanent. That is material nature. It is just like the flashlight. When you pass through roads and avenue, there are three colors-red, blue and yellow. They're passing through, always. Not that the blue is always existing, or red is always existing, or the yellow is always. Passing, simply. That is the nature, material nature. Here, everything is born. That is called sṛṣṭi, creation.

Everything is creation. That is our experience. Everything is created and it is maintained for some time. Just like my body, your body, is created. And it will be maintained for sometimes. But at the end, when the body is old, it will be destroyed. This is material nature. Some of the philosophers, they say there is no such thing, creation or destruction; everything is existing always. That we also accept. That everything is existing always means Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa... The creation is going through three stages. The creation taking place, it is being maintained for some time, and again it is destroyed. These things are going on. The same example: the lights, flashlights. They are coming and going. But the puller of the lights, behind the light, he is existing. Similarly, the creator is existing, but not the creation. Creation is coming into existence, is sustained, and again... But the creator is there. Aham evāsam agre. Lord Kṛṣṇa says that "Before creation I was there." Otherwise who will create? "Before creation I was there. While creation is maintained, I am there. And when it is destroyed, still I am there."

So in three stages, Kṛṣṇa is there: in the past, present and future. Therefore He knows everything. If, under my direction, something is going, going on, I have created something, it is maintained, and it is destroyed, I am seeing, or I am ordering, then I am always existing. I know when it is created, when it is maintained and when it is destroyed. So Kṛṣṇa knows past, present and future. Kṛṣṇa does not mean alone. Kṛṣṇa means there is another kingdom. Just like when we speak of a king, it means the king is not alone. There is queen, there is palace, there is bodyguard, there is secretary, there is commander in chief, so many things. Just like in England, there is Queen Elizabeth. It does not mean that Queen Elizabeth is alone. She has got so many paraphernalia. Similarly, when we speak of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa means His name, His form, His quality, His activities, His pastimes, His friends, His mother, His father, His cowherd, cows, His Vṛndāvana... So many things. That is another variety. And here this material world, this variety, this variety is imitation of that variety. And that variety is eternal. This variety is created, maintained and destroyed. But in the middle, the point, Kṛṣṇa, He is ever-existing.

Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, ūrdhva-mūlam adhah-śākham [Bg. 15.1]. You have... You know. Just like a tree, standing on the shore of a reservoir of water. You'll find the reflection of the tree downward. Everything is topsy-turvied. The trunk, the root is on the up, and the foliage, which is on the up, that has come down. Similarly, this material world is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, Fifteenth Chapter: ūrdhva-mūlam adhah-śākham. Generally, we see tree downwards, root, but in the reflection you will find the roots upward. Therefore ūrdhva-mūlam adhah-śākham means these material varieties are simply an imitation of the original variety. Just like I'll give you very nice example. Just there will be a great fair. Just like we had in this Allahabad, Māgha-melā. So because government knew that many people will come to take bath in the Ganges, confluence of Ganges and Yamunā, all of a sudden, a great city, practically, was developed. Those who have seen-so many houses, camps, electric lights, post office, everything. Temporary, created. But as soon as... It is maintained also so long the melā, the fair, is going on. And as soon as the duration of melā is finished, all people go away and the temporary township is also demolished. That we have seen. Similarly, this material world means it is a kind of fair, assembly of so many men. What is the purpose? The purpose is to give them chance, just the Māgha-melā is a chance to become purified, to become pious. They take bath in the Ganges. They become, get an opportunity, an auspicious moment to take bath.

So it is like that. There are living entities who are eternally conditioned and there are living entities eternally liberated. The eternally liberated souls, living entities, they are with Kṛṣṇa, they're dancing with Kṛṣṇa, because they have no other desire than to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is the difference between eternally conditioned and eternally liberated. Eternally liberated means they have no other desire. All these gopīs, all the cowherds boys, all the cows, all the trees, all the water, all the father, mother, friends, they're simply trying to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is Vṛndāvana. They have no other business. That is Vṛndāvana. The central point is Kṛṣṇa. And here, in this material world, everyone is trying to satisfy himself. His center is he himself. Therefore he's exploiting others, he's cheating others, he's making so many things, bluffing, because he wants to enjoy himself. That's all. This is the difference between spiritual world and material world. If you want to satisfy yourself, your senses, that is material. And if you want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's senses, then it is spiritual. This is the difference. So either do it here or go to Vaikuṇṭha, Goloka, do there-the business is the same.

So this is a chance, these conditioned souls who have come to this material world to enjoy senses, they are given chance, they are given chance, "All right, you enjoy. You want to enjoy as human being. All right, take a body of human being. If you want to enjoy like a tiger, all right, take a body. If you want to enjoy as demigod, all right, take a body." Kṛṣṇa is so liberal, "Take, and enjoy as you like. But you'll never be happy." That is the crucial point. "If you want to happy, then surrender unto Me." This is the point. You cannot manufacture your happiness. That is not possible. Therefore this is, this creation is there. Try to understand. Why there is creation? This creation is a chance given to the conditioned soul, how to come to his senses, that living entity, that he is eternally servant of Kṛṣṇa, part and parcel. His only business is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. So here is a chance. If we don't take this chance, then again the creation will be wound up, it will be destroyed. Again there will be creation, again another chance will be given. This is going on. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate. It is manifested sometimes and maintained for some time and again destroyed.

Now the original person is Kṛṣṇa. Now, to maintain this creation, He expands Himself into three: hari, viriñci, hara. Hari means Viṣṇu, viriñci means Brahmā, and hara means Lord Śiva. Hari-viriñci-hareti saṁjñāḥ. But, just like the Māyāvādī philosopher says that "Then, if Kṛṣṇa has become Hari, Viriñci and Hara, three, so I can worship anyone." No. That is hinted here: śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ. But if you want your ultimate goal, then you take shelter of Viṣṇu-sattva-tanoḥ-not Śiva, not Brahmā. Here, clearly says. If you want... Because your conditioned life is due to your disobedience to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So unless you surrender unto Him, you again become obedient, there is no question of your goodness or your good or fortune. That is not possible. That is explained here. Śreyāṁsi, if you want... Śreyāṁsi means if you want really ultimate benefit of your life, then sattva-tanoḥ. Sattva-tanoḥ means Viṣṇu. You have to take shelter of the form of the Lord who is representing sattva-guṇa, goodness. Not the rajo-guṇa not the tamo-guṇa. If you take to rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa, then tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye [SB 1.2.19], then you will be influenced by two qualities, namely greediness and lust. That's all. You'll never come to your senses. You'll be carried away by these two modes of material nature. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura therefore said, māyār bośe, jāccho bhese' Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi. "My dear brother, you are being carried away by the waves of this material nature, two modes of material nature, and you are being harassed. Sometimes you are drowned, sometimes you are up."

So, jīv kṛṣṇa-dās, e biśvās, korle to' ār duḥkho nāi. If you simply believe that you are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, then there is no more carrying out, no more carried away by these two things, lusty, lust and greediness. Therefore it is advised here that śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ. Our ultimate benefit rests when you take shelter of the sattva-tanoḥ.

Purport?

Pradyumna: "Why Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa with his plenary parts shall be rendered devotional service as it is explained above is confirmed by this statement. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and all His plenary parts are viṣṇu-tattva, or the Lordship of Godhead. From Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the next manifestation is Baladeva. From Baladeva is Saṅkarṣaṇa; from Saṅkarṣaṇa is Nārāyaṇa; again from Nārāyaṇa there is the second Saṅkarṣaṇa; and from this Saṅkarṣaṇa the Viṣṇu puruṣa-avatāras. The Viṣṇu or the Deity of the quality of goodness in the material world is the puruṣa-avatāra known as Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, or Paramātmā. Brahmā is the deity of rajas, or passion, and Śiva for ignorance. They are three departmental heads of the three qualities of this material world. Creation is made possible by the quality of passion and endeavor; it is maintained by the goodness of Viṣṇu; and when it is required to be destroyed, Lord Śiva does it by tāṇḍava-nṛtya. The materialists and the foolish human beings do worship Brahmā and Śiva respectively, but the pure transcendentalists do worship the form of goodness, Viṣṇu, in His various forms. Viṣṇu is manifested by His millions and billions of integrated forms and separated forms. The integrated forms are called Godhead, and the separated forms are called the living entities, or the jīvas. But either the jīvas or Godhead, both of them have their original, spiritual forms. The jīvas are sometimes subjected under the control of the material energy, but the Viṣṇu forms are always controller of the material energy. When..."



Prabhupāda: There is a difference between ordinary form and Viṣṇu form. Ordinary forms, they are controlled by Viṣṇu. Go on... nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). That is the Vedic injunction. Go on.



Pradyumna: "When Viṣṇu or the Personality of Godhead appears in the material world, He comes to deliver the conditioned living beings who are under the material energy. Such living being appears in the material world with intention of lording it over falsely, and thus becomes entrapped by the three modes of nature. As such, the living entities have to change the material coverings for undergoing different terms of imprisonment. The prison house of the material world is created by Brahmā, under instruction of the Personality of Godhead, and at the conclusion of a kalpa, the whole thing is destroyed by Śiva. But so far maintenance of the prison house is concerned, it is done by Viṣṇu, as much as the state prison house is maintained by the state. Anyone, therefore, who may wish to get out of this prison house of material existence, which is full of miseries like repetition of birth, death, diseases and old age, must please Lord Viṣṇu for such liberation. Lord Viṣṇu is worshiped by devotional service only, and if anyone has to continue the prison life in the material world, he may ask for relative facilities from the different demigods like Śiva, Brahmā, Indra, Varuṇa, etc., for temporary relief. No such demigods can, however, release the imprisoned living being from the conditioned life of material existence except Viṣṇu. As such, the ultimate benefit may be derived from Viṣṇu, the Personality of Godhead."



Prabhupāda: Just like one is a prisoner. So if he pleases the superintendent of prison, he can get some little facilities. Now I have seen, practically, that one young boy, he was imprisoned for some criminal act. So he was typing in the office of the jail superintendent. So that means he was educated, but he was put into ordinary prison term. He was breaking some stone. But he satisfied the jail superintendent that "I am not accustomed to this. However, I can serve you in some other way." So, he saw that "He is educated. He knows. All right. You come to my office. Just help me, in typing."



So this facility one can have. But not released from the prison house. That is not in the power of the superintendent. Similarly, all the demigods, they can give you a temporary facility, but they cannot give you relief from this prison house. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. People are going to heavenly planets and our planets... Just like they are going to the moon planet. But they are again coming down, again coming down. Either by machine or by fruitive activities, you can be transferred to higher planetary system, but again you have to come back. Kṣīṇe puṇye punaḥ martya-lokaṁ viśanti. You cannot get release. If you want to get release, then you have to come to Viṣṇu. Then you will get release. Śudhyanti prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ. Viṣṇu can do. Hariṁ vinā na mṛtiṁ taranti. This is Hari. If you do not surrender to Hari, then you cannot get release from these four principles of material life, namely birth, death, old age and disease. You cannot get.

Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is stated: kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Hṛta-jñānāḥ, hṛta-jñānāḥ, those who have lost their intelligence. They are influenced by their lust and greediness. They worship different demigods to get some material temporary benefit. Therefore they are called naṣṭa-buddhi. His real problem is how to get out of this entanglement of repetition of birth and death, but he doesn't care that. He thinks, "Oh, now I am living in this way. If I live in a palatial building, then my problem is solved." That is not your problem, solution of the problem. That is not solution. But people are very much enamored by this temporary material elements. Therefore they are called by Kṛṣṇa as naṣṭa-buddhayaḥ, hṛta-jñānāḥ. They're actual knowledge is lost. Real thing is... Just like in the jail. The same example: the boy was given a little relief. Instead of breaking stone, he was allowed to type in the office. That does not mean his problem is solved. His problem is solved when he's out of the prison. That is. But that the superintendent of police cannot give. That will be given by the government. Similarly, if we want to get relief from this prison house of material existence, we must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No other method will relieve us.

Thank you very much. (end)



721103SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.23

-

Vṛndāvana, November 3, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sattvaṁ rajas tama iti prakṛter guṇās tair

yuktaḥ paraḥ puruṣa eka ihāsya dhatte

sthity-ādaye hari-viriñci-hareti saṁjñāḥ

śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ

[SB 1.2.23]



Translation: "The transcendental Lord is indirectly associated with the three modes of material nature, namely passion, goodness and ignorance, and just for the material world's creation, maintenance and destruction He accepts the three qualitative forms of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva. Of these three, all living beings can derive ultimate benefit from Viṣṇu, the form of the quality of goodness."



Prabhupāda:



sattvaṁ rajas tama iti prakṛter guṇās tair

yuktaḥ paraḥ puruṣa eka ihāsya dhatte

sthity-ādaye hari-viriñci-hareti saṁjñāḥ

śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ



The material creation, mahat-tattva... Sa īkṣata. As it is said in the Vedic literature, simply by glancing over the material nature and agitating the three modes of material nature, the whole creation comes out. This is an sum, sum and substance of material creation. Mahā-Viṣṇu is lying in the Causal Ocean, Kāraṇārṇava, and He is breathing, and from His breathing innumerable universes are coming out. And in each and every universe, Mahā-Viṣṇu, in His further expansion as Garbhodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu, He enters. That Garbhodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu, from His abdomen there is a lotus stem, and in that lotus flower Lord Brahmā is born. In this way, creation is made.



So actually, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, they are the principal directors of the three guṇas. Therefore Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, they are called guṇāvatāra. Lord Viṣṇu is in charge of sattva-guṇa activities. Therefore brāhmaṇa, the symbol of sattva-guṇa, they are Vaiṣṇavas. Formerly, in each and every home of a brāhmaṇa, there was Viṣṇu worship. A brāhmaṇa cannot worship any other demigods except Viṣṇu, because Viṣṇu is in the charge of the sattva-guṇa and brāhmaṇa is also in the sattva-guṇa. So Viṣṇu asya devatā. For this reason brāhmaṇa's another title is Vaiṣṇava. Brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava. Or brāhmaṇa-paṇḍita.

So on account of the three guṇas, there are three types of Vedic literatures. Not directly śruti, but smṛti, the purāṇas, they are divided into three divisions: sāttvika-purāṇa, rājasika-purāṇa and tāmasika-purāṇa. Śiva Purāṇa, Devī Purāṇa, they are sāttvika, rājasika. Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Śrīmad Bhāgavata Purāṇa, they are sāttvika-purāṇas. The whole scheme is that everyone, every living entity within this material world, they are infected. That we have discussed. The most inferior infection is the rajas-tamas. And the superior rajas, uh, sattva-guṇa, that is also infection, but it is less harmful, whereas the infection of rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa is very much embarrassing.

Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye [SB 1.2.19]. The whole material world is going on, impelled by rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. Generally. Sattva-guṇa is very little. Especially in this age, practically there is no sattva-guṇa. Rajo-guṇa also, very little. Tamo-guṇa predominant. For this reason, śāstra says in this age most people are śūdras because there is scarcity of sattva-guṇa and rajo-guṇa. Brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya. Brāhmaṇas' activities and kṣatriya, practically nil. There is no protector. Kṣatriya means one who protects people from being injured. Therefore the kṣatriya class, they were royal families, and the brāhmaṇas, they were meant for giving spiritual education. Brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇa. And the vaiśyas, they were meant for trading, agriculture and cow protection. As the kṣatriyas were interested, entrusted for protecting the citizens, similarly the vaiśyas were entrusted for protecting the cows. Kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. So now vaiśyas, they have got big, big factories, they can maintain big, big factories, but they cannot maintain a cow. That is the position. Similarly, Kṣatriyas, they have taken different occupational duties. Brāhmaṇas also, they have left their occupation. Only everyone has come to the platform of śūdras. Therefore it is very difficult to convince them about spiritual life. Mostly people are śūdras. Śūdras, less intelligent. They cannot understand. Mūḍha. Less intelligent means mūḍha. The symbol of less intelligence is ass, mūḍha. The ass... Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has described the karmīs as mūḍha because they work very hard. Although the necessity of life is very little, still they work very hard, day and night. The ass is the symbol because the ass eats only a morsel of grass, but for the washerman, he works so hard. So mūḍha. Because the people are mūḍhas, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa says,

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



So the three guṇas, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa, that is going on since the creation. So here it is said, sthity-ādaye hari-viriñci-hareti saṁjñāḥ. This, the same Lord, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, has expanded Himself as Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā. We are also expansions. Brahmā is also jīva-tattva. He's also like us, jīva-tattva. Lord Śiva is between viṣṇu-tattva and jīva-tattva. And Lord Viṣṇu is viṣṇu-tattva. Viṣṇu-tattva, via media, and jīva-tattva. So they are all expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So for controlling these three guṇas they have taken charge. Viṣṇu is in charge of sattva-guṇa, and Brahmā is in charge of rajo-guṇa and Lord Śiva is in charge of tamo-guṇa. So Lord, Lord Brahmā creates, Lord Viṣṇu maintains and Lord Śiva destroys. These three things are going on. Sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya. So śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ.



Now, for our..., solving our problems... What is our problems? That we do not know. There is a great problem. The problem is repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. This is the problem. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. Those who are intelligent, they will..., they will see that these are the real problems. But they do not care. Mṛtyu, they think, "All right, it is coming naturally. Let us die." But they do not know, after death, where he's going? "Never mind. I shall forget." People say like that. In Western countries, when I speak, these questions are raised and they are so callous, they say, "Never mind. Next time, if I become a dog, what is the harm? I'll forget that I was a man." Plainly they say. So many people have gone so much down that they cannot understand that low-grade life is not desirable. They do not make any distinction. In whatever life it may be, if there is sufficient arrangement for eating, sleeping, mating, then they are happy. Viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. By God's grace, nature has sufficiently given opportunity for enjoying these things: eating, sleeping, mating and defending. Just like these monkeys, they have got enough facilities for eating, sleeping, mating, especially mating, they have got very good facility. Beginning from the morning, they are going on in sex matters. And defending also, they have got nails and teeth.

So these things, śāstra says, viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. These necessities of life, they can be obtained in any form of life. There is no scarcity. But the human form of life, if it is wasted only for these facilities of life-eating, sleeping, mating and defending-then what is the credit of getting a human form of life? The śāstra therefore says, tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. In human form of life one should try to achieve that perfection which was not obtained in previous lives after wandering heaven and hell and all species of life. Bhramatām upary adhaḥ. Upari adhaḥ means upwards and downwards. And we are wandering: sometimes downwards, sometimes outwards, sometimes poor, sometimes rich, sometimes man, sometimes dog, sometimes tree, sometimes demigod. In this way, we are wandering. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore says, ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. We are wandering in this way in different species of life, in different planets, but somehow or other, if one is fortunate, he comes in contact with a devotee by the grace of Kṛṣṇa. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151].

Here it is, also, it is said, śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ. If want our ultimate goal, ultimate success, then we should accept the sattva-guṇa form of the Lord. The rajo-guṇa form and tamo-guṇa form are there, Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā. But śreyāṁsi, if we want our real benefit of life, then it is better to take shelter of the form of sattva-guṇa. That will be explained in the next verse: pārthivād dāruṇo dhūmas tasmād agnis trayīmayaḥ. Just like earth, from the earth the tree grows. So tree grows means wood. Now, if you ignite the wood, first of all there is smoke, then there is fire. So my necessity is fire, neither the wood, nor the earth, nor the smoke. Similarly, for getting out of these material clutches one has to take shelter of Viṣṇu-not of Lord Brahmā nor Lord Śiva. It is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Anya-devatāḥ means Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā and others. There are many, thirty-three crores of different demigods. Indra, Candra, Varuṇa, so many. So the chief of them is Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. Lord Śiva is therefore called Mahādeva. He is above all these demigods. And Lord Śi... Brahmā is called pitāmaha. Pitāmaha means he's the father of all demigods. He's the father of Lord Śiva also.

So in this way, if we really want salvation, free, freedom from these clutches of māyā... That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. This māyā is very, very hard to pass over. Duratyayā. Only means is: mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti. This is the verse. Here it is also, the same thing confirmed: śreyāṁsi. If you want ultimate goal, ultimate goal means to get free from the conditional life, repetition of birth, death, old age-then you have to take shelter of Lord Viṣṇu. But people do not know that. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. For temporary benefit they go to worship other demigods. But that is not their ultimate goal. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. Antavat tu phalam. If you take any benediction from other demigods, that is antavat. That will be finished. That is temporary. Antavat tu phalam..., tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām. Just like Lord Śiva's name is Āśutoṣa. He's very quickly becomes pleased to offer benediction; therefore generally people go to Āśutoṣa, Lord Śiva. He does not consider. If you can please him, you can take any kind of benediction from him. He'll be ready: "All right. You take it." Because he wants to avoid botheration. So when the devotees come, bother him, so to..., just to get him out, he says: "All right, whatever you like, you take and go away." Therefore his name is Āśutoṣa. And people take the shelter of Āśutoṣa, Lord Śiva, for quick result. But Lord Viṣṇu is not like that. If you want something extraordinary from Lord Viṣṇu, it is not possible. He'll not give. Lord Brahmā also.

So, so here it is indicated: śreyāṁsi. If you want your ultimate goal, then you take shelter of Viṣṇu, the Lord of sattva-guṇa. Then you'll be benefitted. Not by others. But we are generally influenced by the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, lust and greediness. Therefore kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. We, we are lost of intelligence, influenced by lust and greediness, and therefore we take shelter of other demigods. Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. Alpa-medhasām. Alpa-medhasām means people do not know. Suppose I take some material benefit, temporary benefit... Every material benefit is temporary. Whatever benefit we have in this life, as soon as this body's finished, all our benefit finished. Then I'll have to take another body which may not be even human form of body. Sometimes we are being too much attached to our present possession. We remain in the possession, but in a different form. In a different form. There are many, I mean, Puranic, Pauranic indences(?). That is long story, that by karma, we take birth in different forms of life, and if we have got too much attachment... Sometimes a person, the proprietor of the house, after death, remains in that house as serpent, sometimes as dog, sometimes as tree. Being too much attached to the possession, they cannot get better life. And sometimes we can get the body of a hog and monkey in Vṛndāvana also.

That is a great science one has to learn: how the transformation of the body takes place, how our attachment acts in that way. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran loke [Bg. 8.6]. This is a great science. Unfortunately, there is no educational system. Neither do they know the process of transmigration of the soul. So everyone is in ignorance. Everyone is in ignorance. Neither they're interested to take knowledge from the Vedic scripture. Everything is described there. Just like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It is the end of knowledge. Vidyā-bhāgavatāvadhi. If one wants to be educated, he has to come to the limit of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and all the sublime informations are there.

Now if we take instruction of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as it is indicated, every one of us should take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is clearly said, śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanoḥ, sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ. Lord Viṣṇu. And Viṣṇu, the original Viṣṇu, is Lord Kṛṣṇa. So if we take to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's shelter... Kṛṣṇa also says: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. So if we take shelter of Kṛṣṇa, according to the injunction of the śāstras and Vedas... Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is stated in Bhagavad-gītā. The purpose of all Vedic Knowledge is to understand Kṛṣṇa, and as soon as we understand Kṛṣṇa, what He is, then tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], then hariṁ vinā na mṛtiṁ taranti. If we want to stop this repetition of birth, death, old age and disease, then we must take shelter of Lord Viṣṇu. And Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all viṣṇu-tattva. That means we must become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is our highest benefit of life.

Thank you very much. (end)



720827SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.24

-

Los Angeles, August 27, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



pārthivād dāruṇo dhūmas

tasmād agnis trayīmayaḥ

tamasas tu rajas tasmāt

sattvaṁ yad brahma-darśanam

[SB 1.2.24]



Translation: "The firewood is the transformation of the earth, and smoke is better than the raw wood, and fire is still better, because by fire we can derive so many benefits by superior knowledge, or Vedas. Similarly, rajas quality of matter is better than tamas quality, but sattva quality is the superior quality by which one can realize the Absolute Truth."



Prabhupāda: (aside:) Here the translation is different. So the example is given here, that... The translation is... [break] Anyway, pārthivād dāruṇo dhūmaḥ. Pārthivāt. Suppose you want fire. So there are so many stages. Earth, then there is wood. Wood is produced from earth. From wood, there is, first instance there is smoke, and then comes the fire. But you require the fire. When you get fire, you can get so many things done through fire, electricity. All industry is going on through fire. Your household affairs, cooking, that is also, you require fire. For your living condition you require fire, heat. So fire is necessity, not the earth, neither the wood, nor the smoke. Similarly, although Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, they are one, from Kṛṣṇa-they are different incarnation of different modes of material nature-but actually, Viṣṇu is required. Brahman, brahma-darśanam. If you want to see the Absolute Truth, then neither Brahmā nor Śiva is required, but Viṣṇu is required.



The example is: just like if you want to have your work done, then fire is required. The wood is also another stage of fire; the smoke is also another stage of fire. But as fire is necessity, similarly, to come to the platform of goodness, that is necessity, especially in this human form of life. In other forms of life, they're mostly in the ignorance. Just like the earth. The earth has got potency to produce wood, trees and plants, but there are some earthen plot of land, it is not producing anything, desert. It has got the potency. If you pour water, it has got the potency to produce wood, but, in that... Similarly, the mode of ignorance, those living entities, those who are in the mode of ignorance, they cannot have any knowledge of the Absolute Truth. That's not possible. Therefore it is gradual evolution, from mode of ignorance to mode of passion. And passion, there is little activity. Just like animal, they have got activity. Just like a dog, we have seen, in the beach and other places, running very swiftly here and there, but there is no meaning. A monkey is very active. You have not seen monkey in your country. In our country there are monkeys. Unnecessarily creating disturbance. But they are very active. But human being, they are not so active, but they have got brain, they're working with brain.

So foolish activity has no meaning. Without brain, simply active, that is dangerous. Sober activity is required. Just like a high-court judge. He is paid very lump sum, money, but he's sitting on his chair and simply thinking. The others may think that "We are working so hard, we are not getting so big salary, and this man is getting so big salary. He's sitting only." Because foolish activity has no value. It is dangerous. So this modern world, they very active, but they're foolishly active, in the ignorance and passion, rajas tamas. Therefore there is confusion activity. Foolish activity, there is accident. Sober activity required. Because, just like unless you come to the platform of fire, you cannot utilize the material things. Fire is required. Similarly, to make your life successful, there is gradual evolution from aquatics to plant life, plant life to insect life, insect life to reptiles, reptiles to bird's life, then beast life, then human life, then civilized life.

In this way, gradually, evolution, we come to the platform of human life. And the Vedic knowledge is meant for the human beings, not for these other animals. Therefore it is said, dhūmas tasmād agnis trayīmayaḥ. By Vedic injunction, the human society, civilized human society, they require to perform sacrifices, fire sacrifices. Just like we do in all auspicious ceremonies... It is said that through the fire, God eats. We give to the fire the grains and the fruits and other thing. That is, means, God is eating, through fire. So sacrifice means you sacrifice for God, and God is accepting. God is accepting also when we offer prasādam to the Lord, He's accepting, but we want to see. That is our disease. We want to see everything. Therefore, the fire sacrifice, you can see that whatever is offering, it is being eaten up. God can eat in many ways. Because a third-class man, they want to see that God is eating, therefore this is required, sacrifice. God, as it is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā: aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti. His every limb of the body is as good as the other part of the body. Just like we have got our eyes. With eyes we can see, but we cannot eat. But God can do that. He can see, eat also, through the eyes. Aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti. He can hear with eyes. He can eat with His ear. He can see with His tongue. That is God. Every part of the body is equally good as other part of the body. That is called Absolute Truth. Our, this body, is relative. I cannot see... I am, if I close my eyes, I cannot see with my hand. But Kṛṣṇa can do that.

So, when we offer Kṛṣṇa foodstuff, He eats. He says in the Bhagavad-gītā, aśnāmi.

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

[Bg. 9.26]



Kṛṣṇa says that "My devotee, when he offers Me something eatable, with faith, love and devotion, I eat." Then is He speaking lies? No, He eats. But the atheist class of men, they do not know. They see that the plate is full. Sometimes, if He's forced, He can eat also, there are some incidences. Anyway, He, simply by seeing, He can eat. Simply by seeing. If you don't believe that He's not eating... But from the Vedic injunction we can understand that you put the food plate before the Lord, and Lord is seeing, and that is His eating. He's not hungry, but He can eat the whole universe at a time. This is God's position. He can devour the whole universe, as you have seen the virāḍ-rūpa.



So this yajña performance required fire. Tasmād agnis trayīmayaḥ. Trayīmaya. Trayī means Vedas. There are three departments of Vedas; therefore it is called trayī. Trayī means three: karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa and upāsanā-kāṇḍa. So in karma-kāṇḍa platform, fruitive activities, the sacrifice is required, and for sacrificing, you require fire, so that you can gradually understand what is the Absolute Truth. Similarly, if you want to see Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth, then you have to come to the platform of goodness. You cannot remain on the platform of ignorance and passion. Therefore our training to the student is to bring him to the platform of goodness, brāhmaṇa. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. Brahma-darśana. Brahma-darśana means one who has seen brahma, or one who has known brahma. He's called brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa is not that being born in the family of a brāhmaṇa and having a sacred thread, two-cent worth. No. Brāhmaṇa means one who has seen, brahma-darśana. Darśana means seeing. So, in order to see the Absolute Truth, one has to come to the platform of goodness. Tamasas tu rajas tasmāt sattvaṁ yad brahma-darśanam. Yad sattvam, the platform which is called goodness. And in that platform you can see God, or you can realize what is Absolute Truth.

So the so-called scientists, they are trying to find out the ultimate source of everything, the Absolute Truth. But because they are not on the platform of goodness, how they can see? They cannot see. The Absolute Truth is coming before us, in person, and is showing His activity as Absolute Truth, and big, big ācāryas, they're accepting Him, the Absolute Truth. Still, these rascals, they cannot see. The so-called scientists, rascals, they cannot see-because, they're not on the platform of goodness. They're in the platform of ignorance. Therefore they... Even... Just like Kṛṣṇa, when He appeared on this planet, there were so many millions of people. But very few of them could understand that He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Only the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and the Pāṇḍavas and some others. Not that all of them. Because all of them cannot understand. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Out of many millions of persons, kaścit, somebody is trying to become a brāhmaṇa. That is siddhaye. Kaścid yatati siddhaye. Siddhaye means to become successful. And yatatām api siddhānām [Bg. 7.3]. And out of many millions of persons who has become successful, out of them some may know what is Kṛṣṇa.

So anyway, brahma-darśanam. Brahma-darśanam means the preliminary understanding of the Absolute Truth. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. In the preliminary understanding, impersonal Brahman is realized; and if you make further progress, then you are, you realize the localized aspect, Paramātmā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. In your heart you will see. And, further progress means you'll see Viṣṇu, or Lord Kṛṣṇa-brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti. The one thing, thing is one, absolute, but a different capacity. Just like the... I have given several times, that the sun and the sunshine and the sun globe and the inhabitants of the sun globe, they are one, but at the same time different. To become in the sunshine does not mean that you are in the sun globe. That requires a very good qualification, how to... They cannot enter even into the moon planet and what to speak of entering the sun planet. It is fiery. So, as it is not possible for ordinary man, but there is sun planet and there are inhabitants also. They have bodies also, fiery body. Therefore it is so glowing and it is so hot that the temperatures, from ninety millions of miles, it is giving us temperature. It is made of fire; that's a fact.

So, as by different position one can understand complete sun... Ordinary men, those who are in the sunshine, they cannot understand what is the temperature in the sun globe. And even if you go nearer to the sun globe, it is very difficult to enter into the, within the planet. Similarly, the first understanding of the Absolute Truth is impersonal Brahman, brahma-darśanam. Then, if you can make further progress, then you will see that Absolute Truth within your heart by yoga system. And if you make further advance, then you see Him eye to eye and give your service, render your service personally. These are the stages.

So, on the whole, to understand the Absolute Truth, even brahma-darśanam, Absolute Truth, you have come to the light, not in the darkness. If you want to see the sun at least, then you have come to the sunshine. Not that in the dark room, closing your doors, you can see sunshine. You have to come out. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. Therefore the Vedic injunction is "Don't remain in the darkness. Come out to see the light." Just like in the morning, somebody is sleeping, closing his doors and windows tightly, and he's sleeping, snoring. Although it is ten o'clock, daytime, he thinks it is night going on. And he's enjoying sleeping. This is darkness. Rascal. And, those who are advanced, they rise early in the morning at four o'clock: "Now there will be sunshine. Prepare." That is the difference. The same human being: one is in the darkness, one is in the passion, and one is in the goodness. And if you come to the goodness, then you see, brahma-darśanam. You can understand what is Absolute Truth.

If you remain in ignorance and passion, you cannot see, you cannot know. You can go on with your so-called rascaldom talks about God, but it is not possible. You cannot understand God, or Absolute Truth, by eating meat, drinking and having illicit sex and gambling. No, that is not possible. Then you'll have to remain in the darkness for good, and next life you'll again become cats and dogs, that's all. Because you are given the opportunity to come to the light, but if you neglect it, if you think that natural life, animal life, to become naked and do all nonsense, then "All right. You, next life you become a tree, naked. Stand up naked for ten thousands of years." You want to be naked? That's all right. Nobody will protest. So many trees are standing naked. So many animals are loitering in the street naked. Nobody protests. But in human society, if you become naked, then you'll be punished by law. But they are thinking they are advancing by becoming naked. This is the knowledge: ignorance.

So Kṛṣṇa will give you opportunity to remain naked, become animals, trees, like that. So that is not our aim of life. Our aim of life, the human form of life, is meant for understanding the Absolute Truth: athāto brahma jijñāsā. That is the Vedānta-sūtra says. Brahma-what is brahma? What is Absolute Truth? This inquisitiveness must be there in human life, then it is human being. Otherwise, he is animal. The animal does not inquire what is Absolute Truth, neither the Vedānta-darśana and all these Vedic scriptures are meant for the animals. They're meant for human being. A human being has got the brain, he can understand, he can be trained up to become a brāhmaṇa. These are the opportunities.

So, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving this great opportunity to the human society. They're training them how to become a brāhmaṇa, we are giving them all important Vedic literature, translated into English and other. This is the greatest boon to make human life successful. But if the people want to remain in darkness, then what can we do? But not that everyone wants to remain in darkness. So many people are coming forward and taking this movement seriously. They are first-class men. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



So take advantage of this great movement. Come to the platform of goodness and see the Absolute Truth. Then your life is successful. Otherwise, you remain like cats and dogs, eat like cats and dogs.



If you want, nature will give you facility. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Prakṛti means nature. He's giving, by nature. Just like, if you infect, if you become infected with some disease, so you'll get that disease. It is nature's way. If you touch fire, your finger will be burned. Not that nature has to make a particular arrangement. By nature it is there. Similarly, if you remain like cats and dogs, then by nature you'll get the body of cats and dogs. There is no necessity of making separate attempt, "How shall I become a dog? How shall I become cat?" Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni. Prakṛti, nature, will give you. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ. How nature is helping? Nature, this material nature is matter. How it is being done, how matter is working? That is, answer is given in the Bhagavad-gītā, that mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "He's acting under My direction." God is giving direction. How he's giving direction? Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe [Bg. 18.61]-God is situated within your heart. When He sees that you are very much anxious to become a cat, a dog, He knows. He asks nature that "Just give him a body of dog. He wants to become a dog. He wants to become a hog; give him a body of hog. He wants the body of a tree, he wants the body of god; give him the body of god." Anything, you can take. You can have the body of a dog, or you can have the body of a god, as you want.

Kṛṣṇa, God is so kind. Whatever you want, you take. That is, nature is helping. Nature is working under the direction of God, and whatever you want, He understands, because He is sitting with you within the heart, like two birds. One bird is eating, one bird is simply seeing. The seeing bird is God and eating bird is the living entity. So that is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ. Fifteenth Chapter. "I am sitting in everyone's heart." Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. One Dr. Farquar, in our college life, he was a Scotsman, so he did not believe in the karma-vāda. And there are so many philosophers like that. But actually, īśvara, Kṛṣṇa, God, is sitting within your heart. He is witness.

In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said anumantā upadraṣṭā. Upadraṣṭā means witness. This is also explained in the Upaniṣads, that one bird is eating, another bird is seeing. The seeing bird is God, upadraṣṭā. He's noting down that you like this. He's noting down that you like to eat such and such thing. You'll find so many animals; they are eating differently. The hog is eating stool, the tiger is eating fresh blood, another animal is eating something, something. All facilities are there. Open hotel: you come on and take whatever you like. And the witness... God is so kind, this person has no discrimination of eating, so let him become dog, hog. The hog has no discrimination. Whatever you think: you give him halavā, he will eat; you give him stool, it will eat. There are goats, so many animals, and no discrimination. The human being, there must be discrimination. Everything is eatable? So why don't you eat stool? No. Your eatable is different. It must be different from the animal eatables. Your teeth is different, your nature is different. A child, a child, you cannot give anything. She wants, he wants to drink milk only. Natural food. Artificially, the child is taught to eat something else. If you, if the child simply drinks mother's milk for six months, it becomes stout and strong for whole life. Because that is natural food. But there is no milk in the mother's breast. Artificial. So how the child will be healthy? This is modern civilization. Otherwise, if we get our natural food, there is no question of disease, there is no question of doctor's bill.

So that is science; that is human civilization. One who knows how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex life, how to defend, that is human civilization. Without knowing, in the modes of ignorance-simply animal life. They are simply like animals. They, that is not civilization. Therefore, we have come to the platform of goodness, to see brahma-darśanam. That is civilization.

Thank you very much. (end)



721104SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.24

-

Vṛndāvana, November 4, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



pārthivād dāruṇo dhūmas

tasmād agnis trayīmayaḥ

tamasas tu rajas tasmāt

sattvaṁ yad brahma-darśanam

[SB 1.2.24]



Translation: "Coal, firewood, is better than raw wood, and fire is even better, for fire is the soul of Vedic sacrifice. Similarly passion, or rajas, is better than ignorance, or tamas; but goodness, sattva, is best because by goodness one can come to realize the Absolute Truth, or Brahman."



Prabhupāda:



pārthivād dāruṇo dhūmas

tasmād agnis trayīmayaḥ

tamasas tu rajas tasmāt

sattvaṁ yad brahma-darśanam



This is gradual process of evolution. Pārthivād dāruṇaḥ. Just like raw wood. Then, when it is dry, then it is fit for igniting fire. Then, when you ignite fire, first there is smoke, and after it is mature, the flames come out. And agnis trayīmayaḥ. And when the flame is there... Just like we generally perform fire sacrifice. Unless the flame comes, we do not chant the mantra or pour the ghee and the grains. Because that is the beginning of yajña. Trayīmaya. Trayī means Vedic yajñas. So our point is to come to the platform of performing yajña.



Yajña means Viṣṇu, the platform of satisfying Viṣṇu. This is the perfection of life. Dull, null brain, ignorance, just like animals, they are in the tamo-guṇa, ignorance. They cannot understand anything. So gradually, they are promoted to the human form of life, rajo-guṇa. Generally, human form of life, rajo-guṇa, activity for creation, we can very well see. Animals, cats, dogs cows, asses... And a little civilized, engaged in sense gratification in a different way, very active, passion... So these two stages of life will not help us. Because our aim is to come to the point of brahma-darśanam, self-realization, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. To remain karmīs or remain animallike life, no knowledge, simply eating, sleeping, mating, that's all... And little advancement means the same eating, sleeping, mating, but in a polished way... Mostly we find in the Western countries, the aim is animal propensities, but in a polished way. Suppose they live in very, very high skyscraper buildings, and the animals live in some cave, in some hole, in some nest.

So for living condition, improving the living condition, does not mean brahma-darśanam. Brahma-darśanam is another thing. Improving the living condition, improving the eating condition, improving the sex life condition, or improving the defending condition. Just like human civilization, they're discovering so many laser weapons, atomic bomb, so many things. So it is improving the defending condition. But modern civilization is in the opinion that if they can improve their material condition of eating, sleeping, mating and defending, that is advancement of civilization. But that is not advancement of civilization. Advancement of civilization means brahma-darśanam. That is advancement. Because so long we do not come to the platform of understanding that "I am spirit soul, I am part and parcel of the Supreme Spirit," we are in the ignorance-in different forms. The example is given very nicely. Just like raw wood, just from the trees, you cut the trees, it is raw, it is not immediately fit for burning. But when it is little dried you can ignite fire, and, igniting fire, immediately there is no flame, there is smoke. Then, after the smoke, there is flame. And that flame is required.

So this gradual process of evolution means one must come to the platform of understanding Brahman. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi: "I am..., I am spirit soul, and I am part and parcel of the Supreme Soul." This understanding one must come. So for that understanding one has to come to the platform of goodness, sattva-guṇa. If one remains in the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, as we have explained, then we shall be entangled in this material world. We may get a different types of body, even if we get the body of demigods or European body, American body, as they are understood, very advanced. So not only European, American, but there are other improved condition of life in higher planetary system. They're all made of rajo-guṇa. Rajas-tamas. Tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye [SB 1.2.19]. Because everywhere you'll find the prominence of greediness and lust, everywhere. Even in the heavenly planet, the King of Heaven, he's very, very, very much lusty. There are so many instances. He's very much fond of sex life, Indra.

So this will not help us. We must come to the platform of sattva-guṇa, goodness, the brahminical stage. Then our life, our evolutionary process, will be successful. Tamasas tu rajas tasmāt sattvaṁ yad brahma-darśanam. Gradually, evolutionary process... I think in Darwin's theory there is no such conception of coming to the point of sattva-guṇa, goodness. They do not know even what it is, sattva-guṇa. Simply they are studying the animal bones. That's all. But actually perfection of evolutionary process is to come to the platform of sattva-guṇa, brahminical stage. In other words, to become a brāhmaṇa is the topmost platform of advancement of civilization. Brahminical culture is the perfect advancement of civilization. That is mentioned here.

So if one wants to come to that platform, then one has to accept the form of Viṣṇu. As we have already explained in the previous verse: śreyāṁsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇāṁ syuḥ. Sattva-tanoḥ. Viṣṇu is the form of sattva-guṇa, Brahmā is the form of rajo-guṇa, and Śiva, Lord Śiva, is the form of tamo-guṇa. So actually, if we want our perfection of life, we'll not be very much benefitted by taking shelter of Lord Śiva or Lord Brahmā or any other demigod. Other demigods, they're all subordinate to Lord Brahmā and Śiva. All demigods are supposed... Even great saintly ṛṣis, they are also sons of Brahmā. Rajo-guṇa. Lord Śiva is also one of the sons of Brahmā. So either to accept other demigods or even Lord Śiva or Lord Brahmā will not help us, because we have to come to the platform of sattva-guṇa. For that purpose sattva-tanoḥ... Sattva-tanu means Viṣṇu. So we have to take shelter of Viṣṇu. In the Vedas, in the Ṛg Veda it is said, tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. Viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. Sūrayaḥ, those who are advanced in civilization, sūrayaḥ... Sura and asura. Asura means materialistic person, atheistic person, interested in sense gratification. That is called asura, na sura. And sura means interested in advancement of spiritual life. That is called sura. So for the asuras, the life is different, but for the suras, their aim is: tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. Their aim of perfection is Viṣṇu. Paramaṁ padam: the Supreme Abode of Viṣṇu, or the Vaikuṇṭhaloka.

So those who are actually advanced in civilization, those who are in the platform of goodness, their aim is how to go back to home, back to Godhead. That is their business. It is not that to take to religious life for some material gain. Dharmasya hy āpavargyasya na arthaḥ arthāya upakalpate [SB 1.2.9]. We have discussed these verses. To become religious means to become free from material entanglement. Not that to take to religious life means to, I mean to say, to develop economic condition. Generally, people take to religious to make economic development very easily. Therefore at the modern age the educated public, they are not interested in religious life because they think that in primitive stage the people were taking to religious life for economic development. Actually, that is the idea, because ordinarily people go to ask for bread in the church: "O God, give us our daily bread." So modern advanced in science people, they think: "Oh, what is the use of asking bread in the church? Why not take to industry?" That is their aim. In India, especially, this is the situation. The government is thinking that Indian people, being too much religiously inclined, they have fallen down economically; therefore these religious sentiments should be stopped completely. It is not encouraged. Here in Vṛndāvana so many pilgrims, they come from all parts of India; now all parts of world, they're coming. But it is kept in such unclean state to discourage people not to come here. That is the idea, so that people, educated people, modernized people may not come here. They do not want. That is the policy, I am seeing. They are introducing in the Vṛndāvana area so many industrial things so that the spiritual atmosphere is to be killed. That is the policy is going on. Nobody... The chur..., I mean to say, the temples are neglected. No question of improvement. The whole idea is not to come here: "Please do not come." They cannot say directly, but this is the idea going on.

But this is due to wrong direction of civilization. They do not know what is the aim of civilization. The aim of civilization is to understand Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But they're missing the point. They're thinking motor tire civilization, very nice road and running motorcar in seventy, eighty miles speed, that is civilization. Not to understand Viṣṇu. That is the difference between materialism and spiritualism.

But we should not be misled by such conception of civilization. Our aim is different. That is right different. I am spirit soul; you are spirit soul. Somehow or other, I have been entangled with this material body, one after another. So I must get out of this entanglement and go back to home, back to Godhead, to Viṣṇu, and live there eternally, blissful life of knowledge. That is our aim. The materialistic persons, they think these are all utopian thinking conception. Because they have no brain they are no better than animals, polished animals. That's all. They cannot understand. In the tamo-guṇa. Tamasaḥ. Tamasaḥ. Two: tamas and rajas. Two, these two qualities material qualities are there. What is...? That in the Bhagavad-gītā there is verse: kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu. Kāraṇam. Why one is born in low-grade body? Why one is born in high-grade body? The... What is the reason? The reason is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: kāraṇam. Kāraṇam means reason. Kāraṇ am asya saṅgaḥ. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. Because he is associating with some one of the three modes of material nature. Someone is associating with sattva-guṇa, one is associating with tamo-guṇa, one is associating with rajo-guṇa. So this is the reason. This is the reason that one is getting low-grade form of body or high-grade form of body. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu.

Now... In another place it is also clearly stated: yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. So kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. Therefore the first-class civilization is that which associates with the modes of goodness. That is, means, brahminical civilization. Truthful, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjava..., jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. This is first-class civilization. People must be truthful, they must be equipoised, not disturbed, not being disturbed by different situations. They must learn how to control the senses. They must learn how to control the mind. Śamo damas ti... They must be tolerant, titikṣā. Ārjava: they must be very simple, no duplicity. Ārjava. Jñānam: they must know everything in full knowledge. Vijñānam: apply the knowledge in practical life. Āstikyam: they must believe in the Vedic injunctions. Āstikya. That is called āstikya. The atheist and, and theist. The theist believes in the Vedic injunction. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is theist. Not that "I believe in God." They must believe in the injunction of the Vedas; what is said in the Vedas, one must believe. That is called theist. As we have given several times the example: the Vedas says that cow dung is pure. One who believes in that, he is theist. And one who does not believe in the words of the Vedas, they want to change, they want to misinterpret, interpolate, they are atheists. Bhagavad-gītā, anyone misinterpreting, giving wrong interpretation, or according to his concocted inter..., they are atheists. Theist, he'll believe all the words of Bhagavad-gītā as it is, as Arjuna believed: sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye yad vadasi keśava [Bg. 10.14]. "My dear Kṛṣṇa, whatever You are speaking, without any malinterpretation, without any change of words, I believe in it." This is theist understanding. Not like the so-called rascal scholars: "It is not like this. It is not like that. I think it is like this." These are all rascaldom.

So this is the process of civilization. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means perfect civilization, perfect advancement of civilization, according to the direction of the Vedas. We do not concoct anything, any meaning. Just like why you are reading this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam? This is the beginning of understanding Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The professional readers, they immediately jump to the rāsa-līlā of Kṛṣṇa. They think that Bhāgavatam means that rāsa-līlā of Kṛṣṇa. Because it appears like ordinary boys and girls, so they like it. No. This is the foundation of Bhāgavata. The nine cantos must be thoroughly read, then one can understand what is rāsa-līlā and what is Kṛṣṇa. If one jumps at once to the platform of understanding Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā or vṛndāvana-līlā, he'll be misled. He'll be misled. Just like so many rascals are interpreting Kṛṣṇa in so many different ways. They are thinking Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. So when He acts like ordinary human being, they take Him as ordinary human being-avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11].

Therefore one should not jump. One should learn Bhāgavata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as recommended by Caitanya Mahāprabhu's secretary, Svarūpa Dāmodara: bhāgavata giyā paḍa bhāgavata sthāne.(?) One who is practical bhāgavata, one who knows what is Bhāgavata, what is Bhagavān. Not from the professional reciters, who are reading Bhāgavata for belly's sake. Now they are reading Bhāgavatam, and if they get more money, they can become a sweeper. Because their consideration is money. They'll give up immediately reading of Bhāgavatam. But my Guru Mahārāja used to say that it is better to become a sweeper and honestly earn one's livelihood than to become a false Bhāgavata reader for earning livelihood. Yes. Because they'll mislead the whole public. Nobody will improve. And actually we have seen that so many people, they're very much accustomed to attend the Bhāgavata-saptāha, but they remain in the same darkness as they were. No improvement. That is not possible.

So therefore Vyāsadeva has taken so much trouble to establish the Bhāgavata life in Twelve Cantos. One has to go, one after another, one after another, one after another. Not jumping. Daśama-skandha, the Tenth Canto is the face of Kṛṣṇa. So worshiping Kṛṣṇa means one should offer tulasī on the, on His lotus feet first of all. Not jump over to the mouth or to the face. So the First and Second cantos are the two lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. One should begin worshiping Bhāgavatam, or the sound representation of Kṛṣṇa, by worshiping the First Canto and Second Cantos. We are reading the First Canto. We are just worshiping one lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Then the other. Then the thighs. Gradually, you have to rise to the face. The Tenth Canto is the face of Kṛṣṇa. Don't jump over immediately. Read it. But try to understand from the very beginning.

So our aim of life should be to come to the platform of sattva-guṇa, goodness. Otherwise it is not possible. A, a person like Max Muller, in the depth of rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, what he can write about Vedas, and what he can understand, Bhāgavata? This is all nonsense. They are going to the translation of Max Muller. What he'll understand Bhāgavata and Vedas? He's in the rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. Therefore it is forbidden that, without becoming a brāhmaṇa, nobody should read the Vedic literature. It is forbidden That I have already said several times. Without being a graduate, nobody should enter the law college. Similarly, Vedas, they are meant for brāhmaṇas, not for the śūdras, not for the kṣatriya. Kṣatriya also, they, they are, but under the instruction of the brāhmaṇas.

So this is perfect civilization. One must know his own business. Everyone should not attempt to understand Vedic literature, remaining himself in the rajo and tamo-guṇa. Kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye. There are many so-called sannyāsīs who went to your country. He was in fully in rajo and tamo-guṇa. He wanted to preach Vedānta. Therefore it was failure. Nobody can do so. So it is very clearly stated: tamasas tu rajas tasmāt sattvaṁ yad brahma-darśanam. One must come to the platform of sattva-guṇa. Therefore we have got so many restrictions, just to keep him fit in the sattva-guṇa: no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling. If one indulges in these affairs, he cannot come to the platform of sattva-guṇa, neither the things will be revealed to him. He'll remain in the darkness. Simply by academic scholarship, it is impossible to understand what is Vedas, what is Bhāgavata, what is Bhagavad-gītā.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Acyutānanda: ...when should we read the Kṛṣṇa book?



Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇa book is written in such a way that everyone can read. But the scheme is like that. To understand Kṛṣṇa, one has to go through this... The idea is that Kṛṣṇa book should be read. Just like the example can be given: sandalwood. Sandalwood, it is rubbed in the flat way. But if you rub in the horizontal way, how, no? What is called? Standing?



Disciples: Vertical.



Prabhupāda: Vertical way. It will give the pulp, but not so very easily. But if you rub it in the horizontal way, it will give very easily. So the, if one regularly reads the other chapters and reads Kṛṣṇa, that will be very nice. Not only "Simply I'm interested to Kṛṣṇa book in the thirty-fifth..., from twenty-ninth chapter to thirty-fifth chapter." That is not good. People generally read those chapters. That is not good.



Acyutānanda: If we, when we show the books to new life..., potential life members, they go to that part. They look...



Prabhupāda: Yes. Everyone is attracted to that. So therefore it is said: śrotra-ramo 'bhirāmāt. It is pleasing to everyone. But unless one becomes a devotee-it may be pleasing-he cannot derive the effect. He cannot derive the effect. As we practically see, generally, the Bhāgavata reciters, they read these chapters and they hear also, but they do not improve. They do not improve; simply sentiment. They do not understand Kṛṣṇa.



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



They do not understand Kṛṣṇa in truth. Therefore they become sahajiyās. Therefore the system is given by Lokasya ajānataḥ vidvāṁś cakre sātvata-saṁhitām [SB 1.7.6]. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. Adhokṣaje, the transcendence, when one is engaged in His devotional service, the anarthas will be vanquished. Anartha upaśamam. But when we see that anarthas are not decreasing, they're increasing, that means they're not entering. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. Anarthas, unwanted things, unwanted things, the so many things we have described. Sometimes we see that they cannot give up even smoking. That anartha is not being diminished. It is increasing. So where is the entrance? Phalena paricīyate. We have to understand by the result. If the result is not very satisfactory, then you must know that progress is not very nice.



Devotee (Śyāmasundara?): I've heard it said that all animals are in the mode of tamo-guṇa. But then I've also heard other devotees say that a cow is in sattva-guṇa. So can an animal be in the mode of goodness?



Prabhupāda: Yes. The lion is in the rajo-guṇa. The cow is in the sattva-guṇa. And the monkey is in the tamo-guṇa. So Darwin's father was monkey. (laughter) Therefore all the followers of anthropology, they're in the tamo-guṇa. What do you think, Hayagrīva Prabhu? (laughter) Eh? Darwin's father, monkey?



Hayagrīva: That's what he claims.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Hayagrīva: That's what he claims.



Prabhupāda: He claims. Yes. (laughter) There is no doubt about it. All right. (end)





720828SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.25

-

Los Angeles, August 28, 1972



Devotee:



bhejire munayo 'thāgre

bhagavantam adhokṣajam

sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ kṣemāya

kalpante ye 'nu tān iha

[SB 1.2.25]



Prabhupāda: "Previously, all the great sages rendered service unto the transcendental Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān, due to His existence above the three modes of material nature. They worshiped Him to become free from material conditions. Whoever follows such sages is also eligible for liberation from the material world."



So, in the beginning, there was no impersonalists or voidists. These are later additions. In the Vedas it is stated oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ. It is a Vedic mantra. Sūrayaḥ, those who are great sages, they're always looking forward to see the lotus feet of Viṣṇu, tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam. So, in another Vedic mantra there is:

yaṁ brahmā varuṇendra-rudra-marutaḥ stunvanti divyaiḥ stavair

vedaiḥ sāṅga-pada-kramopaniṣadair gāyanti yaṁ sāma-gāḥ

dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yogino

yasyāntaṁ na viduḥ surāsura-gaṇā devāya tasmai namaḥ



Yaṁ brahmā. Brahmā is the original living creature within this universe; so he worshiped the Supreme Lord, Personality of Godhead. He worshiped not the impersonal brahmajyoti; he worshiped the person. Yaṁ brahmā varuṇendra-they were the first creation, and the sages Marīci, Vasiṣṭha, Ātreya... There are seven great sages, first-born. All of them worship the Personality of Godhead. Bhejire munayo 'thāgre. Agra means in the beginning of creation. Later on they have deviated, or as the ages are going on, people are becoming degraded in their standard of spiritual understanding. In the Satya-yuga, cent percent people were aware of their spiritual necessity of life. Next yuga, seventy-five percent. Next yuga, fifty percent, fifty percent; and this yuga, Kali-yuga, seventy-five percent are rascals, and twenty-five percent, they are little wise. And out of that twenty-five percent, mostly they are fruitive actors. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā says manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu [Bg. 7.3].



So, in this fallen age, they have manufactured so many things. But actually in the beginning, agre, in the beginning-agre means in the beginning-all the sages, they worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Bhejire munayo 'thāgre bhagavantam. There are... Absolute Truth is manifested in three phases: brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti [SB 1.2.11]. So Bhagavān is the last word in the Absolute Truth. So here it is said they did not worship Brahman or Paramātmā; they worshiped directly bhagavantam adhokṣajam. Adhokṣajam.

Another name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is adhokṣajam. Akṣaja, akṣaja means direct perception. Direct means sense perception. Just like we see so many things directly with our eyes; we touch with our hands; we smell by our nose. These are direct perception by our senses. But bhagavantam, Bhagavān, is adhokṣajam. He is beyond direct perception. Adhokṣajam. Adhaḥ, you cannot reach there by direct perception. Just like I do not see God. Then what do you see? Your seeing power is very limited. Why don't you accept that? So He's not appreciable by limited senses. Therefore His name is adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja. Sattvaṁ viśuddham. Sattvaṁ viśuddham. Sattva, goodness, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa. That sattvam, or existence, His existence is adhokṣaja, beyond our sense perception, and viśuddham. Apāpa-viddham, as it is stated in the Īśopaniṣad, viśuddham. He is never touched by the material contamination. Viśuddham. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam. Here, however good we may be, there is some material touch. But so far Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is concerned, His existence is viśuddham. Therefore He's called paraḥ. Nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ. Paraḥ means above this material world, transcendental.

So the material nature is created, everything here created at a certain point, but because He's above, therefore He is not within this creation. We cannot take Kṛṣṇa as one of the created beings like us. We are all created beings. But Kṛṣṇa is not created. He is above creation. Before creation, He was existing; therefore His existence is not within this creation. That is adhokṣaja. Within this creation we can understand by experimental science, but which is beyond this creation, because we cannot reach there, adhokṣaja... Because we take everything by direct perception, but that is beyond direct perception. Adhokṣaja. Kṣemāya kalpante ye 'nu tān iha. That is our real benefit, adhokṣaja. In the beginning also of this chapter it is said, sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. The same word, adhokṣaje. Ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati. If you want real happiness, then you engage yourself in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṣemāya. Then you'll be happy. And if you take to other demigods, those who are material, that will not be your perfect happiness or permanent happiness.

Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, yajante anya-devatāḥ. Kāma, kā. What is that? Hṛta-jñānāḥ. Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. We have read, we have discussed, that if you want, if you want to fulfill this desire, then you worship this demigod. If you want to be beautiful, then you worship Umā. If you want money, then you worship Prajāpati, the treasurer of the demigods, Kuvera. And in this way there are different recommendations. But the conclusion is that Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ: [Bg. 7.20] this material kāma, lust, desires, for this purpose they go, they worship different demigods. There is no necessity. Kṛṣṇa stopped demigod worship. To His father, when His father was going to arrange a festival for worshiping Indra, and He stopped it. The father was so affectionate: "Oh, Kṛṣṇa doesn't want it. All right, stop it." But Indra became very angry. "Who is this boy, stopping my worship?" So he wanted to show his power. So for seven days torrents of rain. And Kṛṣṇa showed His power. He lifted the Govardhana Hill, giri-vara-dhārī, Govardhana Hill to protect the Vṛndāvana vāsī. Then he came to his senses, that "He's not ordinary cowherd boy. I'm... He's my master." Then he...

So, Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja means beyond our sense perception. Therefore we have to know Kṛṣṇa from Kṛṣṇa, not by our speculation. Kṛṣṇa may... That is frog philosophy. Frog philosophy. He's simply calculating with reference to his teeny well, three feet. So if we want to speculate, what experience we have got, what knowledge we have got that we can speculate to understand the supreme, all-pervasive, Supreme Personality of Godhead? That is not possible. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. If you want to know Kṛṣṇa, then you have to take to this process of devotional service, rendering service unto Him. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Brs. 1.2.234]. Bhejire, bhejire, bhaj-dhātu. Bhaja means sevā. So bhejire. You have to take to this devotional service. And Kṛṣṇa also says bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. He doesn't say by knowledge or by work or by yoga, mystic yogic power, one can understand God. No. That is not possible. These are all akṣaja, within the range of our sense perception. But bhakti is not within the range. Bhakti is the transcendental process. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Brs. 1.1.11]. Jñāna and karma, knowledge and fruitive activities, they are of this material world. And anyābhilāṣitā-they're all of this material world, anyābhilāṣitā, desiring other than Kṛṣṇa.

So, leaving aside all these processes, we have to simply serve Kṛṣṇa ānukūlyena, favorably, as Kṛṣṇa wants. So at the present moment, Kṛṣṇa, what does He want? How do you know it? Yes, we can know it. Kṛṣṇa, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He appeared, and He has declared His mission. What is that? Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. He says, "Whomever you meet, you simply speak of Kṛṣṇa." Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, the instruction given by Kṛṣṇa or the instruction given about Kṛṣṇa. Just like this Bhāgavata, this is instruction about Kṛṣṇa, how to know Kṛṣṇa. And instruction given by Kṛṣṇa is Bhagavad-gītā. He says, "I am like this, I am like this." So we haven't got to make any research. Whatever is already stocked there, let us distribute it. What capacity we have got to find out Kṛṣṇa by research work? That's not possible. That is akṣaja, akṣaja. Kṛṣṇa is adhokṣaja. Your paltry research work with limited power of sense, how you can find out Kṛṣṇa? That's not possible.

So we have to take instruction from Kṛṣṇa to understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the supreme." You have to accept that, in the Bhāgavata. You cannot interpret in a different way: "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is supreme, all right. But..." Not like that. Take it as it is. Kṛṣṇa says ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8], "I am the original source of everything." Because our inquiries, every scientist, every philosopher is trying to find out the ultimate source. That is called progressive science or philosophy. But here we get the information. Why should we take so much trouble? Kṛṣṇa says aham ādir hi devānām: [Bg 10.2] "I am the original of all demigods." Just like Brahmā. Brahmā is the first demigod within this universe, but he is not original. Original is Kṛṣṇa. Aham ādir hi devānāṁ maharṣīṇām. So He says that He is the ādi, ādi-puruṣam. Brahmā says ādi-puruṣam, the original person. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So He's the ādi-puruṣa, He's the original source. Every Vedic literature declares, every authority declares. He comes Himself to declare, but still we are so rascal, we are finding out, making research work, "What is the ādi-puruṣa?" This is called rascaldom. Everything is there, but the rascal will simply spoil their own time and spoil others' time making research work. This is called illusion. Everything is there. Sun is there, brilliant, and one is searching sun with a lamp. What is the use of this lamp? The sun is self-effulgent, you can see. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is self-effulgent. By śāstra, by authority, by action, everything. Why you are wasting your time? Wasting your time? Yes. What is the reason?

The reason Kṛṣṇa says: duṣkṛtina. Duṣkṛtinaḥ, narādhamāḥ. Because they are very, very sinful, duṣkṛtina. Mischievous, miscreants, simply wasting money. They're taking huge salary, huge research fees from the government, and simply misleading persons. That is their business. Miscreants. Actually, they want money, but to take the money he has to bluff. Without bluffing, how he can take money? Then they will present themselves: "I am great scientist, I am great philosopher, so give me money, millions of dollars. I'll go to the moon planet, I'll go to the Mars," and taking money and wasting. And because we are rascals, we are also: "Oh, they are making so much advancement, yes." Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. We are following blind leaders. Because we are blind, we do not know. This is the position. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. So we have to open our eyes. How these eyes are opened?

ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



We are blind. We can have our eyes through the medium of bona fide spiritual master. That is required. Ādau gurvāśrayam.



So this adhokṣajam, Kṛṣṇa, we have to worship. Adhokṣaja. So we cannot see if it is beyond our sense perception. How we can worship Him? Therefore you have to take shelter of the spiritual master who has seen Him. Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. You try to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead by surrender. Praṇipātena, paripraśnena. First of all, surrender. Not asking before surrender. This is not allowed. If one is not surrendered, then he should not put any question, because the first principle is lost. First of all you must surrender, then put question. And when you put question, don't argue. Take it. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was putting... When Arjuna surrendered himself to Kṛṣṇa, śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam: [Bg. 2.7] "Now I become..." Because in the beginning he was talking like friends. So friends' argument, there is no end. Because every one thinks that "I am your friend. Why shall I be defeated by you?" So that talk, sort of talks will not solve your problem how to see God. That is not possible. Therefore, you must follow the principles done by Arjuna. He surrendered to Kṛṣṇa: "Kṛṣṇa, I know You are my friend, but unless I surrender unto You, I accept You my spiritual master, it is not possible to know." Therefore he surrendered: śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam. Kṛṣṇa also immediately took him as disciple and immediately chastised him, aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase: [Bg. 2.11] "You're talking like a very learned scholar, but you're fool number one. You do not know what is knowledge."

So we must go to certain person, such a person who can actually give us knowledge. Ādau gurvāśrayam. So in the Bhagavad-gītā,

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



Tattva-darśī, one who has seen the Absolute Truth, he can give you real... So guru and Kṛṣṇa... Ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva, guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Both-Kṛṣṇa's mercy and spiritual master's mercy. Kṛṣṇa's mercy is there, Bhagavad-gītā. He has already given you. And try to understand this Bhagavad-gītā through the bona fide spiritual master, Bhagavad-gītā As It Is, then you'll learn. Then you'll learn what is adhokṣaja, beyond your sense perception. Then you will understand gradually. Svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ: He becomes revealed. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. The spiritual master's duty is to engage you in devotional service, especially engage your tongue, jihvādau. Jihvā means tongue. Tongue means engaging your tongue for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, (devotees chant with Prabhupāda) Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. And when you are tired, take kṛṣṇa-prasādam. That is on the tongue.



So simply engage your tongue; he'll give you Kṛṣṇa. Thank you very much. [break]



...Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. We are so unfortunate. You see, the things have been made so easy, actually, but unfortunate class of men, they cannot take to it.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721105SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.25

-

Vṛndāvana, November 5, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



bhejire munayo 'thāgre

bhagavantam adhokṣajam

sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ kṣemāya

kalpante ye 'nu tān iha

[SB 1.2.25]



Prabhupāda:



bhejire munayo 'thāgre

bhagavantam adhokṣajam

sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ kṣemāya

kalpante ye 'nu tān iha

[SB 1.2.25]



"Previously all the great sages rendered service unto the transcendental Personality of Godhead (Bhagavān) due to His existence above the three modes of material nature. They worshiped Him to become free from material conditions. Whoever follows such sages is also eligible for liberation from the material world."



So bhejire munayaḥ athāgre bhagavantam adhokṣajam. There are some theories-that is not fact-that ultimately the Absolute Truth is impersonal. But here we find that agre, in the beginning, after creation, all the sages... First of all, there was Brahmā. And then he created so many saintly persons. Marīcyādi, great sages. And they also engaged themselves in worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not impersonal, from the very beginning. Bhejire munayaḥ atha agre. From the very beginning. Bhagavantam adhokṣajam. Adhokṣajam, we have described many times: "beyond our sense perception." The Absolute Truth is a person, it is very difficult to understand. "Beyond our sense perception." They, generally they think that "How a person can create such huge cosmic manifestation?" That is their bewilderment. They cannot accommodate, accommodate in the teeny, poor brain that the original Absolute Truth is a person. That is their problem. So their idea is that by personal worship, one has to reach again to the impersonal transcendence. But we don't find from the śāstra like that. Now, the most authentic śāstra is Vedānta. Vedānta is accepted by all classes of men. Because without accepting Vedānta, nobody will be bona fide. Generally they think that the impersonalists are Vedantists. Generally they think, but that's a wrong conception. They... All the Vaiṣṇava-Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya-they are also Vedantists. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Vedantist. We are also Vedantist. It is not that Vedānta is the monopoly of the impersonalists. No.

Now, the Vedānta, in the beginning it is, the first sūtra is: athāto brahma jijñāsā. So to inquire about Brahman, the Absolute. Now, the next answer is janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Brahman, the Absolute Truth, is that from whom everything emanates. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Now, this janmādy asya yataḥ is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is explained by Vyāsadeva himself. Vyāsadeva is explaining Vedānta-sūtra in his book, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhāṣyaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇām **. Śrī Vyāsadeva says, "This is the real comment, or bhāṣya, of Vedānta-sūtra, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." Therefore Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, Gosvāmīs, they did not write any comment on the Vedānta-sūtra because they accept Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the natural commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra. So why they should write again? But still, when there was such question raised in Jaipur that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava has no commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra, at that time, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, he wrote Govinda-bhāṣya on Vedānta-sūtra. But still, Vedānta-sūtra does not mean to understand impersonalism. No. That's not the fact.

Therefore in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the very beginning, the Vedānta-sūtra is discussed. Unfortunately, the professional Bhāgavata reciters did... Neither they have got brain, nor do they explain the, from the very beginning, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from the very beginning, Vedānta-sūtra is explained: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. In the Vedānta-sūtra, the answer is: "The Absolute Truth is that from whom everything emanates." So Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explains: janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣu abhijñaḥ sva-rāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. As soon as we speak that the original source of everything, janmādy asya yataḥ, so what is the nature of that original source? Whether He's a dead stone, or a living being? That is the next question. Everything that we experience is coming from the supreme source. Whether that supreme source is a living being or a dead stone? What will be the answer? From common sense? From common sense, suppose if we find out the original source of everything, what will be the nature of that original? The Bhāgavata explains therefore: abhijñaḥ sva-rāṭ. He's not dead stone. Abhijñaḥ. He has got consciousness. He has got consciousness. What kind of consciousness? Anvayāt itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ. He knows everything, directly and indirectly.

Now suppose we are also conscious. So what is the nature of our consciousness? Our consciousness is that I know directly everything of my body, or of my self. But I do not know indirectly about yourself. I cannot say what is going on in your mind, in your body, what pains and pleasure you are feeling. But I can speak about myself that "I am feeling like this. I am thinking like this. I am willing like this." That I can say. So my consciousness is not perfect. It is perfect so far I am concerned. But I, my consciousness does not spread upon you. But here it is said, anvayāt itarataḥ abhijñaḥ artheṣu abhijñaḥ. "The Absolute Truth knows everything, directly and indirectly." My knowledge is imperfect in this sense that I am eating something, it is being digested in the stomach. So many secretions are coming out. How they are forming into blood, and so many things are going on within the body, I am not directly concerned. Neither I know directly. But the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Being, He knows everything, in any corner of the cosmic manifestation. Therefore His consciousness and my consciousness is... As, so far possessing consciousness, the Absolute Truth and myself are one, but His consciousness is all-pervading. My consciousness is limited. So the Absolute Truth cannot be limited, but we are limited.

Therefore here it is said, bhejire munayaḥ athāgre bhagavantam. In this... We have already discussed that the Absolute Truth is realized in three features: brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases: impersonal Brahman, localized Paramātmā, and the Supreme Person, Bhagavān. So the ultimate realization is Bhagavān, not the impersonal Brahman. That is not ultimate realization. That is partial realization. Even Paramātmā realization, that is also partial. The complete realization is Bhagavān. Vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam [SB 1.2.11]. There is no duality in the Absolute platform. That's a fact. But that does not mean that realization of Brahman is the same as realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is not the same. There is no difference, so far the spiritual identity is concerned. The spiritual identity is the same, Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān. But because my realization is imperfect, therefore somebody says that Brahman realization is the supreme; somebody says that Paramātmā realization is the supreme; somebody says Bhagavān realization is the Supreme. But factually, one who has got real realization, he knows the Absolute Truth is realized in three features, according to one's capacity. The Absolute Truth is one. The example may be given: just like the sun-god, the sun planet, and the sunshine. They are one. But according to the capacity, we are, generally, we can realize the sunshine only. But sunshine is not the perfect realization of the sun. It is partial realization. Brahmeti paramātmeti. The full realization is sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Person. Vigraha means person. One who realizes the Supreme Person-and that Supreme Person is Kṛṣṇa,

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



That is real realization.



So one who has not reached to that point, to realize Kṛṣṇa, it is to be understood that his knowledge is still imperfect. But these persons who have got imperfect knowledge, they are passing as Vedantists and knows everything. They do not know. Kṛṣṇa therefore says, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante: [Bg. 7.19] "These impersonalists, the so-called men of knowledge, after many, many births..." Because it is not so easy to understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person. They'll have to wait to understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person. They'll have to wait for thousands of births to understand Kṛṣṇa. They'll have to wait. Although they are very much proud of their knowledge, we know where they are: partial realization. Of course, they are also in the same field. But they'll not understand the Supreme Person. Those who understood, the great sages in the beginning, in the beginning of the creation, munayaḥ, great, great sages, Marīci, Ātreya, Vasiṣṭha and others, so they worshiped the Supreme Person, bhagavantam, not the impersonal feature. Impersonal, actually, there is, there cannot be any worship of the impersonal feature, Brahman. It is simply accepting some trouble. Kleśaḥ adhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām. It is simply troublesome. But unfortunately, these impersonalists have spread all over the world. They have no sharp brain to understand the Supreme Person, and they are misguiding the whole population that either impersonalism or voidism. Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi.

But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is against this. We are giving directly the name and address and the activities, everything, of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are trying to find out the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person. Anvayāt and abhijñaḥ. Abhijñaḥ means conscious. And what kind of conscious? What kind of knowledge? Sva-rāṭ. Our, my knowledge, your knowledge is received from others. Without... The Vedantists... The Vedantists, they also receive their knowledge from another Vedantist-the so-called Vedantists. Vedantists are... Real Vedantists are the Vaiṣṇavas. And the impersonalist Vedantists, because their knowledge is not perfect. Therefore their knowledge of Vedānta is also imperfect, because they do not know anything about the Supreme Person.

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

[SB 10.2.32]



This is the version of Vyāsadeva. The... Because they neglect the Supreme Person. Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. The Vedantists... There are many Vedantists in Vṛndāvana, but they do not come to see the temple, because they think themselves that they have become Kṛṣṇa. That is the Vedānta, so-called Vedānta philosophy conclusion. But Bhāgavata says that vimukta-māninaḥ. "They are thinking that they have become liberated." That is their concoction. Māninaḥ. If somebody thinks that "I have become the richest man in the world," although he has nothing to show... To become richest man, there must be some symptoms. But if a poor man says that "I am the richest man in the world," so one should test him, whether he has got the complete riches of the world.



So simply thinking, concocting, is one thing. And fact is another. Fact is that we are teeny, part and parcel of the Absolute Truth. But we are not actually absolute. We are relative. Relative truth. On the existence of the Absolute Truth, we are existing, but we have no independent existence, neither we have got independent knowledge. We are all dependent. The independent knowledge, Absolute Truth, is Kṛṣṇa. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. That is the beginning of Vedānta-sūtra. Therefore, bhejire munayo 'thāgre bhagavantam adhokṣajam. Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, beyond the sense perception. This impersonal concept of the Absolute Truth is in negation of the material duality. But that is not absolute knowledge. Absolute knowledge is that when we reach bhagavantam adhokṣajam. Sattvaṁ viśuddham. His existence is viśuddha, not contaminated. Our existence in this material existence, this is not viśuddha. This is contaminated by the modes of material nature. But His existence is viśuddha. Even Śaṅkarācārya, he says, in his commentary on the Bhagavad-gītā: nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ avyaktāt. Vyaktāvyakta. There are two material features: manifested and nonmanifested. Śaṅkarācārya agrees that Nārāyaṇa... As soon as he says "Nārāyaṇa," he means the person, person, the Supreme Person. Paraḥ avyaktāt. He's transcendental. His person is not the same person, personality as we have got. There, that is... Para means that is adhokṣajam, beyond our sense perception. So... And there are so many other evidences. Kṛṣṇa says that mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 7.7], "There is no more superior existence than Myself." Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. "I am the origin." Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. This verse, this code, is explained by Kṛṣṇa Himself that "I am the origin of everything." And Arjuna, who understood Kṛṣṇa, he said, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān puruṣam [Bg. 10.12]. He accepted the Absolute Truth a puruṣa, a person.

So the Absolute cannot be imperson. Imperson is one of the features of the Absolute Truth, but the Absolute Truth, in the original understanding, He is person. As Kṛṣṇa says, brahmaṇo 'haṁ pratiṣṭhā. The impersonal Brahman is situated in Him. It is His personal rays, effulgence of His bodily rays. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. He has got His bodily effulgence, just like the sunshine is the effulgence of the sun globe, and the sun globe, within the sun globe there is sun-god, Vivasvān. That is also... We get information from the Bhagavad-gītā, the sun, sun planet, is not impersonal, not a lump of matter. There is the predominating Deity in the sun globe, and his name is also given in the Bhagavad-gītā-Vivasvān. Vivasvān manave prāha. Prāha, he explained Bhagavad-gītā. Therefore he's a person. As we get, get this experience that from the sun globe, within the sun globe there is a person, and, due to the effulgence of that personal rays of the sun-god, or the population there, every people being glowing, the whole sun planet is so powerful, glowing, and the glow is distributed all over the universe, similarly, there is a glowing effulgence of the Supreme Person. That is called brahmajyoti. That brahmajyoti is impersonal, but the brahmajyoti is resting on the Personality of Kṛṣṇa.

So ultimate Absolute Truth is Kṛṣṇa. That is the verdict of all Vedic literature, Vedānta, and Kṛṣṇa says that vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Anyone who has not understood Kṛṣṇa, he has not studied the Vedic literature very perfectly. Vedānta-vid vedānta-kṛd ca aham. Kṛṣṇa says He's the compiler of Vedānta. So who will know Vedānta better than Kṛṣṇa? The so-called Vedantists, they are very much proud of their knowledge of Vedānta, but the, the real compiler of the Vedānta philosophy is Vyāsadeva. He's incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, vedānta-kṛd vedānta-vit. He is the compiler of the Vedānta-sūtra and He knows what is Vedānta-sūtra, not the so-called Māyāvādī philosophers.

So we have to learn Vedānta-sūtra from Kṛṣṇa, not from others. Not from others. We are not going to be befooled. We know what is Vedānta-sūtra. Vedānta-sūtra points out that here is the person, Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. Brahmā says, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Kṛṣṇa Himself says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. He is the origin. Because the Absolute Truth is the origin of everything, the Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ. He's the origin of even Nārāyaṇa. He's the origin of Brahmā. He's origin of Lord Śiva. He's origin of the Brahman effulgence. He's origin of Paramātmā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So... But the origin from Paramātmā is another expansion of Kṛṣṇa. That is also explained: ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28].

Our, this philosophy, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we are pointing out the Supreme Person. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Everyone is searching after God; we are delivering. Kṛṣṇa is delivering Himself. That is His kindness. That is His mercy. And Lord Caitanya is delivering Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. Not only Kṛṣṇa, He's giving love of Kṛṣṇa. So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness people, they should not be misled by so-called Vedantists or impersonalists, or voidists. They should stick to the principle, as it is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Therefore we present Bhagavad-gītā as it is.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721106SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.26

-

Vṛndāvana, November 6, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān

hitvā bhūta-patīn atha

nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntā

bhajanti hy anasūyavaḥ

[SB 1.2.26]



Translation: "Those who are serious about liberation are certainly nonenvious, and they respect all. Yet they reject the horrible and ghastly forms of the demigods and worship only the all-blissful forms and plenary portions of Lord Viṣṇu."



Prabhupāda:



mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān

hitvā bhūta-patīn atha

nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntā

bhajanti hy anasūyavaḥ



So the first word: mumukṣavaḥ-it is very difficult. This class of men, to find out, mumukṣavaḥ, it is very difficult to find out. They do not know what is meant by mumukṣava. Mumukṣava means "desiring to be liberated." They do not know what is liberation. The so-called scientists, philosophers of the modern age, they do not know what is meant by liberation, mokṣa. And still, they are the heads of education and public leaders. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know what is the objective of life, what for the human life is meant. They do not know. I was just talking with Guru dāsa. Sometimes in the year 1950 or '51 I went to Jhansi, and it happened so that the..., the friend in whose house I was staying, he was a leader, and there was a meeting for Gandhi's disappearance day. So I was asked to speak. At that time I was not sannyāsī. I was asked to speak something on nonviolence. So I explained that violence means if you have got some right and if somebody by force stops you to utilize your right, that is violence. That is violence. I have got some right to take something, so, or enter in some room, and, if somebody checks me by force, that "You cannot enter," that is violence and it is criminal.



So our land of Bhāratavarṣa, it is not ordinary thing to take birth in Bhāratavarṣa. Just see, practically, how many men, they are automatically circumambulating this temple. Even a common man. So in this way, if you study, by nature, they are God conscious, in Bhāratavarṣa. By nature. Even a very poor man, he's satisfied in God consciousness. He doesn't care, poverty-stricken. He's satisfied: "Kṛṣṇa has placed me in this position." Neither he cares to know-we have studied-that "Why I am poverty-stricken?" Doesn't care. "Now I am getting some food by grace of Kṛṣṇa." Not very long ago, say about two hundred, three hundred years ago, in Krishnanagara, there was a big zaminder, Raja Krishnacandra. So he went to a learned scholar, paṇḍita, brāhmaṇa. In those... Brāhmaṇa, they voluntarily accept poverty. They don't care. So Raja Krishnacandra came to him and asked him: "Panditji, can I help you in some way?" He replied, he replied, "I don't require any help from you." "No, I see that you are very poverty-stricken." "No, I am not poverty-stricken. My students get some rice for me, and my wife cooks it, and I get some..." There was a tamarind tree. "So I get some tamarind leaves. So it is very nice. I don't require any help." You see. This is India's... Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, he was the greatest scholar, politician. He was prime minister of Mahārāja Emperor Candragupta, under whose name the Cāṇakya Purī is going on. He was living in a cottage, not accepting any salary. And as soon as Mahārāja Candragupta wanted some explanation, (he) immediately resigned. This is the standard of persons who are born in India. Vyāsadeva-who can be greater scholar than Vyāsadeva? He has written... His last contribution is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and each word, if you study for hundreds of years, still, you have to understand. Each word. Such a scholar. He was living in a cottage.

So this is actually India's culture. So I explained in that meeting that "After many, many births, one is given the opportunity to take birth in this holy land of Bhāratavarṣa. Unfortunately, you people, you are, by force, making them materialist. They had the opportunity to take advantage of the contribution of great sages, ṛṣis, to study and to become a successful human being, but you are, by force, dragging them from that attitude to this materialistic way of life. This is violence. This is violence. What you are speaking of, nonsense, nonviolence? This is violence." So about twenty years ago I was thinking like that. So actually, people are being killed not only in India, but outside also, by these blind leaders. They do not know how to lead people, how to make them happy, how to make them successful in their human form of life. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sung,

hari hari biphale janama goṅāinu

manuṣya janama pāiyā, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā

jāniyā śuniyā biṣa khāinu



"My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, I have simply wasted my time, simply." Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, actually, simply we are wasting time. Simply. Such opportunity, human form of life. We are..., our attention is diverted simply for eating, sleeping, mating and defending. And our real business is spoiled. That is summarized by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, that: hari hari biphale janama goṅāinu. "I have simply spoiled my life." Manuṣya janama. This human form of life was especially meant for understanding Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. If not Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, at least Kṛṣṇa, or Battle of Kurukṣetra. Sometimes the politicians say... Our friend, Mr. Chatterji, M. C. Chatterji, he was, sometimes, he was nice friend of me, that "Swamiji, I want Kṛṣṇa of the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, not of Vṛndāvana." That's all right. At least you take Battlefield of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. But take to Kṛṣṇa. If you are not so much fortunate to understand what is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, at least you try to understand what is Arjuna-Kṛṣṇa.



So actually the whole world is being spoiled. I am especially drawing the attention of those who are thoughtful men. People are being killed without this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. People are being killed. They got this opportunity, human form of life-they should have been educated to understand Kṛṣṇa. And by understanding Kṛṣṇa, they become liberated. Here, as it is here: mumukṣavaḥ. Mumukṣavaḥ, those who are desiring for liberation. But they do not know what is liberation, what is transmigration of the soul, what is soul-nothing. Simply rascals, and they are leading the whole people. They do not know what is liberation. The Darwin's theory, bodily concept of life, but..., and, and anthropology. That is going on in the university. A false theory, without any idea.

So here it is said, mumukṣavaḥ, "desiring for liberation." But the people do not know what is liberation. They are thinking liberation in terms of politics. Just like we have become liberated from the British rule. What sort of liberated? Liberation? During British rule, people were free to move, free to spend their money. Now you are so liberated that you cannot move, you can (not) spend your money. This is liberation. Formerly there was no restriction for going outside. And for a sannyāsī like me, I had so much difficulty to obtain the permission of the government to go out. So much difficulty. I remember all those... How, oh, with what great difficulty I got out of this country. And because I, some way or other, by Kṛṣṇa's grace, I got out of this country, I could spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement all over the world. Otherwise, it was not possible. I wanted to start this movement from India, but I was not at all encouraged. I was not at all encouraged. I approached so many friends that "You have got four sons. Kindly give me one, one of your sons. I want to make him brāhmaṇa." "Oh, Swamiji, what he will do, becoming brāhmaṇa? We have to earn our livelihood." You see.

So people have forgotten what is the aim of life, what is the purpose of life. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said,

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



"Everyone who has taken birth on the land of Bhāratavarṣa, he must make his life successful." Because here we have the opportunity in, what is mumukṣava, what is liberation, actually. We have got this information in Bhāratavarṣa. No other country. Their liberation means so-called political liberation and making humbug all these things. Fighting with one an... That is not liberation. Liberation means to get out of the cycle of repetition of birth and death. That is called liberation. But they have no idea whose liberation, what is liberation, after liberation, where to go. All this knowledge, practically blocked. So it is very difficult to understand the statements of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam like this verse: mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān hitvā bhūta-patīn atha. They do not understand. People are so misguided, ill-educated, that they do not understand it. Otherwise, the land of Bhāratavarṣa is meant for liberation. In other land they take birth. They have no information of liberation. Here, in this land, Bhāratavarṣa, there is the idea of liberation, mukti. Mukti. So we should be interested in that liberation. Mumukṣava. Mumukṣa icchavaḥ, "those who are desiring." Those who want to remain within this bondage, material bondage of transmigrating from one body... Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ. We are trying to improve our material condition. Sometimes we are going up, sometimes we are coming down. This is going on.



But actual life, this human form of life, is meant for to get out of this darkness of material world. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. This is the information, Vedic information: "Don't remain in this darkness." Darkness, this, this material world is dark. Just like night. It was dark. actually it was dark. And because the sunshine is there, now we are seeing each other. Actually it is dark. And dark also-ignorance. We do not know what is the aim of life. Therefore, the whole world is darkness. And the Vedic information is: "Do not remain in the darkness. Come to the light." But that education is wanting. That is called mukti, to get out of the darkness of ignorance and darkness of this material world. So mumukṣava, if one is serious to go out of this darkness to the light, then his duty is to...

Here, as it is mentioned: nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntā bhajanti hy anasūyavaḥ. Anasūyava. Asūya. Asūya means envious. Just like when we present Kṛṣṇa, especially in India... This botheration is not there in other countries, outside India, because they had no information. I have placed before them that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are searching after God. Here is God. Here is God's name, here is God's address, here is God's activities. You try to understand God. Why you are speculating?" So they have accepted it. They are not asūyava. They are not envious. Here, if I present Kṛṣṇa, one may say, "Why not Kālī?" Ghora-rūpān. "Oh, Kālī is very active. It has got so long tongue. And it has got a sword in her hand, cutting the heads. It is very nice. And we are, we shall be able to eat goats." You see. Actually the Kālī-pūjā means for the meat-eaters. The Kālī-pūjā... Now this, this season is Kālī-pūjā. This Kālī-pūjā means because the Vedic śāstras are so made that from the lowest rascal to the highest intelligent man should be elevated. That is the purpose. From the lowest rascal to the highest intelligent brāhmaṇa. Because all classes of men are there. Some of them are influenced by the modes of goodness; some of them are influenced by the modes of passion; some of them are influenced by the modes of ignorance. But the Vedas are meant for study for the human being. Anādi-bahirmukha jīva kṛṣṇa bhuli' gelā, ataeva kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa kailā [Cc. Madhya 20.117]. The Vedas are meant for human being.

So there are different types of human being; therefore there are different types of śāstras, to attract all classes of men. So the meat-eaters, for them, the Vedas says, "Yes," loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantoḥ, "every living being, entity, has a general tendency..." Because he has come here to enjoy, to satisfy the material senses, and material senses means eating meat, drinking wine, and have sex life. This is material, satisfying the material senses. So they are regulated. "All right. You want meat, you want to eat meat, all right, then sacrifice one goat before Goddess Kālī and worship her on the on the āmāvāsya, dark moon night." So many regulations. The real purpose is to restrict him, but if it is directly said that "Don't eat meat," he'll be revolting. Therefore there are so many prescription of worshiping different demigods. Otherwise, there is no necessity. There is no necessity. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. Those who are worshiping other demigods, they have become blind, they have lost their senses. Hṛta-jñāna. Hṛta-jñāna. Real knowledge is lost. Real knowledge is lost. Therefore they're after so many demigods. Kṛṣṇa says, "It is not My manufactured word." Kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. There is no need of worshiping any demigods. This is the Govardhana-pūjā. This Govardhana-pūjā, Nanda Mahārāja was arranging for worshiping Indra, and Kṛṣṇa stopped it. And He engaged him for worshiping Govardhana, which is representation of Kṛṣṇa. That is the Govardhana-pūjā.

So here it is said, mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān hitvā bhūta-patīn atha. Bhūta-patīn atha. So those who are actually desiring liberation from this entanglement of material life, transmigration from one body to another... We can get different types of sense pleasure in different bodies. That's all right. But this is not a very good business. Sometimes I become a demigod, and sometimes I become a eucalyptus tree, standing for three hundred years. So why should we waste our time in that way? That is intelligence. But they do not know that "This time I am very nice American. I have got my skyscraper building and motorcar and very good bank balance. I am very happy." They don't care. But he does not know that next life he may become a cats or dog. That he does not know. There is risk. This science is not taught in any university. They are so fools and rascals. It is a great science, transmigration of the soul, immortality of the soul, how to elevate the soul to the highest perfection; these things are... They do not know, the rascals, they do not know. Neither do they teach. Mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān. A so unfortunate time it is.

Therefore there is great necessity of spreading this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to actually educate the human being to the highest perfect of life. That is required. It is not a religious system, competing with some other religion. Just like they are thinking that we are making Christians, Hindus. This is nonsense. We are not concerned with Hindus, Muslims or Christians. We are not... If these boys... They're educated boys; they have no business to come..., become Hindu from Christian. They have no business. They're... Many people before me, many swamis went there to make Christians, Hindu. They kicked there on their face. They did not become successful. Because they talked nonsense. Why one should, Christian become Hindu, Hindu become Christian? They should know what is God, what He is, what is his relationship with God. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is. It is not a movement for making Hindus to Muslim or Muslim to Hindus or Christian to Hin... This is not that movement. They clearly understand this. Therefore they are following. They are accepting. If I would have preached that Hindu religion is better than Christian religion, they would have kicked me out long ago. It is a science; it is a philosophy.

So there is great necessity of educating people what is the aim of life. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Therefore He said that bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra [Cc. Ādi 9.41]. He was appealing to the human beings, those who are actually human being, not to the cats and dogs. He was appealing to the human being that "You study the contribution of the great sages and make your life successful and go outside, preach this mission." That is going on, under the name of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. It is not a sentimental movement. It is scientific movement. Mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān. We are therefore restricting not to worship any other. Therefore when I started this mission many friends advised me "Why don't you make it 'God consciousness'?" This is bogus, God consciousness. "Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Otherwise, they'll put so many gods. "Here is another god, here is another god, here is another god, here is another god, here is another incarnation, here is another avatāra," all nonsense. Place actual who is God. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntāḥ. So try to understand our mission. Here it is said. We have to accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa also says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śa.. [Bg. 18.66]. "Unto Me only. Then you'll be saved." Otherwise you'll go to hell.

So this mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān, we don't advise that you..., either you worship Kālī, or either you worship Śiva, either you worship... Oh, it is all the same. yata mata tata patha. We don't speak all this nonsense. We simply say, "Come to Kṛṣṇa. Then you'll be saved."

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721107SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.27

-

Vṛndāvana, November 7, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ

sama-śīlā bhajanti vai

pitṛ-bhūta-prajeśādīn

śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ

[SB 1.2.27]



Translation: "Those who are in the modes of passion and ignorance worship the forefathers, other living beings and the demigods who are in charge of cosmic activities, for they are urged by a desire to be materially benefited with women, wealth, power and aristocratic birth."



Prabhupāda: So...



rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ

sama-śīlā bhajanti vai

pitṛ-bhūta-prajeśādīn

śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ



Śriyaiśvarya-prajā. (aside:) Stop that. Śrī means beauty, aiśvarya means riches, opulence, and praja means progeny, sons, grandsons, great-grandsons. In Bengal there is a proverb, nāti nāti sagye bhati(?): "If one can see grandson of the grandson, his life is successful." His door to heaven is open now. Nāti means grandson, and nāti's nāti, grandson. That means six generations. So people like this-good family and full of beautiful women and very good bank balance, motorcars-then life is successful. Śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ. But who are after this śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ? That is explained: rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ. Rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ, those who are influenced by the modes of passion and ignorance.



In the Bhagavad-gītā, the division of the society is given there: cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. According to guṇa and according to karma, there are four classes of men. The first class men, the brāhmaṇas, because they are on the platform of goodness. Goodness means they can see. One who is qualified brāhmaṇa, he can see what is what, what is this world, what is God, what the human being... Everything is clearly prakāśa. It is called prakāśa, illumination. If one is situated in the modes of goodness, platform of goodness, he can see things as they are. Prakāśa. And the next stage is passion, productive. Productive, ruling, administrating, like that. Creation. Just like the king's royal orders, they want to conquer expansive kingdom. And next stage is mixed-up-ignorance and passion. That is the stage of vaiśyas. They want simply money, somehow or other. They do not care for anything, the vaiśya. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. Śūdra, they are completely ignorant. They cannot produce anything, neither they have got any enthusiasm for ruling or administration. So their business is to submit to the higher classes and live peacefully. These are the divisions of the society. But all of them are required for upkeep of the society.

It is exemplified in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

mukha-bāhūru-pādebhyaḥ

puruṣasyāśramaiḥ saha

catvāro jajñire varṇā

guṇair viprādayaḥ pṛthak



In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the same thing is confirmed, that the brāhmaṇas are the face of the Supreme Lord. Therefore, according to our Vedic civilization, whenever, whenever there is any ceremony, the brāhmaṇas are..., are sumptuously fed. Because brāhmaṇas are considered to be the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The mouth, the business of mouth is to speak and to eat. So brāhmaṇa's business is to speak Vedic knowledge, distribute Vedic knowledge. Veda-vādī. That is their speaking. Just like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja used to do.



sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane...

[SB 9.4.18]



The brāhmaṇa's business is to speak about the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just like Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is speaking about Himself... Because the purpose of Vedas is to understand Kṛṣṇa. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is the purpose of Veda. If you become a very great scholar in Vedas, but you do not know what is Kṛṣṇa, it is useless. Because Vedas means... Veda means knowledge. And Vedānta means the ultimate end of knowledge.



So ultimate end of knowledge is Kṛṣṇa. So Vedānta means the ultimate goal of knowledge is to know Kṛṣṇa. That is Vedānta. Vedānta does not mean anything else. Because Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is Vedānta. And He also confirms: vedānta-vid vedānta-kṛd ca aham. "I am the compiler of Vedānta philosophy, and therefore I know perfectly well what is Vedānta." Therefore if you follow the instruction of Kṛṣṇa, then you are completely in knowledge of the Vedānta. That's all. This is Vedānta philosophy. Vedānta philosophy does not mean to make some jugglery of words and deviate one from Kṛṣṇa. That is not Vedānta. That is misleading, bluffing. That is going on, in the name of Vedānta.

So in the previous verse it has been explained that,

mumukṣavo ghora-rūpān

hitvā bhūta-patīn atha

nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntā

bhajanti hy anasūyavaḥ



Those who are in the platform of goodness, they worship nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntāḥ, Nārāyaṇa and His expansions. In the spiritual world, there are innumerable Vaikuṇṭha planets. As we have got experience within this material world, within this universe, there are innumerable planets, similarly there is another sky. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. That sky is eternal. This sky is not eternal. It is created. It has got a date of creation, and it will be annihilated at a certain date. So beyond the sky there is another sky, which is called paravyoma, or sanātana, eternal sky. And in that sky there are innumerable Vaikuṇṭha planets. Vaikuṇṭha means vigata-kuṇṭha hy asmāt. There is no anxiety. Here in this material world everyone is full of anxiety. This is the material nature. Even a small bird-you give some grains to the small bird, he'll be full of anxiety. He'll look like this, look like this. Yes. "If somebody's coming to kill me? Somebody's coming to kill me?" That is explained by Prahlāda Mahārāja: sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. The living entities in this material world, they are full of anxieties. Why? Asad-grahāt. Why? Because they have accepted something which will not exist. Asad-grahāt. There are two things: asat and sat. So oṁ tat sat. Paraṁbrahma Bhagavān, He's sat. And this material world, asat. Asat means "that which does not exist."



So because we have accepted this material body, asad-gra hāt, therefore we must be always in anxiety. This is the law. Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehinām, dehinām. One who has accepted this material body, he must be full of anxiety. He may be the King of heaven, Indra, or he may be a small ant in the stool. It doesn't matter. Everyone is full of anxiety. So Prahlāda Mahārāja recommended that when his father asked him: "What is the best thing, my dear boy, you have learned?" He explained, "My dear father..." He did not say "father." He addressed his father as "the best of the demons," asura-varya. Asura-varya. Because he was... (Hindi, aside) Asura-varya. Varya means the best, varīyān, varya.

So,

tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta

[SB 7.5.5]



Harim āśrayeta. Unless we take shelter under the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, Hari, so long we shall be full of anxiety. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to bring everyone under the shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, so that they may become free from all anxieties. This is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Otherwise, unless one comes under the shelter of Kṛṣṇa, he cannot be free of anxiety. That is not possible. Therefore it is explained here that rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ. Those who are on the platform of the modes of goodness, brāhmaṇa platform, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam āstikyaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam. This, these are the qualities of brāhmaṇa. Not that because one is born of a brāhmaṇa father, he will be brāhmaṇa. No. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. He must have the qualities of brāhmaṇa and must act as a brāhmaṇa. Then he'll be accepted as brāhmaṇa. Otherwise he'll be called brahma-bandhu, dvija-bandhu. Strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhu. Strī, woman, śūdra and dvija-bandhu. Dvija-bandhu means born of a brāhmaṇa father but his actions are like something else. He's called dvija-bandhu. Or born of a kṣatriya father. Dvija means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, and vaiśya also-those who are born for the second time by initiation. First birth is by the father and the mother, and the second birth is by the spiritual master and Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is the mother, and spiritual master is the father. So when one approaches a bona fide spiritual master, his second birth is there by advancement of spiritual knowledge, and that sacred thread is offered to him. Upanayana. Upa means "near," and nayana means "bringing."



So this sacred thread is the symbol that one has accepted a spiritual master and he knows Vedic knowledge. That is the symbol of sacred thread. Ācāryavān puruṣo veda. One who has accepted a ācārya, it is to be understood that he knows things as they are. That is the symbol of sacred thread. So those who are not mumukṣavaḥ, they are to considered under the influence of ignorance and passion. They are called rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ. Those who are on the platform of brahminical understanding, brahminical qualities, controlling the senses, controlling the mind, tolerant, simplicity... And Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has given about this ārjava, "simplicity." He says that a brāhmaṇa even to a enemy will disclose all his secrets. Even to his enemy. Nobody discloses his secrets before an enemy, but a brāhmaṇa, if he, even he finds out a enemy, he will disclose all the secrets. He has no secret. Brāhmaṇa means open-minded, liberal. And the opposite word is kṛpaṇa, miser.

So anyone who is trying to utilize fully the advantage of this human form of life, being desire, desirous of becoming liberated from these material clutches and acts accordingly, he's a brāhmaṇa. Mumukṣavaḥ. Others, who are not brāhmaṇas, those who are influenced by the material ignorance and passion, rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ, their business is how to get money, how to get beautiful woman, and how to have many followers. Caitanya Mahāprabhu denies this. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, "My dear Lord, Jagadīśa, I don't want riches," dhanam, na janam, "neither good," I mean to say, "progeny or followers," na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāma... Sundarīṁ kavitām, "very poetic, beautiful wife." Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye. "I don't want all these things." Just see. This is the difference between sattva-guṇa and rajo-guṇa. Rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ, those who are influenced by the passion and ignorance, their desire is śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ. Śrī. Śrī means beauty. Śriyaiśvarya, opulence, śriyaiśvarya. And prajā, good progeny. That nāti. Nāti.

So this is the desires of the persons who are influenced by passion and ignorance. And one who is influenced by the sattva-guṇa, goodness, he denies. Especially on the platform where devotional service. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu denies: na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Then what do you want? Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi. "My dear Lord, I want life after life..." Not He... He doesn't want even mukti. Otherwise, if one is liberated, then, according to Bhagavad-gītā and every Vedic śāstra, punar janma naiti tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. That is mukti. The mukti means to go out of this ignorance of the darkness of this material world. But Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He says, mama janmani janmani. He doesn't want to stop even punar janma. Kṛṣṇa says mukti means no more birth, no more accepting this material body, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, janmani janmani janmani, "life after life." That means a devotee, who is actually pure devotee, anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], no other desire than to serve Kṛṣṇa, he doesn't want even mukti. Diyamānāṁ na gṛṇanti.(?) Diyamānāṁ na gṛ... Mukti, if it is offered to a devotee, he doesn't care for it; he doesn't want it. He doesn't want anything. He simply wants how to be a faithful servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He doesn't want anything.

So those who are not in the modes of goodness, mumukṣavaḥ, they worship... Rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ sama-śīlā bhajanti. Sama-śīlā, according to their temperament. There are recommendations that "If you want this thing, you worship this demigod. If you want education, you worship this demigod. If you want money, then you worshi p this demigod. If you want very beautiful wife, then you worship Umā and..." The recommendations are there. That is not false. These are all Vedic recommendations. Because, if you want this, then... Bhagavad-gītā also, Kṛṣṇa says that yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. "If you want to go to the heavenly planets, then you worship such and such demigod. If you want to go to the Pitṛlokas, then you worship such and such demigod." These are explained there. They are not false. They are facts. If you want... Just like they are going, trying to go to the moon planet. So how to go to the moon planet, that process is described. You can, you can adopt that process and automatically, after your death, you'll be transferred to the moon planet. You don't require this artificial sputnik. No. Neither you can go there by the sputniks. It is not possible. You must be qualified to enter into a particular type of planet. You cannot go by force. I have given this example many times in America, that if somebody wants to come to America, he has to secure the proper passport and visa. Otherwise, the immigration department will not allow him to enter. Similarly, if you want to go to a particular type of planet, higher planetary system, you must have the required passport and visa. Otherwise, how you can enter there?

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says,

yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām

[Bg. 9.25]



Kṛṣṇa never says that "You do anything nonsense and you come to Me." Kṛṣṇa never says. If you, if you worship demigods, you'll be promoted to the planets of the demigods. If you want to, if you worship the Pitṛs, the śrāddha performance, then you enter the Pitṛlokas. But one who is endeavoring in devotional service, yānti mad-yājinaḥ. Mad-yājinaḥ. Mad-yājī. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī. Kṛṣṇa recommends, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. And in another place He says, mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām [Bg. 9.25].



So those who are devotees, those who are always engaged in the worship of Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa... Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa, Viṣṇu-They're all the same, viṣṇu-tattva. So in the previous verse: nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntā bhajanti hy anasūyavaḥ. Anasūyavaḥ, they're not envious. They, they're not envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not like the so-called scholar, envious of Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī mām, he's envious of Kṛṣṇa. He's recommending, "It is not to the person Kṛṣṇa," Because he's envious. He does not like that Kṛṣṇa should be worshiped. Not only he; there are many persons. As soon as we put that Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28], "You just worship Kṛṣṇa," they will protest: "No. Why Kṛṣṇa? We have got so many other demigods. We shall worship them." They are asūyavaḥ. They are hiṁsaka, hiṁsaka. They are envious of Kṛṣṇa. And because our life, this material life has begun being envious of Kṛṣṇa... "Why Kṛṣṇa shall be the enjoyer?" Kṛṣṇa says, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Our enviousness is "Why Kṛṣṇa shall be the only enjoyer? I also, I shall enjoy. Why He shall enjoy the rāsa-līlā? I shall imitate. Or I shall also make arrangement for rāsa-līlā." You see. This is rascaldom. Nobody can imitate Kṛṣṇa. Then that is... That is described in the Bhāgavata. If someone thinks of imitating Kṛṣṇa, he'll be ruined. He'll be ruined. That is said, stated there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam on the question of Parīkṣit Mahārāja.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to be completely nonenvious. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the beginning, it is said, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavaḥ atra paramo nirmatsarāṇām [SB 1.1.2]. Paramo nirmatsarāṇām. Those who are completely free from enviousness, they can understand what is Bhāgavatam. Paramo nirmat... Dharmaḥ projjhi... It is not a cheating type of religion, enviousness. Paramo nirmatsarāṇām, or paramahaṁsa, those who are not at all envious. They're always friend. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. Paramahaṁsa means suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām, "friend for everyone." Not for this human society or this society. A paramahaṁsa is friend for everyone. Paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satām. They are satām, Vaiṣṇava. Vāstavam atra vedyam atra tāpa-trayonmūlanaṁ śivadam. These things are mentioned.

So those who are envious of Kṛṣṇa, they take to the worship of other demigods. Śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ. Because to quickly attain achievement or achieve perfection in these three things, beauty, opulence, and good generation. So Bhāgavata says that "Even though you are very much anxious to get all these things," śriyaiśvarya-prajā, "still, we recommend that you worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.10]



That is the recommendation. Akāma. Akāma means bhakta. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu is saying: na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. "We don't want." He's called akāma, no desire. Akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā [SB 2.3.10]. Sarva-kāma means this: śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ. Dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi yaśo dehi balaṁ dehi dehi dehi dehi dehi dehi. They are sarva-kāma. Akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā [SB 2.3.10]. And another, mokṣa-kāma. So mokṣa-kāma and sarva-kāma or, what is called, the yogis, siddhi-kāma. They are also siddhi-kāma. Some of them are mokṣa-kāma; some of them are sarva-kāma; some of them are siddhi-kāma-all of them are kāmīs, lusty. The yogis, the karmīs and the jñānīs-all of them-they are kāmīs. Means they want something. Only the devotee, he doesn't want anything-except Kṛṣṇa. He doesn't want Kṛṣṇa also. He simply wants to serve Kṛṣṇa.



Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches: āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu māṁ marma-hatāṁ karotu vā adarśanāt [Cc. Antya 20.47]. A devotee desires to see Kṛṣṇa. But he says: "I don't mind if You break my heart by not being present. I don't mind. You break my heart." Because a devotee is always anxious to see Kṛṣṇa. Just like Rādhārāṇī. She's always anxious to see Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa does not come. Just like Kṛṣṇa left all the gopīs, immediately went to Mathurā. Renouncement. So much love with the gopīs, and He could renounce immediately. This is one of the qualifications of God. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47), jñāna-vairāgyam. Vairāgya. Kṛṣṇa was so much attached to the gopīs, so much, but when it was necessary, He left all of them in Vṛndāvana and went to Mathurā for killing Kaṁsa. That is God, renouncement. So these gopīs remained simply crying for all the life, rest of their life. That is pure devotion. Marma-hatām, broken-hearted. Kṛṣṇa made them broken-hearted. "Never mind. We shall remain broken-hearted, crying all the life. You do Your business." That is love of Kṛṣṇa. That is love of Kṛṣṇa.

āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ

[Cc. Antya 20.47]



[I know no one but Kṛṣṇa as my Lord, and He shall remain so even if He handles me roughly by His embrace or makes me broken-hearted by not being present before me. He is completely free to do anything and everything, for He is always my worshipful Lord, unconditionally.]



This is... The lampaṭa. Just like lampaṭa husband goes to so many other women, but the chaste wife still loves the husband: "Never mind." So similarly we have to become so chaste, so honorable, just to stick to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



Thank you very much. (end)



721108SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.28-29

-

Vṛndāvana, November 8, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



vāsudeva-parā vedā

vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ

vāsudeva-parā yogā

vāsudeva-parāḥ kriyāḥ



vāsudeva-paraṁ jñānaṁ

vāsudeva-paraṁ tapaḥ

vāsudeva-paro dharmo

vāsudeva-parā gatiḥ

[SB 1.2.28-29]



Translation: "In the revealed scriptures, the ultimate object of knowledge is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead. The purpose of performing sacrifice is to please Him. Yoga is for realizing Him. All fruitive activities are ultimately rewarded by Him only. He is supreme knowledge, and all severe austerities are performed to know Him. Religion [dharma] is rendering loving service unto Him. He is the supreme goal of life."



Prabhupāda: Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. The same verse, in the Bhagavad-gītā, is explained here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. As it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā:



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



There are many mahātmās, many yogis, jñānīs, karmīs. They're all good. But if they do not approach the ultimate goal of life-means approaching Vāsudeva-then śrama eva hi kevalam.



dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



You can execute your religious principles, you can execute dharma-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ. Charity. Dharma, dāna. You can execute severe austerities, penances. But if you do not approach Vāsudeva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then the śāstra says, śrama eva hi kevalam. In another place it is said, ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim [Nārada-pañcarātra]. If you can approach Vāsudeva, Hari... Vāsudeva, Hari, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu-the same. Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Varāha. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Vāsudeva has got ananta-rūpam. Ananta-rūpam means... This is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Just like if you sit down by the side of a river and the, the waves are flowing, you cannot count how many waves are going on in your front, similarly, how many forms are there of Vāsudeva, that is very difficult to count.



advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam

ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca

vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.33]



Absolute Truth is one, advaita. Advaita is one. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Absolute Truth is one, but He's realized in three phases: Brahman, impersonal Brahman; localized Paramātmā; and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are one.



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



The Absolute Truth is one. One who knows the Absolute Truth, he knows that Brahman, Paramātmā, Bhagavān, the same objective, but they are realized by different devotees or different knower in different features. The example is given in this connection: Just like if you see from a very distant place one hill, you'll find just like a cloud, hazy cloud. If you push forward further you'll find something green. But when you actually approach the hill, you'll find there are many houses, many animals, many trees, varieties. So the Absolute Truth, when it is realized by our limited understanding, the Absolute Truth appears as nirviśeṣa, impersonal Brahman. Similarly, when we try to meditate upon the Absolute Truth within our heart, He appears as Paramātmā. Yogis... Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. But at the ultimate issue, He's Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, origin. Advaitam acyutam anādim. Anādi: Kṛṣṇa has no source. He's the original source of everything. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. These things are there.



So Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of everything, cause of all causes. But He is independent, svarāṭ. That is described in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayāt itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ svarāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. Svarāṭ means completely independent. He's not caused by any, anyone. And He says also in the Bhagavad-gītā: mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7]. So He's the origin, Vāsudeva. Therefore all activities should be targeted to Vāsudeva. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. This is the aim of life. Unfortunately, they do not know it. People in general, they do not know it. That is ignorance. This material world is full of ignorance. Therefore it is called tamas. Tamas means darkness. We do not know. The human civilization, at the present moment at least, it is always... At the present moment, it is completely in darkness that they do not know what is the aim of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Everyone is very intelligent. At least, he thinks like that, that "I am attaining my interest of life in different ways." But actually one does not know what is his actual interest. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatim. Svārtha-gatim, satisfaction of our interest. Everyone is interested, but they do not know what is actual interest.

The actual interest is to search out Viṣṇu, or Vāsudeva. Therefore, here it is said: vāsudeva-parā vedāḥ. You are studying Vedas. That's all right. But do you know what is the end of the Vedas? That is, that is answered by Kṛṣṇa Himself: vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. This is the end of... You are very nice student, great student of Vedas, but do you know where to end, where is Vedānta, know? Veda-anta. Veda means knowledge. Do you know what is the end of knowledge? They'll talk of Vedānta, but minus Kṛṣṇa. This is going on. They are known as Vedāntī minus Kṛṣṇa. What is the use? Śrama eva hi kevalam [SB 1.2.8], simple wasting time, simply wasting time. Here it is clearly said, vāsudeva-parā vedāḥ. If you are a student of Vedas, then you must know that ultimately you have to know who is Vāsudeva. In the Vedas there are prescription of sacrifice, so many different types of sacrifices, yajña. So yajña is the name of Viṣṇu. Another name of Viṣṇu is Yajña. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, yajñārthe karma. Karma-kāṇḍīya, rituals, religious rituals, this is meant for yajñārthe, sacrifice, or Viṣṇu. In every sacrifice there must be Viṣṇu. Those who are Hindus, following the Vedic principles, any yajña, any sacrifice, any religious ceremony you perform, there must be yajñe vara(?), śālagrāma-śilā. Without śālagrāma-śilā, no yajña sacrifice can be performed.

Here it is said, vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ. In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is said,

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



The whole aim of varṇāśrama-dharma... Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. The brāhmaṇas, the kṣatriyas, the vaiśyas, the śūdras, the brahmacārī, the gṛhastha, the vānaprastha, and the sannyāsī-this is called varṇāśrama. This is the form of human civilization. Unless one comes to this point of executing the varṇāśrama-dharma, he's animal. Dharmeṇa hīnāḥ paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. This is dharma, to execute varṇāśrama-dharma. That is dharma. So if anyone is not executing this varṇāśrama-dharma, he's animal. Paśubhiḥ samānāḥ. That is not accepted as human civilization.



When Rāmānanda Rāya was questioned by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: "What is sādhya and sādhana, what is human duty, sādhya, and what is the end of sādhana...?" Sādhana, sādhana means cultivating something with a aim of objective. So this question was put to Rāmānanda Rāya by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: "What is the aim of human life and what is the process of executing that will?" So immediately Rāmānanda Rāya said that varṇāśramācāravatā. The beginning of human life is to execute the varṇāśrama-dharma. Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān [Cc. Madhya 8.58]. Why varṇāśrama? Now viṣṇur ārādhyate. If you properly execute your varṇāśrama-dharma... Actually, it is now pervertedly spoken as Hindu dharma. Hindu dharma is a vague term. Real dharma is varṇāśrama-dharma. Hindu dharma we don't find, any Vedic literature. Neither in the Bhagavad-gītā. It is a, a nomenclature given by the Muhammadans-"Hindus." From Sindhu, "Hindu." Anyway, now we are known as Hindus. The "Hindu" is a vague term. Real term is varṇāśrama, varṇāśrama, four varṇas and four āśramas. This is dharma and this is given by God Himself. Just like Kṛṣṇa says, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. It is given by God. You cannot manufacture dharma, religion. No. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam: [SB 6.3.19] "Dharma means the codes, the regulations given by God." That is dharma. That is dharma. Otherwise, it is not dharma.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is dharma, obedience to God. Religion means obedience to God. Nowadays it has become a fashion to drive away God and make a so-called show of religion. Drive away: "No God." Just like our secular state. "Don't think of God. This is botheration. Kill God." Kaṁsa. Kaṁsa secular state. "Don't talk of God." Rāvaṇa's secular state. Without God, what is life? Without... If you do not follow the codes or the rules or the laws given by God, then what is your religion? That is not religion. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Just like the state can give you laws. There is legislative assembly of the state. They can enact laws. You cannot do at home. You cannot do. That will not be accepted as law. Similarly, our Vedic principle is: "Religion means the codes and the rules and regulations given by God." That is religion. Kṛṣṇa says, God says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is religion. Vāsudeva-paro dharmaḥ. Vāsudeva-paro dharmaḥ. Dharma, here it is said that it should be given by Vāsudeva, or it must be approved by Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. Vāsudeva means son of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. So oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya.

So either you perform dharma, either you perform yajña, either you study Vedas, either you work, whatever you do, it must be targeted-the ultimate goal should be Vāsudeva. Then it is perfect. In many places it is explained. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. You may accept any kind of dharma. It doesn't matter. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya. But the perfection, how you are becoming perfect in executing your dharma, will be tested how far you have satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Everything is very nicely explained in every śloka, in every chapter of the Vedic literature, especially in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Ataḥ, "Therefore, after saying so many things," dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ... Naimiṣāraṇya, Naimiṣāraṇya... So still Naimiṣāraṇya is there. Naimiṣāraṇya. So in that Naimiṣāraṇya, all the sages assembled, and the conclusion, the resolution was: ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. All the great brāhmaṇas, learned brāhmaṇas, dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ... Dvija, dvija means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, but śreṣṭha means brāhmaṇa. Dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. Because human civilization means accepting this varṇa-āśrama. There must be classification. Not that everyone is the same, everyone on the same level. Everyone on the same level means śūdra, no knowledge. No knowledge, no philosophy, no culture, simply eat, sleep and... Animals' life.

So ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama... Varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ must be there. The present civilization is suffering because there is no such thing as varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ. There is no selection that there must be the most intelligent class of men, brāhmaṇa, the real kṣatriya who can give protection to the people, kṣatriya. That is real kṣatriya. And vaiśya who can actually give protection to the cows and produce agriculture, agricultural products and trade. And śūdras, ordinary laborer class. There must be divisions. They must be trained up. I have repeatedly said in America that there is draft board. They call, conscription, they call any young man to the military department, but most of the boys, young men, they try to avoid this, this military. Most of them. One of the causes of the hippie movement is due to the government's draft board. They want to avoid it. So I have repeatedly said: "Why do they avoid?" In India still we have got some martial races, the Gerkhas, the Sikhs. They will be very glad to accept military training. Still. Because there is kṣatriya spirit. But in other countries they have been made all śūdras. How they can take up kṣatriya spirit? That is not possible.

So according to this varṇāśrama, there must be training. Some classes of men must be trained as nice brāhmaṇas. Some people must be trained as nice kṣatriyas. Some people must be trained as nice vaiśyas. And śūdra does not require any... Everyone is śūdra. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. By birth, everyone is śūdra. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. By training, one becomes vaiśya, one becomes kṣatriya, one becomes brāhmaṇa. Where is that training? All śūdras. And how can you expect good government, śūdra government? All the śūdras are taking vote by hook and crook. And they are occupying government post. Therefore their only business is..., Kali, in this age especially, mlecchā rājanya-rūpiṇaḥ, eating and drinking, eating flesh, drinking wine. Mlecchas, yavanas, they are accepting government post. What good government you can expect? Forget, forget good government for millions of years, unless you establish this varṇāśrama-dharma. There is no question of good government. There must be first-class kṣatriya who can take charge of the government. Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. He was on his tour, and as soon as he saw that one black man was trying to kill a cow, immediately he took his sword: "Who are you, rascal, here?" That is kṣatriya. That is vaiśya, who can give protection to the cows. Kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. Everything is there clearly. Where is the culture?

Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so important. The leaders of the society, they should take very serious attention how you can improve the social condition of this world. Not only here, everywhere, sir. Simply it is going on in ignorance and illusion, everything. Vague, no clear idea. Here is clear idea: vāsudeva-parā vedāḥ. You are a... Veda, knowledge, you are educating people, but where is your education to teach people about Vāsudeva, about Kṛṣṇa? Bhagavad-gītā is prohibited. Vāsudeva speaking about Himself, but that is prohibited. And if somebody's reading, some rascal is reading, he's making minus Vāsudeva. That's all. Bhagavad-gītā minus Kṛṣṇa. This is going on. Whole nonsense. You cannot expect human civilization in a nonsense society. Here it is the real purpose of human life: vāsudeva-parā vedā vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ, vāsudeva-parā yogāḥ. There are so many yogis. I can clearly say that without Vāsudeva, yoga-simply pressing the nose. That's all. This is not yoga. They say... In Europe and America the yoga principle is very popular because they think by practice of yoga, they'll have very good health and they can use their senses very nicely. That is yoga system. The fatty woman goes to the yoga class for reduce fat. That is yoga system. You see. Somebody is going to practice yoga system for making right the liver action. You see. Here is yoga: vāsudeva-parā yogāḥ. That is... Kṛṣṇa also says in the Yoga chapter, Sāṅkhya-yoga chapter, Kṛṣṇa says,

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



He's yogi. That is yogi. Not for health's sake, or curing the liver disease or reducing fat, yoga system. This is not yoga system. But people are so much absorbed in the bodily concept of life, everything they want with this, in connection with this body. That's all. Instead of vāsudeva-parā yogāḥ, they, there is śarīra-parā yogāḥ. Śarīra-parā yogāḥ. Farce. These are all farce.



So vāsudeva-parā yogā vāsudeva-parā kriyāḥ. All the activities should be... The same thing. Kriyā means varṇāśrama-dharma, everyone is engaged in his own work. Brāhmaṇa is engaged in his own work. Kṣatriya is engaged in his own work. That is all right. But the ultimate goal should be hari-toṣaṇam. Svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya. It doesn't matter whether you are brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya or a vaiśya and śūdra. It doesn't matter. Just try to see by your work whether Kṛṣṇa or Vāsudeva is being satisfied. Vāsudeva-parā kriyāḥ. Vāsudeva-paraṁ jñānam. Jñānam, cultivation of knowledge. What is that cultivation of knowledge? To understand Vāsudeva. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. So-called knowledge, speculation, philosophical speculation, without understanding of Vāsudeva, means he has to continue such speculation for life after life. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Jñānam, jñānam means knowledge. So if you immediately take to Vāsudeva... Bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ [SB 1.2.7]. Vāsudeve bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ, janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ jñānaṁ ca. The ultimate goal of knowledge is to know Vāsudeva, but if you take to Vāsudeva directly, then vairāgya and jñāna... Janayaty āśu vairāgyam jñānam. Immediately, very soon, automatically, ahaitukam, without any cause, you understand what is knowledge and what is vairāgya.

So vāsudeva-paraṁ jñānam. All scientific research should be to know Vāsudeva. In Boston I was invited in the Massachusetts Technological Institute? Yes. So I, first of all I questioned the students that "You have got technological department. So where is the technology where we can understand the difference between a dead man and a living man? What is the thing is lost that a body's called dead body? What is that technology." So I talked on this point. The students appreciated very much. Actually, there is no technology why a man is dead. What is the machine, what is the component part of the machine is missing? You can replace it. But where is that technology? There is no technology. Because there is no knowledge with reference to Vāsudeva. Simply superficial. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ. They do not know what is the purpose of knowledge. They're taking interest, taking care of this bahir-artha, external things. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. This is knowledge, svārtha-gatim, to approach Vāsudeva, Viṣṇu. But without that knowledge, they are simply taking outward. Just like Darwin's theory. He has no knowledge. He's simply studying this body. That's all.

So one who is interested to study this body, he has been described in the Śāstra as ass and cow.

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



The bodily concept of life is meant for the animals. It is not for the human being. Therefore, vāsudeva-paraṁ jñānaṁ vāsudeva-paraṁ tapaḥ. People are taking to so much austerities. Just like modern scientists, they have discovered the atomic bomb. That is tapasya, of course. It is tapasya. But that kind of tapasya was done by Hiraṇyakaśipu also. What is the value of such tapasya? Tapasya must be to understand Vāsudeva. Vāsudeva-paraṁ tapaḥ. If one has actually undergone severe austerities of life to understand Vāsudeva, that is perfect tapasya. Otherwise it is simply... Hiraṇyakaśipu or the manufacturer of the atomic bomb, they are also undergone severe austerities. It is not manufactured all of a sudden. But it required brain and perseverance. They have manufactured, but what is the value? Killing, killing men. The killing, it is automatically being killed. You discover something that people will not die. People are dying. You have accelerated the death process, that's all. But they want to take credit out of it. "We have discovered this scientific..." That is not knowledge.



Here it is said, vāsudeva-paraṁ tapaḥ. Vāsudeva-paro dharmaḥ. Vāsudeva-paro dharmaḥ. Unless we come to that point, dharma, religious principle... Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmaḥ. That is paro dharmaḥ. What? Yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. Ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati. By executing religion one should be satisfied, but unless he comes to the point of Vāsudeva, he'll never be satisfied. That is not... Yayātmā suprasīdati. If we learn to love Vāsudeva, yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, then we'll be satisfied by executing religion. Otherwise it is superficial. Dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ, notpādayed yadi ratim [SB 1.2.8]. If one is not interested to hear the kathā, vāsudeva-kathā, śrama eva hi kevalam. Similarly, only formalities will not help. We must enlighten ourself. We must enhance our propensity to hear about Vāsudeva. Śravaṇam. That is wanted. Simply formalities will help us very slowly. One, one who is interested in hearing about Vāsudeva, his progress is very quick. Otherwise, it will be simply formalities. Vāsudeva-paro dharmo vāsudeva-parā gatiḥ. The ultimate goal: go back to home, back to Godhead. Vāsudeva-parā gatiḥ.

So this verse is very nice, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Essence of knowledge. Vāsudeva-parā vedā vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ. We should take advantage of the study of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the direction; then our life will be successful, our aim of human life, mission, will be fulfilled. That is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. [break] Yes?



Devotee: I've heard of that form, but what is that form?



Prabhupāda: That you'll know in due course. Not now. Chant. (end)





721109SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.30

-

Vṛndāvana, November 9, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sa evedaṁ sasarjāgre

bhagavān ātma-māyayā

sad-asad-rūpayā cāsau

guṇamayāguṇo vibhuḥ

[SB 1.2.30]



Translation: "In the beginning of the material creation, the Absolute Lord, in His own transcendental position, created the energies of cause and effect by His own internal energy."



Prabhupāda:



sa evedaṁ sasarjāgre

bhagavān ātma-māyayā

sad-asad-rūpayā cāsau

guṇamayāguṇo vibhuḥ



So here is the information of creation. The creation is from a person, not from the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. Creation, there must be brain; otherwise how there is question of creation? We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. We are..., we have also creative power. So as soon as there is question of creative power, there must be a brain behind the creation, and brain means a person. Creation cannot be possible from void or impersonal thing. We have several times discussed this point, that the government, this word, appears to be impersonal, but actually, behind the government there is a person-the president or the king, like that. So this creation, cosmic manifestation, is possible through the creative power of the Supreme Person; therefore God cannot be impersonal. Impersonal feature is one of the manifestation of God. God must be a person. This is the conclusion. Sa eva idam: this cosmic manifestation was created. In another place it is stated, aham evāsam agre: before creation, there was God, Kṛṣṇa. And when this material creation will be finished, He will remain.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa, or God, is not one of these created, material created things. That is admitted even by the staunchest impersonalist, Śaṅkarācārya: nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ avyaktāt. Vyakta avyakta, this mahat-tattva, from which this material cosmic manifestation is there, but nārāyaṇa-para, Nārāyaṇa is above. That means above this creation. Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa, is not one of the product of this creation. Just like our existence: we are one of the products of this creation. So Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa, is not one of the products of this material creation; therefore it is to be understood that Kṛṣṇa's body is not material. But the Māyāvādī philosophers, they think like that, that Kṛṣṇa is God, but He has accepted a material body. This is Māyāvādī philosophy. But how Kṛṣṇa can accept a material body, because He existed before the material creation? Another consideration is that even if He accepts a material body, that is not material for Him. That is also spiritual. It appears to us as material, but that is spiritual. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He has got multi-energies, and because He is spirit, complete spirit, therefore His energies are also spiritual. Sakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ. There cannot be any distinction between the powerful and the power.

So here it is clearly said that sa evedaṁ sasarjāgre bhagavān ātma-māyayā: "Bhagavān created by His energy." It is not that Bhagavān is finished after this creation. The Māyāvāda philosophy is that everything is God; therefore there is no separate existence of God. That is impersonalism. But here it is said that bhagavān ātma-māyayā: He created this cosmic manifestation by His energy. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. His full energy, even it is taken away from Him, still, He is full, He's complete. He's not exhausted. So sa evedaṁ sasarjāgre bhagavān ātma-māyayā, sad-asad-rūpayā. The māyā is displayed... Māyā means energy. That is displayed in two ways: material and spiritual. Material is asat, and spiritual is sat. Asat means which does not exist permanent, permanently. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It is created, again it is annihilated. Therefore it is called sometimes asat. Asat means not false, but not permanent. So this material creation is also manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's energy, and there is another creation, but that is not creation. That is always existing. That is the spiritual world, sanātana. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ avyaktaḥ avyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. That, that manifestation, that is internal potency. This is external potency. This material world is manifestation of the external potency of Kṛṣṇa, whereas the spiritual world is the manifestation of His internal potency. Unfortunately, the modern advancement of education has no information what is that spiritual world. He has... They have no information. They are concerned with this material world only. That is also not perfectly. But there is spiritual world. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6], Kṛṣṇa says. There is another, another manifestation of His internal potency. That is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. Here, in this material world, material world means it is not eternal, not blissful and not full of knowledge. This is material world. In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is said: avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. This manifestation of energy is full of ignorance. The nature of this world is called darkness, tamasi, tama. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. So sad-asad-rūpayā cāsau guṇa, guṇamaya aguṇaḥ. Kṛṣṇa, when He's called aguṇa, or nirguṇa, that means He's not affected by these material modes of nature. Above material nature. We are affected. We living entities, we are affected by the material modes of nature, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. But Kṛṣṇa is not affected. That is Kṛṣṇa..., difference between Kṛṣṇa and ourself.

In the Bhagavad-gītā there is another instance. When Arjuna asked Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa said, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. Kṛṣṇa said that, "First of all, I narrated this yoga system of Bhagavad-gītā to the sun-god." So, in order to clear this matter, Arjuna inquired from Him: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, we are born very recently. How is that You narrated this yoga system to the sun-god?" Arjuna, of course, knew everything, but in order to clear our doubts, he raised this question. And Kṛṣṇa answered that "You were also present at that time, but you have forgotten. I have not forgotten." So this is another proof that Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's body does not change. Kṛṣṇa, when He comes, when He appears, He comes in His original spiritual body. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has warned that avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 9.11]. The Māyāvādī philosophers who think that Kṛṣṇa has accepted a material body, they are described as mūḍhas. They have no sufficient knowledge. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. They do not know what is the power behind Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa creates. Before creation, aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, devānām. First of all, Brahmā was created. Then other great sages were created. Then other demigods were created. But Kṛṣṇa says, aham ādir hi devānām. Therefore He's not a created being of this material world. We have to consider in that way. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. The Vedānta-sūtra: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. So Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ. One who knows Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme, ādi-puruṣam, ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33], his knowledge is perfect. If one thinks Kṛṣṇa as one of the products of this material word, then his knowledge is imperfect. He's still in the darkness of this material creation.

So those who are in the darkness of this material creation, they consider Kṛṣṇa as one of the human beings. As a great scholar says, when Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], the scholar points out that "It is not to Kṛṣṇa. It is the..., it is up to the inner soul which is within Kṛṣṇa." There is no "within" and "without" Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa..., as we have got difference between within and without, Kṛṣṇa has no such difference. And those..., one who does not know, they think, such persons thinks Kṛṣṇa as one of the products of material creation. That is not the fact.

sa evedaṁ sasarjāgre

bhagavān ātma-māyayā

sad-asad-rūpayā cāsau

guṇamayāguṇo vibhuḥ



Vibhu. He's vibhu, we are aṇu. That is the difference. Kṛṣṇa is vibhu, unlimited. We are limited. So we, we cannot be equal to Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvāda philosophy that there is no difference between jīva and Bhagavān... There is sufficient difference. He is vibhu; we are aṇu. Aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. He's the greatest of the great, and He's the smallest also. So Kṛṣṇa cannot be equal..., or nobody can be equal to Kṛṣṇa, or greater than Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is asamordhva. Nobody can be equal or greater than Kṛṣṇa. Everyone is below Kṛṣṇa.



That is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta: ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Only Kṛṣṇa is the supreme master. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya. Now... Śiva-viriñci-nutam [SB 11.5.33]. Even great demigods like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, they also subordinate to Kṛṣṇa. They offer their obeisances to Kṛṣṇa. Śiva-viriñci-nutam. And in the Brahma-saṁhitā it is confirmed by Brahmā: īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Īśvara. Everyone can be an īśvara. Īśvara means controller. So we are also controller of something. A business man is controller of his business; I am controller of my disciples. There are so many controllers. So in that sense, everyone is īśvara, in the sense of controller. But Lord Brahmā says, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]: "The supreme controller, the supreme controller is Kṛṣṇa." What is the difference between supreme controller and ordinary controller? Ordinary controller means that he controls and he is controlled, both. We are controller, but nobody can say that "I am not controlled." We are controlled. But Kṛṣṇa, He's controller, but not controlled. That is the difference between Kṛṣṇa and ourself. So we cannot be equal with Kṛṣṇa. We are controlled. I think in Glasgow, one boy, he was presenting himself as God. So I asked him, "Whether you are controlled or not controlled?" He admitted, "Yes, I am controlled." "Then how you can be God?" God is never controlled. God is controller, but He's not controlled. So if we take ourself as so many samples of God, that is all right, but we are controlled God, not controller God. So that statement of Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya

yāre yaiche nācāya, sei taiche kare nṛtya

[Cc. Ādi 5.142]



We are controlled in every moment.



So Kṛṣṇa is vibhu; we are aṇu. Never consider that we are equal to Kṛṣṇa. That is a great offense. That is called māyā. That is the last snare of māyā. Actually, we have come to this material world to become one with Kṛṣṇa. We thought that we shall become like Kṛṣṇa.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



Because we wanted to become one with Kṛṣṇa, to compete with Kṛṣṇa, therefore we are put into this material world. Māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare. And here, in this material world, it is going on. Everyone is trying to become Kṛṣṇa. That is māyā. Everyone. "First of all, let me become a big, big man; then let me become the minister, let me become the president." In this way, when everything fails, then "Let me merge into the existence of God." That means, "Let me become God." This is going on. This is material struggle for existence. Everyone is trying to become Kṛṣṇa.



But our philosophy is different. We do not want to become Kṛṣṇa. We are trying to become Kṛṣṇa's servant. That is the difference between Māyāvāda philosophy and Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches us how to become the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa. Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. The one, a person who is the lowest of the servant of Kṛṣṇa, he's first-class Vaiṣṇava. He's first-class Vaiṣṇava. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore teaches us:

tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



This is the Vaiṣṇava philosophy. We are trying to be servant. We don't identify with anything material. As soon as we identify with anything material, we become under the clutches of māyā. Kṛṣṇa-bhuliyā. Because, as soon as I forget my relationship with Kṛṣṇa... I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. That is the eternal identification of the living entity, to remain servant of Kṛṣṇa. As soon as we forget this, that is māyā. As soon as I think that "I am Kṛṣṇa," that is māyā. That māyā means this māyā, illusion, can be rejected by advancement of knowledge. That is jñānī. Jñānī means this is real knowledge, to understand his real position. This is not knowledge, that "I am equal to God. I am God." This is not knowledge. I am God, but I am sample of God. But the Supreme God is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa like that: paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. Paraṁ brahma. We may become Brahman... We are Brahman. There is no question of becoming. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. This is not very difficult to understand. Because I am spirit soul, so I am Brahman. That's all right. But I am not Paraṁ Brahman. That is ignorance. I am not Paraṁ Brahman. If one, anyone thinks that he is Paraṁ Brahman, then it must be understood that he's under the clutches of māyā. That is the last snare of māyā. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that when one actually becomes knowledgeable, cognizant, he surrenders. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. That is real knowledge.



So advancement of knowledge means to understand his real position and act accordingly. That is knowledge. That is perfection of knowledge. Simply to understand that "I am Brahman" is not perfection. You have to still go further. Simply to understand that "I am Brahman," "I have now realized myself as Brahman," that is not perfection of knowledge. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. One who becomes realized souls, self-realized, he becomes immediately perfectly joyful. Because our all lamentation is due to our material identification. Śocati kāṅkṣati. We are simply lamenting for our loss, and we are simply hankering for some gain. This is material activities. Everyone is struggling to gain something which he does not possess, and he's lamenting for something which he has lost. But when he realizes himself that "I have nothing to gain and nothing to lose; I have nothing to do with this material world," that is called brahma-bhūtaḥ. That is Brahman realization. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati, samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu [Bg. 18.54]. At that time, he realizes that all living entities, they are spirit soul, paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. That is equal vision-not the bodily vision. So long we have got bodily vision, there cannot be any equality. That is not possible. When one sees only to the spiritual existence of a living entity, there is question of seeing equally, equal vision, universal brotherhood. That is possible. Not on the bodily platform. That is not possible.

So after acquiring this knowledge, the life of devotional service begins.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



That is required. And in that stage of devotional life, one can understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. That is tattvataḥ understanding. In another place it is said, in the Bhagavad-gītā, uh, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. Unless one becomes jubilant, joyful, by executing devotional service, he cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa. It is not possible. To understand superficially Kṛṣṇa, that "He..., He appeared in Mathurā in His uncle's prison house...," that is also nice. But one should try to understand Kṛṣṇa in fact. That fact can be revealed by devotional service. You cannot challenge Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will reveal. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. If we become sevonmukha, if we try to serve Kṛṣṇa as eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will reveal Himself, what He is. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa by speculation, by mental speculation. That is not possible. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. By sense perception, you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible.



There are many versions of the saintly persons. Just like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, rūpa-raghunātha-pade haibe ākuti, kabe hāma bhujabo se jugala-pīriti. A saintly person, ācārya, like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, he says that "When I shall be very much eager to understand the path of the Six Gosvāmīs?" Ei chay gosāi jāṅr mui tāṅr dās. We cannot understand Kṛṣṇa unless we have submitted ourself under the lotus feet of the Six Gosvāmīs, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We have to understand Kṛṣṇa in this way. It is very difficult to understand Kṛṣṇa, but by the grace of the Gosvāmīs, by the grace of Lord Caitanya, we can understand Kṛṣṇa.

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



Panthās tu... There are many shastric evidences. Panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām [Bs. 5.34]. So by speculation, we cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. By mental speculation, we cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. We have to understand Kṛṣṇa as Kṛṣṇa says, or Kṛṣṇa's devotee says, the Gosvāmīs says, Caitanya Mahāprabhu says. Then we can understand how this cosmic manifestation is created, who created, how it is created. Everything will be clear. This is the beginning of such understanding.



sa evedaṁ sasarjāgre

bhagavān ātma-māyayā

sad-asad-rūpayā cāsau

guṇamayāguṇo vibhuḥ



So Kṛṣṇa is transcendental, His position is always transcendental. Even though He appears before us, still, He's transcendental. This is the understanding of Kṛṣṇa.



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721110SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.31

-

Vṛndāvana, November 10, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tayā vilasiteṣv eṣu

guṇeṣu guṇavān iva

antaḥ-praviṣṭa ābhāti

vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ

[SB 1.2.31]



Translation: "After creating the material substance, the Lord expands Himself and enters into it. And although He is within the material modes of nature and appears to be one of the created beings, He is always fully enlightened and in His transcendental position."



Prabhupāda:



tayā vilasiteṣv eṣu

guṇeṣu guṇavān iva

antaḥ-praviṣṭa ābhāti

vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ



Now, this material creation is possible when the Supreme Spirit enters into it. This is a problem to the modern scientist, how creation was possible. They cannot understand that without spiritual touch, there cannot be any creation. That is their poor fund of knowledge. The Darwin's theory, development, process of evolution, they are childish. They are concentrating on the matter: matter is evolving. Matter does not evolve; matter is dead. It is due to the presence of the spirit soul it evolves. That they do not understand, although actually we are seeing. Just like a child born. If the child is born dead, it is simply dead matter. It does not grow. It is our practical experience. But if the child is living, or the spirit soul is within that body, then it develops. Similarly, the whole cosmic manifestation, this big universe, unless there is, in the center, the Supreme Spirit, how it develops? It cannot develop. Either you take this body or take this universal body-without the spirit being entered within it, there cannot be development. The modern scientists, they have no knowledge. They cannot understand this. They are so poor fund of knowledge. Practically we are seeing every day. This body has developed, your body, my body, how it has developed? Because I, the spirit soul, you, the spirit soul, enter into the matter. Therefore, it has developed. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur deha upapattaye [SB 3.31.1].



So deha upapatti, development of this body, is possible when the spirit soul enters. The man, the male and female, they have sex life, and the two secretions, they mix up, becomes emulsified, and the spirit soul takes shelter within that matter. And then the matter develops gradually. That is the development within the embryo. And when it is fully developed, with hands and legs, consciousness, at seven months, then child wants to come out. Then, by the natural process, on the tenth month the child comes out. But medical science or physiologist, biologists, they do not know this. They do not know this. They cannot explain how the body is developing, how the body is being formed. They do not know. But it is the fact.

Tayā vilasiteṣu guṇeṣu guṇavān iva. Now, the living entity wanted to enjoy this material world. We get different types of bodies on account of our desire to have such body. We want to enjoy the material, the matter, in a certain way, and Kṛṣṇa gives us the opportunity to enjoy as we liked Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Everything is under control of Kṛṣṇa. Although the body's obtained by material arrangement, still, behind the matter, there is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is... As the living entity enters this material world, Kṛṣṇa is also there along with him. Sometimes the Māyāvādī philosophers, they mistake that the soul and the Supersoul, there is no such difference: only the soul is the Supersoul, or the Supersoul is the soul; ātmā, Paramātmā, they are both one. But not they are not both one. They are two. That is stated in the Upaniṣads, that they are sitting in one tree like two birds, friendly birds. One is enjoying the fruit of the tree; other is only witnessing. So the witnessing bird is Paramātmā, and the fruit-eating bird is ātmā. These are the Vedic statements.

So we have entered this material world for enjoyment, and to give us facility for enjoyment, the plenary portion of Kṛṣṇa, Paramātmā, brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti [SB 1.2.11], He's also within this body. The..., this can be explained by one example. Just like when there is some fair. In India, just like we had attended that Kumbha Mela fair. So because the people would come and gather there, the government takes precaution, or makes necessary arrangement. There is actually a small government; the commissioner, the magistrate, they go there and manage things, that things are going on nicely so that people may not be in inconvenience, let them take bath peacefully. That is the idea. Similarly the government is Kṛṣṇa. And because we wanted to come here to enjoy, the Kṛṣṇa has made so many nice arrangements. The... Sometimes they question, "Why this material world is created?" That is created for us. Because Kṛṣṇa knows that some of them, they want to enjoy this material world, to give them facility everything is arranged there. This is a, a replica of the spiritual world, but it is temporary, exactly like the Kumbha Mela camp is temporary. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. A chance is given to the living entities to enjoy to their satisfaction, and the Vedic instruction is there so that they may follow and again come back home, back to home, back to Godhead. This is the whole arrangement.

So guṇeṣu guṇavān iva. Now, the Supersoul does not become affected by the material qualities, but the individual souls, they are affected by the material qualities. Sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. But the Supersoul is above these guṇas always. Antaḥ-praviṣṭa ābhāti vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. He's always full conscious. When Kṛṣṇa comes within this material world, He does not become affected by the qualities as we become. Therefore, those who are mūḍhas, those who are fools, they consider that Kṛṣṇa is also a human being like us. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. But Kṛṣṇa, about Kṛṣṇa, it is said, vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. He's full, fully conscious. He knows. Vedāhaṁ samatītāni [Bg. 7.26]. "I know everything," Kṛṣṇa says, "past, present, future." Just like Kṛṣṇa said to Arjuna, imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam, aham avyayam: [Bg. 4.1] "Formerly I spoke to the sun-god." So because He does not forget past, present, future... Vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. He's always conscious, fully conscious. Whatever was done in the past, what will happen in the future, and what is happening, everything is known to Kṛṣṇa. Vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. But we have lost our consciousness. We have lost our memory that we have past, that we are parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa, and we are identifying with this material world in different capacities. Somebody's identifying with this body; somebody's identifying with the society or community or nation or country. But Kṛṣṇa does not become such materially affected. Vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. He's always conscious.

So the Paramātmā... Although the Paramātmā is within this body, antaḥ-praviṣṭa ābhāti, without Him... Both the Paramātmā and jīvātmā are within this body, and the intelligence is coming from the Paramātmā. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi-sanniviṣṭaḥ. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi-sanniviṣṭaḥ: "I have entered in everyone's heart." Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi-sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. Smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca. Remembrance, memory, knowledge-everything is coming from Him. Smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca. And forgetfulness is also from Him. (loud kīrtana in background) (aside:) That's all right. Let them... Jñānam and apohanaṁ ca. Knowledge and forgetfulness, both are there. Both are coming from Kṛṣṇa. Knowledge...Suppose I wanted to enjoy something in my past life. So Kṛṣṇa has given me a type of body so that I can enjoy, and He gives me reminder also: "Now you wanted to enjoy like this. You have got this opportunity. You do it." This is the proof. You'll find even a, what is called, the cub, born of an animal, the dog, cats and dogs, they find out where is the mother's breast. The human child also, they also try to find out where is the mother's breast. Because they, they explain it as intuition. But we don't say it is intuition. Or even if you call "intuition," wherefrom it is coming? It is coming from Paramātmā. He's giving that "You find out. Here you'll find your mother's breast, and here is your food. Here is your food." Therefore even just after birth, the kitty, or a small child, finds out where is the food. This is the explanation of intuition.

But the modern scientists, they say "intuition," but they cannot explain how the intuition is coming. It is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā: mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. It is coming from Paramātmā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Antaḥ-praviṣṭa ābhāti vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. But Kṛṣṇa, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi-sanniviṣṭaḥ, as Paramātmā, He has entered in everyone's heart. He is in His knowledge. He knows that "This individual soul wanted to enjoy this material world," so He gives him facility: "Now you enjoy." Those who have no discrimination of eating-all abominable things one can eat-he's given the chance of eating everything up to stool in the form of a hog. The facility's given. One who is shameless... Now this civilization has spread in the Western countries-they want to remain naked. There are so many nudie clubs. So next life they'll be given chance to become tree, to stand naked for thousands of years. This is laws of nature. They do not know how they're getting chance, different types of body for different types of enjoyments, material enjoyment. Sometimes he's put as a poor man; sometimes he's put as a rich man. Sometimes as demigod, sometimes as cat, sometimes as dog. In this way, it is going on. But they are..., there is no knowledge. The modern civilization, they do not take care of this Vedic information, neither they have got any sufficient knowledge how these 8,400,000 species of life are becoming possible. They have no science. But here it is stated: antaḥ-praviṣṭa ābhāti vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ.

So our, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is all-pervasive. It is including science, philosophy-everything that we require. Everything complete. By Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, everything becomes completely known. Prakāśa. Prakāśa. Because as soon as we become in touch with Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa gives us all intelligence. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. If we engage ourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in devotional service, sincerely, and seriously, then all intelligence will come from within. Because Paramātmā is there, Kṛṣṇa is already there. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So simply... Just like the television set is there already. You can get so many news from outside, but you have to know how to tackle it. As soon as you push some button, electronic button, immediately the picture and the speaking immediately become manifest. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is already there within your heart. You are also there. If we simply connect or link with Kṛṣṇa, that is called yoga. Yoga means connecting the link. So there are different processes of yoga system. The best yoga system, as it is described in the Bhagavad-gītā: always think of Kṛṣṇa within your heart. Always think. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. This is the example given by Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. You haven't got to practice so many aṣṭāṅga-yoga process-that is also one of the process-but this process, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa... Satataṁ cintayanto mām. Satataṁ cintayanto mām, satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. These words are there. If we engage ourself always chanting, hearing about Kṛṣṇa,

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Then gradually the dirty things within our heart will be cleansed, and there will be clear direction what to do in which circumstances and how to do it. Everything will come.



Because vijñānena vijṛmbhitaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is there. He's full of knowledge, scientific knowledge. Vijñānena. This very word is used, vijñānena. Not only jñāna, but vijñānena. Tactfully, everything perfectly will come. Simply we have to link our lost relationship. We are always in Kṛṣṇa touch, but at the present moment, due to the illusory energy of māyā, we have forgotten that we are always connected with Kṛṣṇa. This has to be, this illusion, this dirty things has to be moved; then our original relationship will be established, and our life will be perfect. That is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721111SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.32

-

Vṛndāvana, November 11, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



yathā hy avahito vahnir

dāruṣv ekaḥ sva-yoniṣu

nāneva bhāti viśvātmā

bhūteṣu ca tathā pumān

[SB 1.2.32]



Translation: "The Lord, as Supersoul, pervades all things, just as fire permeates wood, and so He appears to be of many varieties, though He is the absolute one without a second."



Prabhupāda:



yathā hy avahito vahnir

dāruṣv ekaḥ sva-yoniṣu

nāneva bhāti viśvātmā

bhūteṣu ca tathā pumān



The Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa is residing along with the living entity within the heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, that Īśvara, the Supreme Personality, is residing in everyone's heart. In another place it is said, kṣetra-kṣetrajña chapter, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata. Kṣetrajña means the knower of the body. I, you, every one of us, we are individual living entities. We are also kṣetrajña. I know this is my body, this is my finger, this is my hair, this is my leg. Jña. Jña means one who knows. So I know; you know. You know about your body; I know about my body. Therefore we are all kṣetrajñas. Kṣetrajña means one who knows about his field of activities.



Everyone has been given, awarded, a certain type of field of activities for sense enjoyment. We want a certain type of body, certain type of sense enjoyment, and Kṛṣṇa gives us the facility through the agency of material nature. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Actually we are dependent. I want something; Kṛṣṇa gives us through the material agent. At the same time, He also accompanies, as a friend. The footnote is there: dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty anaśnann anyo 'bhicākaśīti. Śruti-mantra. So both the living entity, and the Supersoul is sitting on the same tree. This body is supposed to be the tree, and the heart is supposed to be the nest. And in the nest, as there are two birds, similarly, there is one bird, the living entity, individual, and the Supersoul, both. One is eating the fruit; the other is simply observing, witnessing. Anumantā upadraṣṭā. Anumantā means "giving order." Just like a child wants to take something, but he also depends on the order of the father. The child is insisting: "Father, I want this." Father says, "No, you don't take it." "I shall touch it. I shall touch the fire." Father says, "No, don't touch it." But he's insisting and crying, so father says, "All right, you touch." Similarly, we create our own fortune and misfortune. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. So the father wants us to do something else, but we want to do something else against the wish of the father. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa wants that everyone of us should surrender unto Him and work according to His direction, but we want to do against His will. Therefore we create our own fortune and misfortune. That is the way.

So there are different types of body, and each one is acting in a different way. Different way means the... Why they are working different way? If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramātmā, is the same in the..., in each and every body-īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]-why one is acting different from the other? One is acting different... That is the action of the individual soul. The Supersoul is there, simply sanctioning: "All right, you do like this." Because he's insisting. And He's sanctioning: "All right, you do like this." Therefore nāneva bhāti viśvātmā. Viśvātmā, the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He appears to be acting differently. He's not acting differently. Just like the magistrate. Magistrate is giving different judgment: "This man should be treated like this. This man should be treated..." The man, the magistrate, is the same, but because the culprit is different, therefore he has got to give different judgment. Culprit is different; he's not different. He's one. This is the proof that Paramātmā and jīvātmā are two different personalities. They're not one. This is the proof. Why? Nāneva bhāti viśvātmā. He's Viśvātmā, the Supersoul. Why one is acting as a hog, one is acting as a dog, one is acting as a demigod, Indra, Candra, Varuṇa? Why these differences? We are all living entities, jīva-tattva, and the Viśvātmā, the Supersoul, is the same in everyone's heart. Why they are acting differently? This is the proof that there is individual soul, jīvātmā, and the Paramātmā, Paramātmā is sanctioning. The same example: the magistrate, or judge, is giving different judgment because the criminals, or the complainers, they are different. Nāneva bhāti viśvātmā bhūteṣu ca tathā pumān.

The example is given: yathā hy avahito vahnir dāruṣu. In every wood, there is fire. A small wood, there is small fire; in big wood, there is big fire. The fire is the same, but according to the different size of the wood, fuel, the, the, what is, the flames of the fire appears to be different. The flame of the fire appears to be different because the living entity is different, of different types. They have got different desires, according to the contact of the material quality. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu. This is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Why they are different? Because kāraṇam, the cause, is-kāraṇam means cause-is guṇa-saṅgaḥ asya. Asya, or this living entity, he is associating, contacting different qualities. There are three qualities: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa; and again, if you mix these three qualities, then three into three, it becomes nine. Then again mix it: nine into nine, it becomes eighty-one. Therefore there are 8,400,000 species of life, different qualities. Nāneva. Nāneva bhāti. And in every living entity, within the heart of every living entity, the Viśvātmā, the Supersoul, is there.

So He's not different. As like the dāruṣu, as the fuel wood are different, and therefore the flame appears to be different, similarly although Viśvātmā, the Supersoul, is one, because He's acting with individual soul different according to his different association, mentality, desires... Every account is kept. Just imagine how many numberless there are living entities. Asaṅkhya. Jīva-bhāgo sa vijñeyaḥ sa cānantyāya kalpate. There is no, you cannot... Innumerable. And each and every individual soul is doing according to his own desires and every account is kept. Just imagine how expert accountant is required. Every account is kept. Because He has to be offered again another body, taking account of his activities. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. He's acting. Innumerable living entities. So how big brain is Kṛṣṇa, you can just imagine. And not only one planet-there are innumerable planets, there are innumerable universes. Everything innumerable. That is called unlimited. Everything innumerable. And still, some rascal claims that he is God. How much brain a God requires, he does not know. How big brain... Anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ. These are analyzed, what is the nature of the Absolute Truth. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. How He is? What He is? Immediately the answer is janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] "From Him, everything is emanating." Everything is taking birth from Him. Janma. Not only janma, birth, but existence, maintenance, janmādi. Janmādi means birth, maintenance and death. Creation, maintenance and annihilation. Janmādi. Asya, anything you take, asya. Janmādy asya [SB 1.1.1]. Janmādy asya yataḥ. From whom everything is emanating, everything is taking birth, this cosmic manifestation, it is being maintained in Him. And again, when it is annihilated, it enters into His own energy. Prakṛtiṁ māṁ gacchati. From His prakṛti, from His energy, Kṛṣṇa's energies, external energy, these five elements come out-earth, water, fire, air, sky. Five gross elements and three subtle elements-mind, intelligence ego. This is the eight, these are the eight elements of material creation. Then all the living entities, those who wanted to enjoy this material world, they are impregnated within this material energy and they come out with different bodies for enjoying different types of sufferings of happiness. There is no happiness; it is all suffering, but we take: "It is happiness." That is called illusion.

So in this way the whole creation is going on under the direction of Kṛṣṇa. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Under His supervision... Just imagine how expert supervision is there, that the sun is rising exactly in the same moment as it is to be done. The waves of the sea are going on perpetually, but the waves cannot come beyond the limit. We have walked on the sea beach. So just at ten, one, three feet, the big ocean, Pacific Ocean is... But we are certain that this Pacific Ocean cannot come beyond this limit. We are certain. How we are certain? Because there is the order of Kṛṣṇa. Mayādhyakṣeṇa. Because we know, I know, you know that there is God's order... The Pacific Ocean may be very, very big, but still, he cannot disobey the order of the Supreme. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. This is understanding of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means you have to study everything, how things are going on. And this is stated. You have to simply think, "Yes." You have to confirm by your brain. If you have got dull brain, then how you can study? Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram. The prakṛti, the material nature, is working under His direction. And you can verify it, how nature is working correctly, exactly. Unless there is some systematic order, how everything is working systematically. As soon as there is spring, immediately thousands and millions of trees, immediately the foliage comes out. Immediately. And as soon as there is fall, September, last, all the leaves fall down, immediately. So this is the process of creation. Just like in Bible it is said, "Let there be creation," and there was creation. So it is fact, actually. But we cannot understand how much powerful is Kṛṣṇa, or God. Simply by His will, simply by His will, everything takes place. Millions and millions of things come out immediately, and millions and millions of things immediately annihilated. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is God. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10].

So the Supersoul, Viśvātmā, He's one. But because we are different, therefore we are acting differently. The question may be raised that if Viśvātmā, the Supersoul, is one, why there are different activities? The different activities due to our will, our selection: "I want to act in this way." So He gives the facility. Just like somebody wants to drink, the government gives license for liquor shop. Now, it is not that everyone is drinking, but there is facility for the drunkards. Because the drunkards want to drink, so government gives facility: "All right. Here is a liquor shop. You drink." But as soon you commit some offense by drinking, you are arrested. So this arrest of the drunkard, is it the government's will or the person created such situation to be arrested? So in this way, the whole world is going on. Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am equal to everyone. I don't..., I'm not envious of everyone, or anyone, or I am friendly to everyone." He's friendly, actually He's friendly. But people, they accuse Him: "Why God has created this distress? Why I am suffering?" You are suffering for your own fault. God created you to become happy. He's happy. You are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. You should be happy. But you don't accept the way of happiness. That is your fault. You don't accept... Kṛṣṇa says that you shall be happy in this way:

bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati

[Bg. 5.29]



Why you claim this is your property? Why you claim? Everything is belonging to Kṛṣṇa. That is your fault. So you must suffer. You are a thief. Stena eva sa ucyate [Bg. 3.12]. Anyone who does not offer things to Kṛṣṇa before using, he's a thief. That is prasādam. That is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. The whole process is to accept the Supreme. So long we do not accept the Supreme, that is māyā. That is māyā. That is going on. Nobody wants to accept the Supreme everyone wants to become Supreme. Even after performing severe austerities, penances, still, they want to become one with the Supreme. This is also māyā.



Therefore Bhāgavata says, vimukta-māninaḥ. They are thinking that after undergoing such severe austerities and penances, now he has become God. That is māyā. He does not know. He's not God. But he claims like that, falsely. This is the cause of his suffering. Nobody can be..., can become God or equal to God. That is not possible. The same quotation: ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Only the Supreme God, Supreme Person, Īśvara, supreme controller, is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. You are, why you are, rascal, trying to become Bhagavān, God? This is māyā. He does not know. He's thinking that "I have become God." This is māyā. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ means his intelligence is not yet cleansed. It's still dirty. Although he has undergone good austerities, penances or taken sannyāsa, but the mind is dirty. Mind is dirty. So that will not help. The whole process is ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam. We have to cleanse our heart. We have to understand our position. Then it will be successful. If we don't cleanse our heart by regular chanting,

ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

[Cc. Antya 20.12]



So we have to understand our position. The dirty things should be removed completely, always by hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā. That is the way of understanding. Only way. This Vṛndāvana is so important, valuable. Why? Because anywhere you go in Vṛndāvana, there is the opportunity of hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā. This whole Vṛndāvana is simply cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unfortunately, we take to other consciousness here. Therefore we become condemned. In Vṛndāvana, if we take other consciousness, then we become condemned. Condemned means he-still, the opportunity's there-condemned to accept a body other than a human being. But he's helped. Because he's in Vṛndāvana, he's making progress. Even as animal, as hogs and dogs, he's making progress, because he's in Vṛndāvana. So Vṛndāvana is so important, because here anyone can get the opportunity of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore it is so important. Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Dhāma means where Kṛṣṇa resides. That is called dhāma. Vṛndāvana-dhāma. Ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma. Dhāma means residence. Tad-dhāma vṛndāvanam. So Vṛndāvana is not polluted. Vṛndāvana is always helping us. Anyone who comes to Vṛndāvana, he's helped immediately, even though he is criminal number one. But if we remain in criminal mentality in Vṛndāvana, then we have to accept another birth to suffer. Then it will be all right, and then again he will be elevated. Due to Vṛndāvana... The Vṛndāvana influence will act, but if we commit something against the Vṛndāvana principle, then we have to accept...



Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. Karmāṇi nirdahati... It is said in the śāstra, the karma is reduced for the devotees. That much facility's there. Karma is reduced means in other place, if you commit some sinful activities, then you have to accept a body, and then evolution will take place gradually. Then you again come to human form of body. Then again, if you are intelligent enough, you can utilize. But in Vṛndāvana the karmāṇi nirdahati... Suppose for your sinful, criminal acts you become hogs and dog; next life you are elevated. That is karmāṇi nirdahati. The karma, the cycle of fruitive activities is reduced. But you have to accept. You have to accept. But nirdahati. But why should we waste our time accepting another body of dogs and hog? That we should be very much careful. Although it is nirdahati, it is reduced, why should we accept even that reduced punishment? That should be our principle. But we do not know. We commit ignorance. Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī has described: sinful activities are done due to ignorance, ajñāna. Just like a child touches the fire. Everyone knows if you touch fire, it will burn, but the child, out of ignorance, touches. Therefore the child is under the protection of the parents so that the child may not do something wrong and suffer.

So nāneva bhāti viśvātmā bhūteṣu ca tathā pumān. These varieties of living entities, it is due to the variety of desires of the living entity. Otherwise Viśvātmā, He's one. He's one. And the living entity is also one, because he's the manifestation of marginal potency of the Supreme. Therefore, as marginal potency, the living entity is one. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. One who knows that the living entities, they're part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and they belong to the marginal potency... Therefore they do not see any difference out of the varieties of bodies. He sees only the spirit soul. And due to the varieties of body, the activities are different, although the direct, the Supreme Soul, Supersoul, is the same, one. This is the conclusion.

yathā hy avahito vahnir

dāruṣv ekaḥ sva-yoniṣu

nāneva bhāti viśvātmā

bhūteṣu ca tathā pumān



So according to our body, we act different. The direction and sanction is there by the Supersoul. This is the purport of this verse.



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721112SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.33

-

Vṛndāvana, November 12, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



asau guṇamayair bhāvair

bhūta-sūkṣmendriyātmabhiḥ

sva-nirmiteṣu nirviṣṭo

bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān

[SB 1.2.33]



Translation: "The Supersoul enters into the bodies of the created beings, who are influenced by the modes of material nature, and causes them to enjoy the effects of these by the subtle mind."



Prabhupāda:



asau guṇamayair bhāvair

bhūta-sūkṣmendriyātmabhiḥ

sva-nirmiteṣu nirviṣṭo

bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān



In the previous verse we have discussed that nāneva bhāti viśvātmā bhūteṣu ca tathā pumān, that the, the living entity, individual soul, and the Supersoul... So because the individual soul wanted a certain type of enjoyment, so the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is making such arrangement. Guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ. That arrangement is made by the material nature. Bhāva, bhāva means nature. Guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ. This nature is made of three modes of material nature. And the other nature... In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. This bhāva, this material creation, it is also bhāva. Another bhāva, that is sanātana. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ. Anya means other. Avyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ. Here the mahat-tattva, the total material energy, is called avyakta. Then, when it is agitated by the glance of the Supreme Lord, the three modes of material nature acts. And by interaction of these three modes of material nature, the whole cosmic manifestation comes into being. This is the... Not theory. This is the fact of creation. Creation, there is machine, or there is electronic working and the buttons are pushed by the Supreme Lord. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. His electronic machine is so subtle and powerful that we cannot understand. We say "nature." Because, due to our ignorance, we cannot explain how the nature is working, we give an evasive reply. Just like a flower is coming from the seed. The tree is coming, the flower is coming, the fruit is coming. So we simply give an evasive reply: "By nature, it is coming." But we cannot explain how it is coming.



But there is explanation. Just like in our, this tape recording machine, we do not know; we push some button. It is recording. But there is a great manipulation of the machine. That we do not know. As soon as it is not working, because we are ignorant, we go to the mechanic: "Just find out what is the wrong." He knows; he puts the things in right way. Again it works. So we take the total working and we may say it is working by nature. No. There is brain. There is pushing of button. Everything is there. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā.

mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate

[Bg. 9.10]



Mayādhyakṣeṇa. "I am pushing the buttons." He is... But the His pushing of buttons and acting on the machine is so subtle and so quick and so immediate that we cannot explain. We think it is automatically done. We think that it is automatically...



So here, asau guṇamayair bhāvair bhūta-sūkṣmendriya ātmabhiḥ. This whole material creation is... There is a brain. It is not a so-called evasive reply, "Automatically." What do you mean, "Automatically"? There must be somebody pushing the button, must be working. There is brain. That is really scientific study. Here, guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ, by the three energies, three kind of energies, goodness, passion and ignorance, these guṇamayī, these qualities of nature, bhūta-sūkṣma indriya. Then there is creation of the ego, then creation of the intelligence, mind, then creation of sky, then creation of air, then creation of fire, then creation of water, then creation of land. Bhūta-sūkṣmendriya. The objective of the senses, the senses are created, the sense enjoyment, objects are created, form is created, taste is created, smell is created. So there is great machinery. It is not that automatically it has come out. But behind all these energetic work... The energies, different energies are working.

Kṛṣṇa's energy is so powerful that He puts the potency in a seed. Bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg 7.10]. Kṛṣṇa says bīja, means "seed," sarva-bhūtānām. "Whatever is coming out, being manifested, the seed, I am." Means-"Seed, I am"-means "It is manufactured under My supervision." Just find out the seed of a banyan tree, a small grain, like mustard seed. But you sow the seed and a big tree, gigantic tree, will come out. Unless the energetic tree is there within the seed, how it comes out? That is Kṛṣṇa's energy. That is Kṛṣṇa, parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. His energy is so subtle that svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca. Svābhāvikī.

Now, from that seed, first of all, the trunk will come, the branches will come. Then the twigs will come, the leaves will come, and the fabrication of the leaf. Everything see, wonderful. Everything we see, wonderful. But svābhāvikī, as if coming automatically, automatically. A creeper is coming, is trying to find out a shelter. As soon as it finds out shelter, immediately captures. We have seen in our Los Angeles. Behind my house, the electric post and the wire, the creeper is taking shelter and giving flower and fruits and everything. Svābhāvikī. Now, you can say it has no eyes. How it is seeing, how it is coming here and is, what is called, squirreling? No. The energy's so perfect that svābhāvikī, it is working like nature. Automatically. Svābhāvikī. There is knowledge. Svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā. Everything is done by knowledge, by power, and by action.

So there is everything. We can see practically how the trees are growing. Your body, my body-in the same way, everything is coming out. Now, there was seed, the father and mother's seed. Now, within that seed, all these arrangements of the veins, nerves and fibers and muscles and everything was there. You cannot explain how these veins are working. Little discrepancy of the working of the vein, I suffer on my finger for so many days. What is that? There was no regular supply of the energy. The, there was some disturbance in the holes of the veins and nerves. This is the medical science. But as soon as it is cured, the supply is there. Just like when the pipe is jammed, the water does not go and it creates disturbance. Similarly, everything is going on nicely in a machine. And Kṛṣṇa knows everything. Anvaya-vyatirekābhyām. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ svarāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. I do not know how the nerves in my finger became disturbed and how it has become diseased and how it became cured. And now it is all right. I do not know, although I claim, "This is my hand, this is my leg." But I do not know. Therefore it is not my leg, not my hand. Just like I'm living in a room, rented room. That is not my room. If you study in this way, you'll find: īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Everything belongs to God, Kṛṣṇa. Falsely you are claiming. I do not know how it is working. I have been given the chance to live in this particular body. Otherwise Kṛṣṇa is working as I wanted. I wanted teeth to eat fresh flesh, so Kṛṣṇa gives us the tiger's teeth, tiger's nail. But how the nails and teeth came into existence, how it is working, how it is set up, that I do not know. That I do not know. That knows Kṛṣṇa. Anvayāt vyatireka artheṣu.

All the purpose of these instruments, different instruments, bhūta-sūkṣma indriya... indriya means senses. How they are working, how the enjoyment, object of enjoyment is supplied, that is all being arranged by Kṛṣṇa.

asau guṇamayair bhāvair

bhūta-sūkṣmendriyātmabhiḥ

sva-nirmiteṣu nirviṣṭo

bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān



Sva-nirmiteṣu, we wanted this kind of manufactured. So Kṛṣṇa has given me the chance, prakṛte, by..., through the agency of prakṛti. prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. That is also explained. Similarly, I wanted a body like this to enjoy a certain standard of sense enjoyment, so I enter into this body, I enter into that body. Also Kṛṣṇa enters as Supersoul. Sva-nirmiteṣu nirviṣṭaḥ. Then bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān. Then what I enjoy? I enjoy the action and reaction of the three modes of material nature, that's all.



Actually, the enjoyment is in my mind. That is not enjoyment. That is not enjoyment. Real enjoyment is when I am free from this embodiment of five elements, gross elements, and three subtle elements. I have entered into this, and the action and reaction of these five gross elements, three subtle elements, I am enjoying. Actually, not enjoying. This is called māyā. There is no enjoyment. It is enjoyment in the mind. The mind is also material creation. Real enjoyment is beyond these senses. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tat. The real happiness is not by these gross senses. By transcendental senses, we can enjoy sukham āt..., real happiness. Therefore, because we are not in that platform of enjoying the transcendental senses, we are trying to enjoy by these gross senses, therefore we are becoming baffled and frustrated. This is the cause of frustration. Because that is not the platform of enjoyment.

Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grā... Atīndriya. Atīndriya means "beyond this." It is covered. Covered senses, you cannot enjoy. Suppose I cover your tongue with some cloth and then I give you one rasagullā. Can you taste it? What you'll taste? There are so many things. If you cover the senses, the real senses, and try to enjoy with that covering, what you'll enjoy? That is not enjoyment. The..., it has to be uncovered. Then you'll enjoy. That is indicated: sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. If you uncover the senses, upādhi... These upādhi... Because I am in bodily concept of life, therefore I am thinking, "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am black," "I am white," "I am man," "I am woman," "I am tree," "I am this," "I am that." This is covered. How you can enjoy with these covered senses?

So you have to uncover. You have to discover. That discovering process is devotional service. The more you are engaged in devotional service, the more your senses become pure or uncovered. And when it is completely uncovered, without any designation, then you are capable to serve Kṛṣṇa. This is apprenticeship. Vaidhī-bhakti, that is apprenticeship. Real bhakti, parā-bhakti, that is rāgānugā-bhakti. This rāgānugā-bhakti, we have to come after surpassing the vaidhī-bhakti. In the material world, if we do not try to make further and further progress in devotional service, if we are simply sticking to the shastric regulation process and do not try to go beyond that... Shastric process also regulation, that is required. Without shastric process you cannot go to that platform. But if we stick to the shastric process only and do not try to improve ourself... The shastric process is kaniṣṭha-adhikāra, lowest stage of devotional service.

arcāyām eva haraye

pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu

sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ



Generally, people come to this temple, they are very devoted to the Deity. They offer their respects, flowers and other things, make the regulative process, circumambulate. This is nice beginning, but one has to go above this. One has to know who is actually bhakta, who is ac... Na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu. One has to do good for others. That is madhyama-adhikārī. If I become satisfied only with these regulative principles for worshiping the Deity in the temple and following the regulative principle daily, but if I have no other idea, then sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ. Prākṛta means on the material platform. Such devotee can fall down at any moment, because he's on the prākṛta stage. And prākṛta means this guṇamayī, prakṛti. It is very strong.



So any devotee can fall down if he remains prākṛta-bhakta. So he has to raise himself above this in the madhyama-adhikāra. So here it is said that sva-nirmiteṣu nirviṣṭo bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān. So we are not enjoying actually. We are enjoying the interaction of the three modes of material nature. And we are thinking... The same thing, as my Guru Mahārāja used to say, that licking up the bottle of honey. That is not real honey. You have to open the bottle of the honey and lick up the real honey, then you'll get taste. That is advancement of spiritual knowledge.

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ...

[SB 3.25.25]



Therefore, if we do not associate with the advanced devotees, uttama-adhikārī, if we simply want to remain in the lowest stage of devotional service, then we are not making progress. Then we shall simply enjoy the material field, without entering into the spiritual platform.



Bhuṅkte, bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān. We have to raise above the modes of material nature. Nirguṇa. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. That is the statement of Bhagavad-gītā. In the Vedic instruction, traiguṇya, Vedic instruction is dealing with the three guṇas, the three material modes of nature. Nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. Nistraiguṇya. What is that? Because when Kṛṣṇa was asking Arjuna to fight, he was in the traiguṇya platform, in the material platform. He was thinking, "How shall I kill my grandfather? How shall I kill my teacher? How shall I kill my brother? How can I kill nephews?" This is traiguṇya-vicāra, consideration on the material platform. Then Kṛṣṇa said, nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna: "Just become transcendental to the material modes of nature." What is that transcendental material nature? "I am asking you to fight. You do it." That is nistraiguṇya. Kṛṣṇa is asking him. That is nistraiguṇya. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. The guṇa or nirguṇa, these two words are there in the Vedic literature. When we speak of guṇa, that is, means these three guṇas, three material modes of nature. And nirguṇa means above these three material modes of nature. So actually devotional service is above the three modes of material nature. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26].

So when you are actually in pure devotional service, sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], being freed from the interaction of the three material modes of nature, that is real transcendental stage of devotional service. So we have to try to go to that platform. Otherwise, we shall remain a prākṛta-bhakta. As it is said here: bhuṅkte bhūteṣu tad-guṇān. We have to become transcendental to the three modes of material nature. That is not very difficult. Simply one has to become very serious and sincere. That's all. As there are directions in the śāstras... As, as I was speaking in this morning, the śāstra... Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī has given instruction in the Nectar of Devotion how to prosecute. He begins in the characteristic of devotional service. He says this verse:

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



So we have to begin from this uttamā-bhakti. Uttama means nirguṇa, or transcendental. Uttama. Uttama, udgata-tamaḥ. Ut means transcendental, when you surpass. Tama. Tama means this material world. So ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. That is uttamā-bhakti. That is transcendental bhakti.



So if we execute devotional service with some material purpose, that purpose may be served, but you cannot rise to the transcendental platform. So we should be very careful that we may not take to devotional service... Even though we take it, still, it is recommended that you prosecute, you go on with the devotional service by the regulative principles. Then you'll come to the uttama platform. There is no question of disappointment, but we must know that if we remain on the material platform, then we have to take so much time. From the material platform, we have to go to the spiritual platform. That means we require to follow the regulative principles very strictly and sincerely. Then we'll be promoted to the nirguṇa platform. Without performing the regulative principles, one cannot come immediately, all of a sudden... Maybe, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, one can come, but the regular way is first of all let us follow the regulative principles strictly. Then gradually we shall be purified and come to the spiritual platform. And that will be successful, a success of our life.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



721113SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.34

-

Vṛndāvana, November 13, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



bhāvayaty eṣa sattvena

lokān vai loka-bhāvanaḥ

līlāvatārānurato

deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu

[SB 1.2.34]



Translation: "Thus, the Lord of the universes maintains all planets inhabited by demigods, men and lower animals, and in His play He assumes the roles of incarnations to reclaim those in the mode of pure goodness."



Prabhupāda:



bhāvayaty eṣa sattvena

lokān vai loka-bhāvanaḥ

līlāvatārānurato

deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu

[SB 1.2.34]



So the Supreme Personality of Godhead, līlāvatāra, incarnates in many forms, not only in the human society, but in the demigod society, or lower than human society, the animal society also, tree society. Because as we have forgotten our relationship with Kṛṣṇa, He's always anxious to get us back to home, back to Godhead. So He incarnates Himself in so many forms. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. He has got ananta-rūpa, unlimited forms. Advaitam acyutam anādim. But all those forms are in essence one. Advaita. That is not different. Just like rāmādi-mūrtiṣu. The Lord appears as Lord Rāmacandra, or as Lord Kṛṣṇa, or as Lord Varāha. They are not different. In the material sense a varāha, a hog, is different from the man. Or the man is..., one man is different from another man. But the incarnations of Kṛṣṇa, they are not different. The same thing. Just like Kṛṣṇa, when He appeared, He, He's Kṛṣṇa when He was so-called three months old, and He was Kṛṣṇa when He was twenty years old. The same Kṛṣṇa. As we find difference that a..., the same man, when he's three months old, he's different from the twenty years old. When his age is twenty years, he's different from his age when his age is three months.



The modern fashion is that they want to become God by meditation, by advancement of mystic power. But that kind of God is not Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa does not become God; He's God always. Others, they try to become God by mystic power. We have heard so many so-called Gods, that "He attained such perfection of mystic power. Now he has become God." That is also another māyā. Nobody can become God. God is God; dog is dog. This is the law of identity. A dog cannot become God, neither God becomes dog. This is Māyāvāda theory that at the end the Absolute Truth is void, or impersonal. The Buddhist theory is void and the Māyāvādī theory is impersonal. But our philosophy is that God is originally the Supreme Person. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. We have discussed this point many times.

Now, here it is said: līlāvatārānurato deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu [SB 1.2.34]. God is always anxious to get us back, back to home, back to Godhead. So apart from His incarnations amongst the deva, demigods... Just like Upendra, Lord Vāmanadeva, He appeared amongst the demigods. There are so many other incarnations, demigods. Tiryaṅ-narādi, tiryak. God appeared as incarnation of boar, incarnation of horse, incarnation of tortoise. Keśava dhṛta-kūrma-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. Kūrma śarīra. Keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare. There are so many incarnations. Keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare. Keśava dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare. So He has got innumerable incarnations. As I have told you several times, just like the waves of the river, one cannot count, similarly, nobody can count how many incarnations are coming always, incessantly, one after another. So līlāvatārānurato deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu. And amongst the human beings, we know Lord Rāmacandra came, Lord Kṛṣṇa came, Ṛṣabhadeva came and Lord Caitanya came.

So Kṛṣṇa is always trying... Because He's the father. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya [Bg. 14.4]. Sarva-yoniṣu. There are different species of life, forms of life, because we wanted to enjoy this material world, to utilize the resources of material world. That is our activity, even at the present moment. Always. Everyone is busy how to exploit the resources of material nature. That is advancement of civilization. Advancement of civilization means how to exploit the material resources. But they do not know, the foolish people do not know that is not advancement. That is entanglement. That is not advancement. This knowledge, they are lacking. They do not know what is advancement. Advancement means advancement in spiritual life. That is advancement. We are spirit. In essence we are spirit soul. We have been encaged within this body. Therefore advancement means how to get out of this entanglement of repetition of birth and death.

When Viśvāmitra Muni went to Mahārāja Daśaratha to ask for his two sons, Rāmacandra and Lakṣmaṇajī, to take them to the Daṇḍakāraṇya to kill the demon, so at that time, Mahārāja Daśaratha welcomed Viśvāmitra, Viśvāmitra Muni with these words: aihiṣṭaṁ yad punar-janma-jayāya, yatraṁ punar-janma-jayāya(?). Aihiṣṭam. Just like if I meet my friend... Suppose he's a businessman. So I'll ask you how your business going on nicely. Similarly, Viśvāmitra Muni, he was not a businessman. He was a great saint, and he was living in the forest. So what was the purpose? The purpose was aihiṣṭaṁ yat tat punar-janma-jayāya. As you are trying to conquer over the repetition of birth, punar-janma-jayāya... The people do not know, at the present moment, that the business is to conquer over the repetition of birth and death, punar-janma-jayāya. They do not know that this can be stopped. Neither they have any idea that there is rebirth. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Your life is not finished. Your life is not finished simply by finishing... When the, this body is ended, it is not that you are also ended. This knowledge, there is nowhere throughout the whole world. There are so many big, big universities. That is our lamentation, that what is this education? They do not know how to direct education. In the śāstra it is said that your activities should be conducted in such a way that Kṛṣṇa becomes satisfied. Hari-toṣaṇam. But they do not know what is Kṛṣṇa, what is Hari. And how to satisfy Him, that is another question.

So at the present moment, the whole civilization is a set of rascals only. That's all. There is no education. They do not know. And because they do not know, Kṛṣṇa comes. Just to make these rascals, to inform that "I am," Kṛṣṇa says, "I am," aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī. Canvassing. Canvassing, "My dear sons, why you are rotting in this material world? Please come. You are My beloved son. I do not tolerate, or I do not, I cannot see that you are suffering." This is Kṛṣṇa's business. He's more kind. He's more anxious to get us back. Therefore He comes personally. Therefore He comes personally. Then again, when we mistake Him... Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. The rascals, they thought, "Oh, why He's demanding so much? Why He's demanding so much? This is sophistry. Why shall I surrender to You?" That is our position. Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender. I take charge of you." Mā śucaḥ, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. "I shall give you relief from all difficulties." "No, why shall I?" Just see how much rascals we are. And they are going on as civilized men. All fools, rascals and rogues and thieves. That's all. This is the position. All fools and rascals and rogues. Ajānantaḥ. Ajānantaḥ means rascals, one who does not know. Ajānantaḥ.

Therefore Vyāsadeva made this śāstra, this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, ajānantaḥ, for these rascals, one who does not know the aim of life. Anartha upaśamaṁ sākṣād bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje. We are meeting with so many problems of life. These are called anarthas, unnecessary. I am spirit soul; you are spirit soul. We are as good as God. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Our real position is ānanda. Sac-cid-ānanda. Why we are meeting so many problems? This is due to this body. This is due to this body. Therefore the real culture is, real education is, how to stop this repetition of body. But they do not know. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt. We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. He is fully joyful. You'll see always Kṛṣṇa joyful. When He's killing an animal, he's laughing. He's joyful. You have seen Kṛṣṇa's picture. It is not that it's a problem. You have seen. Kṛṣṇa is killing that Keśī demon, a horse, big horse, just like a child's play. Kṛṣṇa is, I mean to say, fighting with that bull. What is the name of that bull?

Pradyumna: Ariṣṭāsura.



Prabhupāda: Ariṣṭāsura. The attacking with his horns. Kṛṣṇa is just like playing with a toy. That is Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa is always anxious to give us enlightenment, that "This is not your life. Why you are rotting in this material world? Come back." In many ways... Deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu. He's coming not only in the human society, but in the animal society also. He's coming in all kinds of... There are so many societies, aquatics, jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi sthāvarā lakṣa-viṁśati kṛmayo rudra-saṅk... There are so many living entities, 8,400,000, and they have got their own society. As we know, birds of the same feather flock together. So that is called society. That is there in the... You'll find all the ants are together. All the birds are together. All the beasts are together. So we form this animal society or the human society. That is not a new thing. That is a... You'll see all the crows, they will flock together. The crows will not mix with the pigeons. The pigeons will not mix with the crows. That is natural.



So there are so many societies. Deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu [SB 1.2.34]. And in every society, there is incarnation of God according to their position. According to their language, according to their problems, there is incarnation. We do not see other incarnations, but we can see the human form of incarnation. Rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan [Bs. 5.39]. But from the śāstra we can understand that there are incarnations amongst the lower animals, beasts, birds and everywhere. The purpose is to reclaim the fallen souls. So not only He incarnates, but He sends His devotee, He comes as devotee. Just like Kṛṣṇa was misunderstood because Kṛṣṇa demanded that "You surrender unto Me." So we misunderstood because we are mūḍhas. The mūḍhas, they do not surrender. Kṛṣṇa says they are, they are very good scholars of Bhagavad-gītā. But they cannot understand these simple things. Kṛṣṇa is demanding, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66], but he'll not do that. And he is a scholar of Bhagavad-gītā. The simple truth, he cannot understand. Neither he can follow. If I am actually follower of Bhagavad-gītā, then Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me," then, if I am actually follower, I shall surrender unto Him. That is my business. But no. I shall not surrender. "I am Kṛṣṇa. Why shall I surrender to You?"

Where does he get this information that he has become Kṛṣṇa? Where is that in the Bhagavad-gītā? But they are preaching Bhagavad-gītā reading means "I have become Kṛṣṇa." Where this nonsense ideas they get? I do not know. But we can take them what he is. We can take... As soon as he does not surrender, then I take him, we take him in three, four classes:

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



Because I see this rascal has not surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he must be one of these groups. What is that? Duṣkṛtina, in the group of sinful life. Duṣkṛtina. Mūḍhāḥ, in the groups of rascals. Narādhamāḥ, in the groups of the lowest of the mankind. "No, they are Ph.D.s." Māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. They may be Ph.D.s, but he's a rascal because māyā has taken his real knowledge. He does not know Kṛṣṇa. What is the value of his knowledge? Māyayā apahṛta-jñānā āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Why this is so? Now, āsuraṁ bhāva, their only business is to discard, kill God. Just like asuras. Just like Kaṁsa. His only business was how to kill Kṛṣṇa. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ.



So those who are asuras or the narādhamas, their only business is to, how to kill Kṛṣṇa. Just like the great scholar is saying, when Kṛṣṇa says that man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], he's commenting, because he's a great scholar, "Not to Kṛṣṇa." Just see. "Not to Kṛṣṇa." This is going on. They are thinking there is something more exalted than Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "There is nothing more. I am the Supreme." So I do not know what kind of scholars they are. They are reading Bhagavad-gītā and decrying Kṛṣṇa. This is going on. Therefore our movement is Bhagavad-gītā as it is. We don't follow these rascals, duṣkṛtina, mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ. We don't follow them. We follow Caitanya Mahāprabhu. We follow Rāmānujācārya. We follow Madhvācārya. We follow the great authorities-Vyāsadeva. We follow Nārada, Asita, Vyāsa. Because that is the only way to understand. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. You cannot understand His incarnation. You have to follow the footprints. Then you'll understand who is avatāra. Otherwise, instead of Kṛṣṇa, you will accept another demi-kṛṣṇa. Somebody will say, "I was Kṛṣṇa." "Oh, he's avatāra." And what is the proof that he was Kṛṣṇa? Why you are so fool? If somebody says... If I say that "I was Kṛṣṇa," so only the fools will take me that I was Kṛṣṇa, now I am dog. It is not like that.

We have to follow the mahājano yena gataḥ. If we want... Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was discussing with Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu informed according to śāstra:

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



So these symptoms are Caitanya Mahāprabhu's symptoms. So when Sanātana Gosvāmī was talking Caitanya Mahāprabhu... He was a politician, minister. So he simply inquired from Caitanya Mahāprabhu: "Shall I take it that these symptoms, as we find in the śāstra, is the incarnation of this Kali-yuga?" Caitanya Mahāprabhu understood that "He's catching Me, he's trying to catching Me." So He immediately said, "Oh, don't bother about that thing. We shall talk..." Like that. Even Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is actually Kṛṣṇa, He avoided to be addressed as Kṛṣṇa. And these rascals, false, they are claiming "Kṛṣṇa." Just see. Kṛṣṇa Himself, in Vṛndāvana... In Vṛndāvana, when Kṛṣṇa, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was present, many devotees used to come and address Him, "My Lord, You are Kṛṣṇa." Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to block His ears: "Don't say like that. Don't say. It is a great offense to address a man as Viṣṇu, as Kṛṣṇa." He taught us like that. And these rascals, they're declaring: "I am God. I am Kṛṣṇa." "I am God, I am Kṛṣṇa."



So only the rascals will follow such rascals. A man is known by his company. God has become so cheap. God, they, there are incarnation, there are hundreds and thousands of incarnation, but to accept that incarnation, we have to follow the direction of the śāstra. The śāstra, in every incarnation is described there, His symptoms are described there. When Rāmacandra is described, He is... What did He do, that is also given there. Even Lord Buddha's activities are there in the śāstra-He's accepted an incarnation. Kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati. Lord Kṛṣṇa's, Lord Balarāma. Everything is described there-Lord Caitanya. So we have to accept one incarnation with reference to the description given in the śāstra. Not that any rascal comes and he becomes incarnation and we accept. No. There are incarnations. That is a fact. As it is said: deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu, hundreds and thousands of incarnations. But if we are intelligent, if we are actually well versed in the śāstras, then we should corroborate. Not that anyone comes to become incarnation, we have to accept. No. That is not our business. Sādhu-śāstra-guru-vākya, cittete kariyā aikya. We have to test sādhu, whether sādhus are accepting. Just like Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is accepted by all the sādhus as Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even Śaṅkarācārya, who's an impersonalist, he says, sa bhagavān svayaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ devakī-nandanaḥ. He accepts. And what to speak of other Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya. They all accept. Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepts. Formerly, Vyāsadeva accepted. Nārada accepted. Everyone... Vedas. The other day, when we met Gaṅgeśvarānanda, he quoted so many Vedic passages Kṛṣṇa, about Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

So in the Vedas, in the Purāṇas, in the Upaniṣads, and confirmed by great sages, saintly persons, everyone accepts Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then why these rascals cannot find out God? We are giving the name of God, the address of God, the father, God's father's name also, Nanda-nandana, Devakī-nandana. So where is the difficulty to find out? There is no difficulty. But the rascals will not accept. They will continue their rascaldom. That is the difficulty. Otherwise, it is not at all difficulty to find out where is God. God is neither dead, nor God has become void or impersonal. He's person, dvi-bhuja-muralīdhara, Kṛṣṇa, playing on His flute and jāmuna-tīra-vana-cārī. He is existent always. Adyāpi kare līlāya gaura-rāya, kona kona bhāgyavān dekhibāre pāya(?). Kṛṣṇa is always existing. Kṛṣṇa's incarnations are always existing, before us. But if we are fortunate enough, we can see; otherwise not.

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan

[SB 10.14.29]



You cannot manufacture the incarnation of God. You cannot see the incarnation of God, provided if you are not blessed by God. Svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234].



So the fact is that there are innumerable incarnations of God. As it is said here: līlāvatārānurato deva-tiryaṅ-narādiṣu. And we have to accept Him as incarnation not by whims, not by public votes, but... Just like it has become a fashion. If a man is voted, without reference to the śāstra, if some rascals vote that "Here is incarnation of God," we accept? No, we have to accept with reference to śāstra, symptoms given in the śāstra, and then we shall... Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu we accept as incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. It is confirmed in the śāstra. In the Upaniṣads, in Mahābhārata, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Everywhere, there are... If you read Caitanya-caritāmṛta, there are so many quotations from the śāstras. Then we accept Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There are some men here in Vṛndāvana, they do not accept Caitanya Mahāprabhu as incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, but there are... They'll not see... They'll not see to the evidences in the śāstra. They'll blind. They'll make themselves blind.

So any incarnation... We should be very careful, that, although there are many thousands and thousands of incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, still, when we have to accept somebody or something as incarnation, we must refer to the śāstra. Then it will be right. Otherwise, we shall be misled. That is being done. So many. In the street, in the lanes, there are so many gods. And especially the god, all the gods are going to Western countries. Especially. Because the Western people are now inclined, especially after this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they are, they are... They were prepared. They were hankering after this God consciousness, because they are fed up with this all nonsense civilization. These young boys and girls, they are fed up. They do not want to live like their fathers or grandfathers. They want something better.

So therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is becoming successful. They were looking after such cultural movement, but taking advantage, there are, so many rascals are going and posing himself as incarnation of God. People can be misled. Even in India, there are so many men misled with the incarnation of God. But incarnation of God is not so cheap. Don't make, don't accept cheap incarnation of God. Try to understand with reference to the śāstras, with reference to the authority. Then it will be all right. Otherwise, it will be misleading. Don't be misled. That is our request.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.3: Lectures





721114SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.1

-

Vṛndāvana, November 14, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sūta uvāca

jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpaṁ

bhagavān mahad-ādibhiḥ

sambhūtaṁ ṣoḍaśa-kalam

ādau loka-sisṛkṣayā

[SB 1.3.1]



Translation: "Sūta said: In the beginning of the creation, the Lord first expanded Himself in the universal form of the puruṣa incarnation and manifested all the ingredients for the material creation. And thus at first there was the creation of the sixteen principles of material action. This was for the purpose of creating the material universe."



Prabhupāda:



jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpaṁ

bhagavān mahad-ādibhiḥ

sambhūtaṁ ṣoḍaśa-kalam

ādau loka-sisṛkṣayā



So ādau, in the beginning, loka-sisṛkṣayā, for creating the cosmology, jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpam, person, the creation is coming from the person. Not from imperson. The modern scientists, their theory of creation... "There was something matter chunk," or something like that. What do they say? What was the beginning of creation, Hayagrīva Prabhu?



Hayagrīva: Uh, one is that there was a mass that exploded, and all of these universes came out in the explosion. The other is that the universe is a solid state universe, that it is constantly existing and regenerating itself. These two theories. One's called the "Big Bang Theory," and the other's called "Solid State Theory," "Steady State, Steady State."



Prabhupāda: Anyway...



Hayagrīva: In either case, there was something there.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Hayagrīva: In either case, there was something originally there, which they don't explain.



Prabhupāda: But here we find it quite reasonable. Because everything is, is from the person. Jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpam. Rūpam, form. It is not from imperson. Jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpam. So we don't theorize. We accept the statement of the Vedas. That is our process of knowledge. Eh? Descending process. We take knowledge from the authority. Of course, the scientists also say they take from authority, but originally, as explained by our Hayagrīva Prabhu, it does not appear that the knowledge was taken from authority. It is theory. Theory, one can put theory of his own, and there are so many theories. But we don't accept theories. We want solid fact.



The solid fact is the Lord created. In the Bible also it is said that God said, "Let there be creation." So it is from the person. Here also, we find the creation begins from the person. In the Vedas it is said, sa aikṣata. Sa asṛjata. Aikṣata, "By the glance, He looked over, God looked over, and He created." The reference is to the person. We also find from our experience that whenever there is something manufacturing, or creation, we do not find automatically some matter comes into being. We don't, we haven't such experience. Whenever there is anything manufactured or created, there is a person behind it.

So this is not a very good theory that from the chunk, or some matter exploded, and immediately the universe came into existence. That is not a very good theory. But this is nice. Jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpam. This pauruṣam, the Mahā-Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, They are expansions of Kṛṣṇa. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. He incarnates, He expands Himself in various incarnations. Now, for the creation, these three persons... Always person. Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, person; Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, person; and Kāraṇārṇava-jala, Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu, person. And Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu, Mahā-Viṣṇu, He's also expansion of Saṅkarṣaṇa. And Saṅkarṣaṇa is expansion of Baladeva; Baladeva is expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa becomes the origin. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ, anādiḥ [Bs. 5.1]. He has no beginning, but He is beginning. Anādir ādiḥ. He's, He has no beginning, but He is the beginning of creation. Anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1].

So mahat-tattva, the total material energy, and six, five elements, sixteen, sixteen, ṣoḍaśa-kalam. What are those? The five elements, namely, earth, water, fire, air, and sense objects and senses and the spirit soul. In this way, sixteen. And from sixteen, it expands to twenty-four. That is the explanation of our Vedic creation. Ṣoḍaśa-kalam. You read the purport.

Pradyumna: Purport: "The Bhagavad-gītā states that the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa maintains these material universes by extending His plenary expansions. So this puruṣa form is the confirmation of the same principle. The original Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, or Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is famous as the son of King Vasudeva or King Nanda, is full with all opulences, all potencies, all fames, all beauties, all knowledge and all renunciation. Part of His opulences is manifested as impersonal Brahman, and part of His opulences is manifested as Paramātmā. This puruṣa feature of the same Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Paramātmā manifestation of the Lord. There are three puruṣa features in the material creation, and this form, who is known as the Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, is the first of the three. The others are known as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, which we shall know one after another. The innumerable universes are generated from the skinholes of this Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and in each one of the universes, the Lord..."



Prabhupāda: This is explained in Brahma-saṁhitā.



yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



Mahā-Viṣṇu. From the skinholes of Mahā-Viṣṇu, the small particles of universes are coming into being. Everything, the nature's way, it comes a very small particle, then it grows. Anything you take. Just like our body. The small particle, the soul which is measured as one ten-thousandth part of the tip of the hair, when it is placed in the womb of the woman by the man, then the body grows. That is the seed. Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the seed-giving father."



So just like here, we practically see, the male semina is injected within the womb of the female, and because the living entity, very small, one ten-thousandth part of the tip of, is there, because that living entity's there, the body grows. Unless the living entity's there, there will be no pregnancy. As soon as the living entity is there, the body grows. And that is known as pregnancy. Daily grows. The mother can understand it is growing. Similarly, without the spirit soul entering into the matter, there is no possibility of creation. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said, viṣṭabhya aham ekāṁśena.

athavā bahunaitena

kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna

viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam

ekāṁśena sthito jagat

[Bg. 10.42]



"Because I have entered into this universe by My plenary portion, therefore it is existing." It is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā.



So without spiritual touch, there is no question of matter working or expanding or growing. That is not possible. So in the seed of any tree, because there is that living entity, therefore it grows into a big tree. Every tree, they are also living entities, in a different form. So here also, in the creation, without the supreme living entity entering within the mahat-tattva, there is no possibility of creation. Go on.

Pradyumna: "And in each one of the universes the Lord enters as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is also mentioned that the material world is created at certain intervals and then again destroyed. This creation and destruction is done by the supreme will because of the conditioned souls, or the nitya-baddha living entities. Nitya-baddha, or the eternally conditioned souls, have the sense of individuality or..."



Prabhupāda: (Hindi) Hmm? Yes.



Pradyumna: "...or ahaṅkāra, which dictates them sense enjoyment, which they are unable to have constitutionally. The Lord is the only enjoyer, and all others are enjoyed. The living entities are predominated enjoyers, but the eternally conditioned souls, forgetful of this constitutional position, have strong aspirations to enjoy. This chance to enjoy matter is given to the conditioned souls in the material world, and side by side they are given the chance to understand their real constitutional position. Those fortunate living entities who catch the truth and surrender unto the lotus feet of Vāsudeva after many, many births in the material world join the eternally liberated souls and thus are allowed to enter into the kingdom of Godhead. After this, such fortunate living entities need not come again within the occasional material creation. But those who cannot catch the constitutional truth are again merged into the mahat-tattva..."



Prabhupāda: So we can very easily understand by the example of our own body. This body, as we, spirit soul, enter into this body, the existence of body continues. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. So the body is not created first. The... Because the living entity enters into the body, therefore the body's created. Similarly, this gigantic body, universal body, cannot come into existence automatically. That is not a very good theory. How...? There is no such example. Unless the living entity is there, this body... We get this experience-it does not grow. If a child is born dead, that body does not grow. Therefore it is to be concluded there is something. Even if we do not accept the spirit soul, there must be something on account of the presence of that something, the body's growing. Similarly, take this gigantic body of the universe; unless there is something like that, as we are in this body, how this gigantic universe can go? This is common reasoning. We do not find that a..., matter is growing automatically. No. A tree, a tree is growing, daily growing new leaves new twigs, new flowers. Because that living entity is within the tree. You cut the tree and throw it aside. There will be no more growing. It will dry. It will dry.



Therefore the conclusion is..., as it is said here, that jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpam. So it is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He, after entering into the matter, there is possibility of creation. Otherwise, there is no possibility of creation. Now... Go on reading.

Pradyumna: "When the creation is again set up, this mahat-tattva is again let loose."



Prabhupāda: Now another point is that this creation is, because it is material creation, it does not exist forever. It is..., come into existence, and again it will be finished, annihilated. Exactly like our body. As this body, we have got this body on certain date, and it has got to be annihilated at a certain date, similarly, this gigantic cosmology, material manifestation, it has a date of creation, and it, it stays for some time... Everything material, there are six changes. First of all, birth; then staying for some time; then growing; then producing some by-products; and then dwindling; and then finish. Exactly like our body. Just like this body is born at a certain date, then it grows, it stays, it produces some by-product. From this body, many children come out-by-product. Then it becomes old, declining. And then one day, finished. This is called ṣaḍ-vikāra, six changes. Six changes.



So similarly, there are six changes of this material world also, because it is also material product. So as I and you enter in our body, similarly viṣṭabhya aham, Kṛṣṇa says He enters within this material world. Therefore the creation takes place, it grows, it gives off so many by-products, and then again there will be destruction. It is said at the time of destruction, first of all there will be no rain, no rain for hundreds of years. So everything will dry up and die, practically by continuous sunshine. And it is said the sunshine will be very, very powerful. Twelve times powerful. So everything will be ablaze, blazing into fire. Then there will be rain. As we have experience, after excessive heat, there is cloud and rain, so there will be rain, and everything will be absorbed into water, and the water will be evaporated. In this way, this material world, cosmic manifestation will be no more. Again there will be creation, mahat-tattva. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. That is stated in the... This material world comes into existence and stays for some time, again becomes annihilated.

But there is another world. That is called spiritual world. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ. That is sanātana. That is eternal. And God, or Kṛṣṇa is eternal. We are also eternal. That is stated in many places. Jīvaḥ sanātanaḥ, jīva-loke sanātanaḥ. And Kṛṣṇa is also described as sanātana in the Eleventh Chapter. And there is another world which is also sanātana: paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ avyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. So Kṛṣṇa is sanātana, that world is sanātana, we are sanātana. Therefore we should meet together. And the process which helps us to go back to home, back to Godhead, and stay in that sanātana place with the sanātana Lord, that is called sanātana-dharma. Sanātana-dharma does not mean that a particular class of men having a particular type of dress or hair. No. Sanātana-dharma is meant for all living entities. They are rotting in this material world, repetition of birth and death. That is asanātana.

So every human being should be educated to accept this sanātana-dharma, how one can go back to home, back to Godhead. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So sanātana-dharma is not meant for a particular class of men. It is meant for all living entities. Unfortunately, the Hindu dharma, or sanātana-dharma, they have identified. And..., as if others have no right to enter into the sanātana-dharma. No. That's not a fact. The fact is every living entity is sanātana. And the process by which a living entity is transferred to the sanātana dhāma, sanātana place, that is called sanātana-dharma. It is... Sanātana-dharma is misunderstood. Just like in India there are classes of men who call: "We are sanātanists." Everyone should be sanātanist. Sanātana-dharma is not meant for a particular class of men or country or society. Sanātana-dharma means it is meant for the living entities.

The real occupational duty of the living entity is called sanātana-dharma. Dharma means not religion. Dharma means the natural characteristic. That is dharma. We don't mean dharma is a certain type of faith. No. Faith or no faith, the characteristics must be there. Just like salt. It has got a particular type of taste. So you like it or not like it, the taste is there. It is... That is... If you think that "I have faith that salt should be sweet," no. That cannot be. You may have faith. You may create that faith that salt has the sweet taste. But that's not a fact. Similarly, if you say, "I have got my faith that sugar will be pungent." No. That cannot be. Sugar has got a particular type of taste. That will continue. You may believe it or not believe it. It does not depend. And faith means you believe, you can change it. Therefore dharma, the exact word, dharma, is different from the dictionary meaning, English dictionary, "a kind of faith. Religion means a kind of faith." We don't mean that.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That means the so-called faith, you should give up. It is a faith. "I am Hindu." "I am Muslim." "I am Christian." Or "I am this," "I am that." This is a kind of faith. You are neither Hindu, neither Muslim nor Christian; you are servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is real characteristic. And actually we are servant. We are serving. That is our characteristic. Either he may be Hindu or Muslim or Christian, but the real business is that everyone is serving. It is not that because I am Hindu, I don't serve. Or because one is Christian, he doesn't serve. No. Everyone is serving. But he's serving māyā. He's serving kāma, krodha, lobha, mātsarya. He's serving. In this material condition, we are serving our whims, kāma. Sometimes I become angry and I serve my anger-I beat others. That means I am serving anger. I am serving my lust. I am serving my greediness.

So we have become, instead of becoming servant of Kṛṣṇa, we have become the servants of our, these enemies. Practically they are enemies-kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ. Or in other words, we are servants of the three material modes of nature. But we are servant. That we cannot deny. So the whole Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that instead of becoming servant of these three modes of nature, you become servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is your original position. You cannot give up your position as servant. In the Bengali proverb there is a ḍheṅki. Svarga gela dan bange.(?) Means a ḍheṅki, that machine, that wooden machine, which... Husking machine? So if you send it to the heaven, then what he'll do? The same business. It does not mean the ḍheṅki, while it is promoted in the heaven, he can become soul or anything else. No. Similarly, we living entities, we have desire to enjoy this material world, but our position is servant. We have not changed our position. We revolted to serve Kṛṣṇa. That is all right. But what is your position here in the material world? That is also servant. Just like I told Professor Kotovsky that "Your Communism, what is the difference between your Communism and our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement? You have selected Lenin as your leader, or master, and we have selected Kṛṣṇa as our leader, master. So on the principle, where is difference?" The professor could not answer.

So the professor could not answer, but he was impressed, that actually what is this meaning of Communism? You simply change of, change of master. That's all. And this is going on. All political leaders, they are going from one political leader to another. And he's exploiting. That's all. He, he is giving some manifesto that "If you give me vote, then I shall make you overnight a king." All false propaganda. And these rascals gives him vote and he again remains the same servant. That's all. There is a Bengali song:

tabe kali tomāra baḍa saba bala ke kare āpanāra karma phala yadi phalebi āmāra(?). So if I remain the same servant, then why shall I vote to you? You cannot make me master. But my desire is that I shall become master. That is called illusion. Because I'm not master. I cannot become master. I have to remain servant. I am flattering some men: "Please make me master. Please make me master." That is my position. This political party, that political party.

Therefore the sane man, one who has got good brain, su-medhas... Su-medhas and alpa-medhas. Medhas means brain substance. Su-medhasaḥ. Su-medhasaḥ. There is a word, the su-medhasaḥ. They... Yes. Saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Su-medhasaḥ. And there is another word: alpa-medhasaḥ. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. Su-medhasaḥ means good brain, and alpa-medhas means rascal, less brain substance. Sometimes we say, chastise, that "Your brain, your, this skull, filled up with cow dung. There is no brain substance." So those whose brains are filled up with cow dung, they want to exploit this material world. It is impossible. It is not possible. Under certain pleas only, that "This political party will give you better chance for exploiting." But you cannot do that. It is not possible. This is called māyā. In illusion, I'm thinking, "If I make certain more progress..." We see, in America, they're increasing the number of motorcars and the problem is road. One flyway above another flyway, another another. The flyway construction is going on perpetually. Is it not? And this is called advancement. The rascals do not know that "I am simply laboring, laboring, laboring. Where is the stoppage of laboring? " No. That you cannot stop. Your progress means you simply work hard. And because you are illusioned, that hard-working, you are thinking progress, happiness. That's all. This is called māyā. He is working just like an ass. The ass, ass, ass is working whole day and night for the washerman for a morsel of grass. But ass, why it is called ass? He can, the ass can have grasses anywhere, but he, for that, he's working very hard for the washerman. Therefore he's ass. He has no sense that "Why I shall work for this washerman so hard? I can get this morsel of grass anywhere." But he'll work.

So ass politician, ass family man, ass community leader. So... All asses, mūḍhāḥ. Na māṁ prapadyante mūḍhāḥ. All asses. They'll not surrender to Kṛṣṇa to get relief. They'll work like ass. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, na māṁ prapadyante mūḍhāḥ duṣkṛtino narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They have no brain, alpa-medhasaḥ. No brain substance. Filled up with cow dung. And those who have got real brain, then, for them it is recommended: saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ, yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ.

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



Oh, one who has got brain, he catches Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Kṛṣṇa-varṇam, always chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam. And simply worship by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is brain substance. All cow dung.



Thank you very much. (end)



680328SB.SF

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.1-3

-

San Francisco, March 28, 1968



Reading from Śrīla Prabhupāda's First

Published Bhāgavatam, Brought from India





Prabhupāda: You read from the third chapter. [break]



Upendra: ...concerning "Description of Incarnations of Godhead" Translation: "Sūta said, In the beginning of the creation the Lord first of all expanded Himself in the universal form of puruṣa incarnation primarily with all the ingredients of material creation. And thus at first there was the creation of the sixteen principles of material action. This was on the intention of creating the material universe." [SB 1.3.1] Purport. "As it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā that the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa maintains this material universes by extending His part of plenary expansions, so this puruṣa Form is the confirmation of the same principle. The Original Personality of Godhead Vāsudeva or Lord Kṛṣṇa who is famous as the son of King Vasudeva or King Nanda, the very same Personality of Godhead is full with all opulences, all potencies, all fames, all beauties, all knowledge and all renunciations. Part of His opulences is manifested as impersonal Brahman and part of His opulences is manifested as Paramātmā. This puruṣa feature of the same Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Paramātmā manifestation of the Lord. There are three puruṣa features in the matter of material creation and this form who is known as the Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is the first of the three. The others are known as the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu which we shall know one after another."



Prabhupāda: These Viṣṇu, Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Garbhodakaśāyī, and Kṣīrodakaśāyī, these are little technical. Try to understand. Now this universe, which you find just like a big ball, there are innumerable universes like this, and they are floating in water. That water is called Causal Ocean. So that Causal Ocean there is, I mean to say, completely in the whole ocean, big gigantic body is lying down there. That is known as Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The Viṣṇu in that gigantic form is sleeping within the water of that Causal Ocean, and by His inhaling and exhaling, breathing, there are bubbles. And those bubbles are manifested as universes. This is stated in Brahma-saṁhitā: yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48]. That breathing, exhaling and inhaling... Just like we also do that. So we have inherited that exhaling-inhaling, from that Viṣṇu.



So how these brahmāṇḍas or universes, each of them has a predominate deity? He is called Brahmā. Brahmāṇḍa, the master of this brahmāṇḍa is called Brahmā. The duration of this Brahmā, duration of life, is only the inhaling and exhaling period of Mahā-Viṣṇu. When He's exhaling, all the brahmāṇḍas are coming in existence. And when He's inhaling, they're all vanquished. This process is going on. And the Supreme Person who is doing this, I mean to say, creation and dissolution, He is called Mahā-Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So the reference is in the Brahma-saṁhitā that that Mahā-Viṣṇu is also part and parcel of Govinda, Kṛṣṇa. Just try to understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Then? Go on.

Upendra: "The innumerable universes are generated from skinholes of this Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and in each one of the universes the Lord enters as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu."



Prabhupāda: Again, after creation of the universes, He enters each and every universe. This universe is filled with water, half. What you are seeing, that is half only. And half is filled with water. In that water Viṣṇu again lying, expanding. This is Viṣṇu's power. He can expand in innumerable identities. That is also confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta means unlimited, and rūpa means forms. He's expanding in unlimited number of forms. We are also expansion of His form. These jīvas, the living entities... He is expanding in two ways, svāṁśa and vibhinnāṁśa. Svāṁśa means Viṣṇu. One extension, expansion, is just directly He Himself. And another expansion is separated from Him. That separated from Him we are.



We living entities, we are also vibhinnāṁśa. We are also part and parcel, but we are separated. Therefore we haven't got the full potency of God. We have got potencies of God. The six potencies, namely opulence, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, we have also got these in minute quantity. Whatever we see here, the richest man in the world, that is only minute particle of the richness of God. Because we are part and parcel, minute part and parcel. Therefore we have got all the opulences in minute form. Just like gold and a minute particle of gold. Chemically analyze the small particle of gold has got all the composition as the original big gold. A drop of sea water... Chemically, a drop of sea water has got all the composition as the big sea water. Similarly, we have got all the qualities of God, but in minute quantity. That is the difference between God and ourselves. Or in other words, you can study God also by studying yourself. Whatever propensities you have got, that is also there in God. Everything. Otherwise wherefrom it comes? Because I am part and parcel, if I have got all these propensities, naturally, in full and without any inebriety, those things are present in God.

Take for example our love, what you call love. Of course, it is perverted reflection of love. Several times I've repeated. In this material world there is nothing like love. It is only, everything perverted reflection of love. Just like you have got affection for children. That is there also, but that is without any inebrieties. Here also the same man and woman, male and female, there is attraction between one another. Similarly there is also, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. But there is no inebriety. That is full and that is perfect. Here it is imperfect due to material contamination.

So everything, whatever we have got, Kṛṣṇa has also got that thing. But in Kṛṣṇa it is in perfection; in us, in our conditional state of life, it is imperfect. So if we dovetail ourselves with Kṛṣṇa, then our..., all these propensities become perfect. The same example as I have given repeatedly, that a car is running at seventy-mile speed, a cyclist catches the car, he also runs in seventy-miles speed, although the cycle hasn't got such speed. Similarly, although we are minute particle of God, if we dovetail ourselves with the consciousness of God, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then we become equally spirit. This is the technique. Go on.

Upendra: "In the Bhagavad-gītā this is also mentioned that the material world is created at certain intervals and then again it is destroyed. This creation and destruction is done by the Supreme will on account of the conditioned souls or the nitya-baddha living beings."



Prabhupāda: Nitya-baddha. This word is also technical. Nitya-baddha means ever-conditioned. There are nitya-muktas. Nitya-mukta means ever-liberated. In the spiritual world, there are also innumerable living entities. The... This material world is only one-fourth manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's energy, God's energy. And the three-fourths energy is manifested in the spiritual world. So we can just imagine that in one-fourth manifestation of energy of the Lord, we are so many living entities which is impossible to count. Now you can imagine how many more living entities are there. But here we are conditioned and they are liberated. Those who are conditioned, they are called nitya-baddha, ever-conditioned. Nitya-baddha means we do not know when our, this conditional stage has begun. It is impossible to trace out the history. But we are conditioned. There is no doubt about it. Conditioned means no freedom. No freedom. As spirit soul we are free. Sarva-ga, we can go everywhere, anywhere. Even those who get some mystic powers by perfection of yoga practice, they can also exhibit some powers. So why? As we become free from material conditions, our original freedom comes.



So one of the qualification of the spirit soul is sarva-ga. Sarva-ga means he can go anywhere and everywhere. But because we are conditional stage, we are trying so much to go to the moon planet, we cannot go. But Nārada, because he is free, he has got full spiritual body, he can go anywhere he likes. Go on.

Upendra: "The nitya-baddha or the eternally conditioned souls have the sense of individuality or ahaṅkāra which dictates them for sense enjoyment which they are unable to have constitutionally. The Lord is the only enjoyer and all others are enjoyed. The living beings are predominated enjoyer. But the eternally conditioned souls forgetful of this constitutional position have strong aspiration for enjoying. This chance of enjoying the matter is given to the conditioned souls in the material world and side by side they are given the chance of understanding the real constitutional position. Those fortunate living entities who catch up the truth and surrender unto the Lotus feet of Vāsudeva after many many births in the material world, become one of the eternally liberated souls and thus are allowed to enter into the kingdom of Godhead. After..."



Prabhupāda: We can also become one of them, eternally liberated. But we are not admitted in the spiritual kingdom unless we have given up this false sense of lording it over the material nature. Here, the conditioned souls, everyone is trying to become the lord, imitating. Everyone is trying. But there is clash. You are trying to become lord, I am trying to become lord. Therefore there is clash. And in the spiritual world the Lord is one and there is no competition of lording it over. Therefore in the spiritual world everything is unconditioned, freedom. Yes, go on.



Upendra: "After this such fortunate living entities have no more to come within the occasional material creation. But those who can not catch up the constitutional truth are again kept merged into the mahat-tattva at the time of annihilation of the material creation. When the creation is again set up this mahat-tattva is again let loose and this mahat-tattva contains all the ingredients of material manifestations including the conditioned souls. Primarily this mahat-tattva is divided into sixteen parts namely the five gross material elements and the eleven working instruments or senses."



Prabhupāda: Five elements means the sky, air, then fire, water, and earth. And five senses acquiring knowledge, just like eyes, ear, tongue, smelling. We are acquiring knowledge by these... And working five senses, hands, legs, the genital, and in this way there are five working senses and five knowledge-acquiring senses, and mind is the center. Therefore eleven. Eleven plus five elements equal to sixteen. Go on.



Upendra: "It is like the cloud in the clear sky. In the spiritual sky, the effulgence of Brahman is spread all round and the whole system is dazzling in spiritual light. The mahat-tattva is assembled in some corner of the that vast unlimited spiritual sky and the part which is thus covered by the mahat-tattva is called the material sky."



Prabhupāda: This is also very important. The sky is one. Just like we can experience the sky, and suppose the sky on San Francisco is overcast with cloud. We say that then we are covered in cloud. Practically this San Francisco sky is only a fragmental portion of the whole sky. Similarly, the real sky is that spiritual sky, paravyoma. When that paravyoma partially is clouded with mahat-tattva, that is called material world. This is the position of material world. Material world is also existing in the spiritual world, but it is covered and in a fragmental segment. Yes.



Upendra: "This part of the spiritual sky, called the mahat-tattva, is only an insignificant portion of the whole spiritual sky, and within this mahat-tattva there are innumerable universes. All these universes collectively is produced by the Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu called also the Mahā-Viṣṇu who simply throws His glance only to impregnate the material sky to manifest." Text 2. Translation: "Another plenary part of the puruṣa is lying down within the water of the universe from the navel lake of His body which has sprouted the lotus stem (which is the body of the universe) and on the top, from the lotus flower Brahmā the master of all engineers of the universe, is generated." Purport: "The First puruṣa is the Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. From the skinholes of Him innumerable universes have sprung up. In each and every one of them the puruṣa enters as the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. He is lying in half portion of the universe full with water of His body. And from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu has sprung up the stem of the lotus flower the birth place of Brahmā who is the father of all living beings and the master of all the demigod engineers engaged in the matter of perfect design and working of the universal order. Within the stem of the lotus there are fourteen divisions of planetary system and the earthly planets are situated in the middle. Upwards there are other better planetary systems and the topmost system is called Brahmaloka or the Satyaloka. Downwards the earthly planetary system there are seven downwards planetary systems domiciled by the asuras and similar other most materialistic living beings. From this Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu there is expansion of the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu who is the collective Paramātmā of all living beings. He is called Hari and from Him all incarnations within the universe are expanded."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is the father of Brahmā who has created all these innumerable planets. And in one of the planets there is Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. In that planet the ocean is of milk. There are different kinds of ocean, as we get information from Vedic literature. As we have got here the ocean of water, similarly there is ocean of milk, there is ocean of oil, there is... Just like you have got oil within earth, similarly in those planets there are oil ocean, milk ocean. So there is one planet within this universe which has got ocean of milk. And in that milk ocean there is another Viṣṇu, who is called Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Kṣīra means milk and udaka means water. Go on.



Upendra: "Therefore, the conclusion is that the puruṣa-avatāra is manifested in three features namely first the Kāraṇodakaśāyī who creates aggregate material ingredients in the mahat-tattva, second the Garbhodakaśāyī Who enters in each and every universe and third the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu Who is the Paramātmā of every material object organic or inorganic."



Prabhupāda: This Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is in everyone's heart. He is also sitting with me in the heart. I, as spirit soul, I am sitting there, and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu as Paramātmā, as guiding Supersoul, He is also sitting in the same position. One is... It is stated in the Upaniṣad that two birds are sitting in one tree. One bird is eating the fruit and the other bird is simply witnessing. So Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu as Paramātmā, He is witnessing the activities of the individual soul. And according to the activities of the individual soul, He is getting the necessary result. He is witness. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is confirmed, anumantā and upadraṣṭā. Upadraṣṭā means witness. Suppose you are doing something. I have nothing to do with your activities, but I can see..., I am seeing what you are doing. So He is upadraṣṭā. And anumantā. Anumantā means the individual soul cannot do anything without the sanction of the Supersoul. Either you may do something good or bad, but it has to be taken sanction from the Supersoul.



Just like there is a English version, that "Not a grass moves without the sanction of God." So without sanction of God, we cannot do anything. You may say that when we do something bad, why God gives us sanction? God does not give us sanction, but we force Him to give us sanction. Therefore He gives us sanction. Otherwise, He does not give sanction. But because we want to do it persistently, so God gives us sanction: "All right. You can do it. And you have to enjoy or suffer the result." Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā, the last instruction is that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Don't try to do according to your whims. You just surrender unto Me. Abide by Me. Then I shall give you all protection. But if you want to do according to your own whims, and if you do not hear Me, what can I do? You do that and enjoy the result."

Suppose a foolish boy is trying to touch fire. Father says, "Don't do it." In spite of that, if the foolish boy does it, his hand is burned. So father is not responsible. He says, "Don't do it." But the child does it out of ignorance and suffers. Similarly the sanction of God is there as we persist on it. "I want this. I want this." As a child sometimes cries and the mother is obliged to sanction, similarly, God is very kind. If we persist on doing something, He gives us sanction. But the result you have to suffer or enjoy. Go on.

Upendra: "One who knows these plenary features of the Personality of Godhead knows also Him (Godhead) properly and thus the knower becomes freed from the material conditions of birth, death, old age and diseases as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. In this śloka the subject matter of Mahā-Viṣṇu is summarized. The Mahā-Viṣṇu lies down in some part of the spiritual sky by His own free will and thus He does lie on the ocean of kāraṇa from where He glances over His material nature and the mahat-tattva is at once created. Thus electrified by the power of the Lord the material nature creates at once innumerable universes just like in due course a tree is decorated with innumerable grown up fruits all at a time. The seed of the tree is sown by the cultivator and the tree or creeper in due course becomes manifested with so many fruits. Nothing can take place without a cause. The kāraṇa ocean is therefore called the Causal Ocean. Kāraṇa means causal. We should not foolishly accept the theory of creation by the atheist without any cause. The description of such atheists is given in the Bhagavad-gītā. The atheist does not believe in the creator neither he can give any good explanation of the theory of creation. Material nature has no power to create..."



Prabhupāda: The atheist class of men, they do not agree to accept that this material world is created by God. They give some reason of their own way of thinking, and most of the arguments are "perhaps like this, perhaps like this, perhaps like this." What is this nonsense, "perhaps"? Is that science? "Perhaps"? So they have no sufficient reason that there is no creator. In everything, we find there is a creator. Anything you take. Take for example this table. There is a creator. Somebody has manufactured it. Or this microphone, somebody has created it. Anything you take, you have to find out some creator. And such a vast, gigantic thing, going on so nicely and punctually... The sun is rising punctually, the moon is rising punctually, the fortnight is going on, the season is coming punctually-everything. Why there should be no creator or no superintendent? That answer is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. "Under My superintendence." So if you accept this, then the whole problem is solved. But if we don't accept it, then we have to speculate. But we never to come to the right conclusion, how this creation began. That is not possible to understand by such way. Go on.



Upendra: "Material nature has no power to create without the power of the puruṣa as much as a prakṛti or woman cannot produce any child without the connection of a puruṣa. The puruṣa impregnates and the prakṛti delivers. We should not expect milk from the fleshy bags in the neck of the goat although they look like breastly nipples. Similarly we should not expect any creative power from the material ingredients. We must believe in the power of the puruṣa who impregnates the prakṛti or nature. And because the Lord wished for lying down in meditation the material energy created innumerable universes also at once and in each of them the Lord lay Himself down, and thus all the planets and the different paraphernalia was created at once by the will of the Lord. The Lord has unlimited potencies and as such He can perform as He likes in perfect planning although personally He has nothing to do and no body is greater or equal to Him."



Prabhupāda: In the Bible also it is said, "God said 'Let there be creation,' and there was creation." That means God is the origin of creation. Yes. Go on.



Upendra: "That is the verdict of Veda." Text 3. Translation: "It is conceived that all the universal planetary system are situated on the extensive bodily features of the puruṣa but He has nothing to do with the created material ingredients."



Prabhupāda: This is universal form of the Lord, virāṭ-puruṣa. Here is also. This is more or less imaginary. But virāṭ-puruṣa... Just like Arjuna was shown the virāṭ-puruṣa, universal form. That is not eternal. That was causal or temporary; for the time being it was shown to Arjuna.



Upendra: "His body is eternally in spiritual existence par excellence." Purport: "The conception of virāḍ-rūpa or viśva-rūpa of the Supreme Absolute Truth is specially meant for the neophyte materialist who can hardly think of the transcendental form of the Personality of Godhead. To them a form means something of this material world and as such an opposite conception of the absolute is necessary for them in the beginning to concentrate their mind in the power extension of the Lord. As stated above the Lord extends His potency in the form of mahat-tattva which includes all material ingredients. The extension of power by the Lord and the Lord Himself personally are one in one sense but at the same time the mahat-tattva is different also from the Lord. Therefore the potency of the Lord and the Lord are non-different. The conception of the virāḍ-rūpa specially for impersonalist is thus non different from the eternal Form of the Lord. This eternal form of the Lord exists prior to the creation of the mahat-tattva and it is stressed here that the eternal Form of the Lord..."



Prabhupāda: Just like in the Bible it is said "God said, 'Let there be creation.' " That means before the creation, before this material creation, God was there. And the material... There was nothing material. Therefore, God's body cannot be material, because He existed before the creation of matter. So before creation of matter, there was nothing like matter, though God was there. Therefore conclusion is that God has no material body. He spoke, "Let there be creation." "He spoke" means He's a person; otherwise how He can speak? But His personality is not material, because when He spoke there was no material creation.



Therefore the persons with less intelligence, they cannot understand that God's body is not matter. They think that anything has got a body is matter; but that is not the case. The real thing is that God has got body, but not material body. And it is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā that īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. His body is eternal, full of bliss and full of knowledge. Just opposite. You have got this body which is neither eternal, nor full of bliss, nor full of knowledge. This body is full of ignorance and full of miseries and temporary. Therefore God hasn't got a body like this. When in the Vedic literature it is said that God has no body, that does not mean that He has no body. He has no body like this body, material body. Apāni-pādo javana gṛhīta. The Vedic literature says like this, that God has no leg, no hand. Therefore the impersonalists take advantage of it. "Oh, here it is stated God has no legs, no hands." But the next line is, javana gṛhīta: "He can accept everything which you offer Him in devotion."

Now how He can accept? If He has no hand, how He can accept things from us? That means He hasn't got a hand like us. His hand is different. Therefore even though He is situated in the spiritual world, which is far, far away from us, still, He says in the Bhagavad-gītā, it is said,

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

[Bg. 9.26]



Kṛṣṇa says that "A little flower or little water or a little leaf, whatever My devotee offers Me in love and devotion, I accept it." And tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam. "And because he has brought it with great devotion, therefore I eat." Tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam aśnāmi. Aśnāmi means "I eat." Now you can say, "All right, I'll offer these fruits and flower to God, but it is the same. It is remaining. How He is eating?" But His eating is not like my eating, because He hasn't got a body like this. This body is material. If you bring me a plate of fruits, this body immediately swallows it. But He has got spiritual body. He eats... Simply as soon as He knows that you have offered it in devotion, He eats immediately.



So these are, I mean to say, technical of understanding, and we can know it from Vedic literatures. Just like in the Vedas it is said, pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. We cannot imagine. Pūrṇam means full. If you take full from the full, still the balance is full. That is the spiritual calculation. Just like if you have got hundred dollars and I take hundred dollars from you. Still, you have got hundred dollars. This is beyond material conception. Here, one minus one equal to zero, and in the spiritual world, one minus one equal to one. Here one plus one equal to two. And in the spiritual world one plus one equal to one. So these things are very subtle. As we make progress in spiritual understanding... Just like how Kṛṣṇa can eat from such a distant place? No. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. He's within you. So His eating process is different, because His body is spiritual. Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya [Īśo Invocation]. He can take the whole thing; still, one minus one equal to one. Still, the... Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate. What is your question?

Viṣṇujana: I was going to ask if the rose-colored light that we see around the food when it's being offered up...



Prabhupāda: You can ask after we have finished all these things. Not within the lecture you cannot ask. What is that?



Upendra: "...the eternal form of the Lord is par excellence spiritual or transcendental to the modes of material nature. The very same transcendental form of the Lord is manifested by His internal potency and the formation of His multifarious manifestation of incarnations are always of the same transcendental quality without any touch of the mahat-tattva." Text number 4.



Prabhupāda: That's all right. Now what is your question?



Viṣṇujana: We offered food up one time to Kṛṣṇa.



Prabhupāda: Some fruit?



Viṣṇujana: Yes, fruit, to Kṛṣṇa. And while we were offering it up, when we raised our head we looked at the food and we saw a rose-colored light that was vibrating all around the food. Is this how He eats?



Prabhupāda: (pause) He eats. How He eats, that you can understand when you make advancement to that stage. He eats. For the time being, you just take it for granted that He eats. How He eats, that is not possible because you cannot see Him. And how can you see that how He is eating? So that requires spiritual vision, and we shall understand. But He eats, we take it. Because in the Bhagavad-gītā He says that "I eat." Aśnāmi. Aśnāmi means "I eat." (end)





720913SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.7

-

Los Angeles, September 13, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



dvitīyaṁ tu bhavāyāsya

rasātala-gatāṁ mahīm

uddhariṣyann upādatta

yajñeśaḥ saukaraṁ vapuḥ

[SB 1.3.7]



Translation: "The supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices accepted the incarnation of a boar, the second incarnation, and for the welfare of the earth He lifted the earth up from the nether regions of the universe."



Prabhupāda: So this universe, this universe is filled up with water, half. Whatever we are seeing, this is only half, like this. The other half we cannot see. So within this water, sometimes that Hiraṇyākṣa demon drowned this whole earth within this water. So at the present moment we cannot find such demons, but there were demons like that. The whole planetary system is floating, but there may be some demon who can take one of them and put within the water. The planets are floating; that is known to everyone. We can see, actually, that such a big, gigantic mass... Even the sun, which is fourteen hundred thousand times bigger than this earth, that is also floating in the outer space. The support is ananta. They say "law of gravitation"; we say Saṅkarṣaṇa. Saṅkarṣaṇa. So He is holding every planet, and it is said that all these universes are resting on the hood of Śeṣa-nāga just like a small grain of mustard.



So when we speak of "God is great," we cannot imagine how great He is. We apply frog philosophy, Dr. Frog's philosophy. Dr. Frog thinks, because he is in the well of three feet, if he is given the information, "Oh, there is a big mass of water, Atlantic Ocean," he cannot believe it. He will think in terms of the well. The well is three feet. So he may think, "All right, Atlantic Ocean may be four feet. All right, five feet. Come on. All right, six feet." So this Dr. Frog's philosophy. The so-called rascal philosophers and scientists, they are calculating God's creation. One of the universes is resting on Anantadeva's hood just like a mustard seed. Not only that...

yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ...

[Bs. 5.48]



Every universe has got a predominating deity, president. We can understand. In every country, there is a president to rule over the country. Similarly, to rule over this universe, there is a president. That is Brahmā, Lord Brahmā. Lord Brahmā's duration of life, span of life, you cannot calculate. You can calculate, but it is something like beyond our imagination. His one day is four hundred..., forty-three crores of years, one day. Similarly, one month, thirty days, one month; then twelve months, year. Such hundred years. So he lives such hundred years. So that Brahmā lives hundred years in his calculation; that is also a breathing period of Viṣṇu.

yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ...

[Bs. 5.48]



These gigantic universes, they are coming out from the hair holes of the body of Mahā-Viṣṇu or from His... Just like sometimes infected persons, they distribute germs from breathing, from perspiration. That is scientific. Similarly, Mahā-Viṣṇu's breathing and perspiration within the Causal Ocean, bringing forth so many universes. And each and every universe, there are so many planets, and one of the planets is this, earth, earthly planet.



So sometimes this earthly planet was thrown into the water, Garbhodaka-samudra, Garbhodaka Sea, and God took the form of a boar, having two tusks-because it was easier. Just like shovel, you take something like that. So He took the earth. So that is described: kṣitir iha vipulatare tiṣṭhati tava... No. What is that? Daśana-śikhare? The, this is described in Jayadeva's prayer. Vasati daśana-śikhare dharaṇī tava lagnā. Vasati, "is resting"; vasati daśana-śikhare, "on the top of the tusk." Keśava dhṛta-śūkara-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare. So He's yajñeśa. It is not that He's... is shape was just like hog, but He's not hog. Don't misunderstand. His shape was a gigantic hog. You can just imagine what kind of hog He was. The shape was like hog, but He was resting the whole planet, earthly planet, on the tusk. Vasati daśana-śikhare dharaṇī tava lagnā śaśini kalaṅka, keśava dhṛta-śūkara-rūpa. Here it is stated, saukaram. Saukaram means like hog. Not that He's hog. He's yajñeśa. He can take any shape. Just like here is, God has assumed the shape of a lion, half-lion, half-man. So He's all powerful, He can take any shape, any form, but He is not that form. That is for the time being. For the time being, He assumes so many forms. The real form is Kṛṣṇa, the original form. Keśava dhṛta-śūkara, sūkara-rūpa or śūkara-rūpa. "My Lord Keśava, You have assumed this form."

So there are many millions and millions of forms of God. According to time, necessity, circumstances, He assumes different forms. Because it is His business:

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



He appears as soon as there is discrepancies in the methodical way. Another place, indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokam [SB 1.3.28]. Indra. Indra means the heavenly god, and ari means enemy. So indrāri, the enemy of the king of heaven. That means demons. There are two classes of beings, human being, in the human state: the devatā and asura. So devatā means God conscious, Kṛṣṇa conscious. Anyone who is Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is devatā, demigod. And anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, he's demon. This is the difference. So that demon may be very big or small, it doesn't matter, but... Asuras tad-viparyayaḥ. Viparyayaḥ means "just the opposite." The devotees, they are demigods, and asura means just the opposite number of devotee; that means nondevotees. Those who are nondevotees, those who are not devotees of the Lord, they are all demons.



So demons are always disturbing. They'll create disturbance. That is... Their business is to create disturbance in the creation of the Supreme Lord. So this Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu, two brothers, they were creating so much disturbances. The whole world is disturbed only for the existence of the demons, asuri. At the present moment also, the world is full of demons. The devotees, their number is very, very small. Just like our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We can count within the finger how many we have got, Kṛṣṇa conscious; but demons, non-Kṛṣṇa conscious, nondevotees, there is no limit. Innumerable. So when demons are too much prominent, then Kṛṣṇa comes. So in the Kali-yuga He has appeared... Just like previously He appeared in the form of hog, similarly, Kṛṣṇa has appeared in this Kali-yuga in the form of His name. There is no difference between the form and name of God. God is absolute. Nāma-rūpe, in the form of name. So those who are disturbed by the demons may take shelter of this form of God, Hare Kṛṣṇa. Then you'll be saved. Otherwise, the demon will put you within the Pacific Ocean water. Just like this demon. But Kṛṣṇa will save you. As Prahlāda Mahārāja was put into the water by his father.

So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious means there will be so many enemies. Even father, what to speak of others? They will criticize, they will attack. I have recently received letter from Germany. Our devotees were attacked by a gang. So this is the way. As soon as you become God conscious, the demons will create disturbance. Just like Lord Jesus Christ. He was crucified by the demons. The only fault was that he was God conscious. Just see; such innocent person. The world is like that. So these dangers are there, but don't be afraid of. Kṛṣṇa will save you. And tolerate. If there are disturbances... Because it is the nature of this material world, as soon as there will be devotee, God conscious person, there will be so many enemies from the side of the demons. So we have to tolerate.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore has recommended:

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. Ādi 17.31]



You have to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra against the demons. Just like in Australia, the demons have instituted a case against us, a big case by the city authorities. So what can be done? They wanted to appoint big, big lawyers. I have advised, "Don't appoint lawyers. You go on chanting. They may put you in the jail. So you go on chanting." What is that? You chant on the street or chant on the jail, they're the same thing. So don't be afraid. They'll take you in the jail, "Go on, Hare Kṛṣṇa." We have got one means. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati: [SB 6.17.28] "Those who are devotees, they are not afraid of anything." Svargāpavarga-narakeṣv api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ: "Either they're sent in the heavenly planet or in the hell planet, it doesn't matter." We want simply to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and remember Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It doesn't matter whether it is in the hell or heaven.



So saukaraṁ vapuḥ. Dvitīyaṁ tu bhavāyāsya rasātala-gatāṁ mahīm, rasātala. We do not know what are the down planets. This is called... Bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ. This is bhūr-loka. Above this, there is bhuvar-loka, svarga-loka; above that, there is jana-loka; above that, there is mahar-loka; above that, there is siddha-loka. In this way, seven upper planetary system, and similarly, there are seven downwards. That is called tala, atala, talātala, rasātala, like that. Tala, atala, vitala, talātala, rasātala. So rasātala, the lowest, that means down the water, rasātala-gatām. Just like this morning we were calculating the depth of the Pacific Ocean. They are sometimes seven miles. So similarly, that Garbhodakaśāyī, Garbhodaka-samudra. Just imagine how deep it is. So within that deep water, the earth was put, and Kṛṣṇa in the shape of Varāha saved it. So Kṛṣṇa will save you. Others may disturb you, put you into the difficulty, but Kṛṣṇa will save you. Be assured. Don't be disappointed.

Kṛṣṇa says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. "My dear Kaunteya, you can declare to the world that anyone who is My devotee..." Devotee means pure devotee, anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11], without any other desires. Devotee means he wants to serve Kṛṣṇa, that's all. Not that in return he wants something. He is devotee. Devotion is not business: "Sir, I have come to Your temple. I am offering my obeisances. Now, my salary is five hundred dollars. Kindly make it two thousand." That is also devotion... Not devotion. That is appreciation of God, that "God can give me." That is also good. But those who are not coming to the temple, they are miscreants. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Those who are lowest of the mankind, miscreants, mūḍhas, rascals, they do not come even to God for asking something. They think that "We shall create our own..." But those who are pious, even though asking something from God, they are pious, because they have come to God.

So these people, those who are coming to the temple for some material amelioration, they are pious. But those who are not coming, they are duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ, narādhamāḥ. That is the description. But devotee means he does not ask anything from God. He simply wants to give, that is devotee. Just like gopīs. They never asked anything from Kṛṣṇa. (long pause)

Hmm. Now chant. (end)



720914SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.8

-

Los Angeles, September 14, 1972



Prabhupāda:



tṛtīyam ṛṣi-sargaṁ vai

devarṣitvam upetya saḥ

tantraṁ sātvatam ācaṣṭa

naiṣkarmyaṁ karmaṇāṁ yataḥ

[SB 1.3.8]



Third incarnation Devarṣi, ṛṣi among the demigods. Just like there are ṛṣis among the kings, they are called rājarṣi. In the Bhagavad-gītā the word rājarṣi is used. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Formerly the kings were just like great saintly persons. They were not ordinary vote collectors. They were so saintly there was no need of electing another president every five years. They are ṛṣis, these words are there. So in the third millennium, they were almost all ṛṣis. They were so enlightened that everyone of the population were just like great saints, saintly persons.



So this Devarṣi means Nārada, saintly sage among the demigods. He is also one of the demigods. So he compiled Vedic principles for executing devotional service, Nārada-pañcarātra. Our method, this devotional service, is according to the Nārada-pañcarātra. Especially in this age, Vedic system is not very much convenient. It is very strict. Just like according to Vedic system, if one wants to become a brāhmaṇa, he must be born of a brāhmaṇa father. Otherwise he cannot be accepted as a brāhmaṇa. But according to the Nārada-pañcarātra system, even if one is lowborn, he can be accepted as a brāhmaṇa by this reformatory process. Because kalau śūdra sambhavaḥ-everyone in this age is a śūdra. Śūdra means no intelligence, little better than animals, that's all.

So how from the śūdras a brāhmaṇa can be selected? According to the Vedic system, it is not possible. One, to be accepted as brāhmaṇa, must be son of a brāhmaṇa. That means background of the person must be brahminical culture. But if people are śūdras, where is the background of brahminical culture? Therefore Nārada, he is Vaiṣṇava, he is very compassionate to the fallen souls. He is travelling all over the universe to make Vaiṣṇavas. He made many sons of Dakṣa Mahārāja Vaiṣṇavas. So Dakṣa Mahārāja became very angry upon him, "Nārada, you come and you train my sons as Vaiṣṇavas, and they do not take care of the family affairs. So I curse you. You cannot stay anywhere more than some time." So even a Vaiṣṇava has to face some difficulty while preaching devotional service; even Nārada.

So sātvata-tantra means books or literature of devotional service. In the Vedas there are different departments, they are divided into three parts-karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa and upāsanā-kāṇḍa. Therefore the other name of the Vedas is trayī. Strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā: [SB 1.4.25] for women, for śūdras and for dvija-bandhus, sons of the higher class but not properly educated. Bandhu means friend, a man born by a brāhmaṇa father, but he is not qualified as a brāhmaṇa. He will be called a dvija-bandhu, not dvija. Dvija means twice-born; actually he is twice-born. The birds are also called twice-born: one birth is the egg, and the other birth is from the egg, closed. Similarly every human being is born śūdra, without any knowledge. Either he is born by the brāhmaṇa father or a śūdra father, he is born a śūdra, because there is no knowledge.

Brāhmaṇa means knowledge and śūdra means no knowledge, that is the difference. One who knows... Just like in this age there are so many scientists, so many philosophers, but they have no perfect knowledge. Therefore they are śūdras. One scientist putting forward one theory-after a few years this theory is changed. That means knowledge is not perfect. They take it as advancement in research, but actually the knowledge is imperfect. Otherwise, where is the necessity of research and advancement? Advancement means you are in the lower grade. So all their advancement, the same lower grade. Because it is going on, they do not know what is the end of advancement. Therefore all their knowledge is imperfect; they are all śūdras.

We cannot accept knowledge from śūdras. Knowledge must be taken from a brāhmaṇa.

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

[MU 1.2.12]



This word brahma-niṣṭham means brāhmaṇa, one who knows Brahman. Therefore knowledge has to be taken from a brāhmaṇa, not from a śūdra.



So reformatory system is to make one first of all a brāhmaṇa. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. Every person is born a śūdra, a rascal. Then by reformatory process... Just like we send our children to school, college, to teachers for reforming, that is reformation. The animals, they are unable to accept this reformatory process. You cannot send a cat or a dog to the school and become educated. That is not possible. All human beings, although they are born śūdra, he can be made a brāhmaṇa by the process. Saṁskāra means by reformatory process, bhaved dvijaḥ. Dvija means second birth. Second birth means by reformatory process, when he is eligible, then he is initiated by the spiritual master. That is second birth. Then initiation means he is allowed to study Vedic literature to achieve real knowledge. Because real knowledge means Vedic knowledge, and any knowledge which is not corroborated with the Vedic version, that is not knowledge; that is imperfect knowledge.

Therefore whenever we speak something, we quote from the Vedas, from Vedic literature, to support it. Otherwise it is useless. When you speak something and corroborate it by the quotation from the Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Upaniṣads-there are so many Vedic literatures-then it is correct. That is the Vedic system. Not that I create knowledge by my research. What is the value of your research? Because you are imperfect, your senses are imperfect, you cannot even see properly. Even you cannot see your eyelids, so what is the value of your seeing? You cannot see something from a distant place, the nearest place. There must be some adjustment, there must be light under so many conditions you can see. Then what is the value of your eyes?

Vedic knowledge is therefore not seen; it is heard. Therefore it is called śruti. Just like actually we do not understand what is the position of different planets by seeing. But when you hear from authorities, from astrologists, from astronomers, then you can understand, "The sun is so great, bigger." That means hearing is perfect knowledge, not seeing. Therefore Vedic knowledge is received through the ear. To hear from the authorized persons, that is knowledge.

So Nārada Muni created this, thinking of the poor people of this age without perfect knowledge. Why this education is required? Because naiṣkarmyam, without producing fruitive result. What is that work? Any work you do, there must be some result. Either you do good work or bad work, it..., there is work, there must be some result. That is our experience. We cannot do anything which has no result. But if that result is offered to God, Kṛṣṇa, then it is without result. So that work is not stopped. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna's work was not stopped. He was a fighter; rather, he wanted to stop his work. He said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, what is the use of fighting? They are all my kinsmen; let them enjoy. I don't want this kingdom." He wanted to become a gentleman without working. No, that without working is work because he was considering in his own terms. But when he fought on the advice of Kṛṣṇa, that is naiṣkarmya-without result. Because fighting, suppose Arjuna has killed so many persons, so he is supposed to be under so much tribulation because he has killed so many persons. But because that was done for Kṛṣṇa, that is naiṣkarmya-no result; means work which does not produce any reaction. Other work just like in this life those who are working for sense gratification, they are creating another body.

So it is not fruitless. If you work piously, then you create next life. Life is continuous. We are simply transmigrating from one body to another. So by our work we are creating the next body. So if you be engaged in devotional service, then you do not create another material body. Karma means by working you create another future. But naiṣkarmya means you work, but don't create another future. Everyone has future, but devotional service means end of all future. That does not mean zero. The śūnyavādīs, the voidists, they also want to make it zero, but it is actually not zero. Zero of these material activities. Kṛṣṇa says, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so 'rjuna: [Bg. 4.9] "One who has understood about Kṛṣṇa, he, after giving up this body, he does not get another birth."

Birth means material body. There is no birth of the soul. The soul transmigrates from one body to another. That is called birth. Otherwise there is not birth. Na jāyate na mriyate, the soul does not take birth nor dies. If there is no birth, then where is death? The body has got birth, therefore there is death. Anything which takes birth, it has got death. But soul is part and parcel of God, God is eternal, therefore soul is eternal. Therefore it is said we give up this gross body or subtle body but we do not die. Just like we change our dress-I give up this shirt or dress-but I do not die. Similarly, the soul is changing, accepting another material body. The result of devotional service is that you do not accept another material body, but you remain in your spiritual body. The soul is spirit, the soul has got spiritual body-hands, legs, mouth, everything-otherwise, how this dress is made? Dress is made according to the body. So unless you have got spiritual body, how we have got this material hand?

So by discharging devotional service, you don't create another body. That means you remain in your pure, spiritual body. Otherwise, karmaṇā: you have to create another body, either human body, cat's body, dog's body, or demigod's body, fish body, tree body, so many-8,400,000 kinds of body. So unless you take to devotional service, you will have to repeat this business of transmigrating from one body to another.

So Nārada Muni compiled these śāstras, tantra. Tantra means expansion. Just like there is notebook. Just like Vedānta-sūtra, the lessons are given in codes. Just like the businessmen, they send code. One word composed of four letters, it has got so many meanings. So those who are using those codes, they can understand, "By this code, this sentence or this paragraph is meant." Similarly, the Vedānta-sūtra is giving Vedic knowledge in codes-athāto brahma jijñāsā, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12)-in this way. This janmādy asya yataḥ code is explained by the whole Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, eighteen thousand verses to explain this one code. Similarly, the Vedic knowledge is expanded, or also contracted. So tantra is expansion, because ordinary men cannot understand Vedic knowledge. Just like Mahābhārata, it is in the form of history, but in it is Vedic instruction. Similarly, in this Nārada-pañcarātra made by Devarṣi Nārada, it is also Vedic.

Just like we are writing these books, English translations, giving purports. This is also Vedic, because our basis is on the Vedic knowledge. We don't take so-called scientists' knowledge or philosophers' knowledge. We derive it from the Vedas. Therefore tantra means which expands the Vedic knowledge.

ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ



It is said in the Nārada-pañcarātra that a person who is not a Vaiṣṇava, he cannot become a guru. "A person born or qualified brāhmaṇa and knows all the mantras and tantras, but if he is an impersonalist, then he cannot become guru," avaiṣṇavo gurur na syāt, "whereas a person born in a low family, but he is a great devotee, he shall be accepted as a devotee, he shall be accepted as a guru." Tantra means Vedic knowledge expanded.



So by discharging devotional service, we become freed from the cycle of birth and death and go back home, back to Godhead. This tantra was compiled by Nārada Ṛṣi.

Thank you very much. (end)



720915SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.9

-

Los Angeles, September 15, 1972



Prabhupāda: So the Lord sometimes appears as... Whenever the Lord takes the incarnation, He appears to be like ordinary human being. So in this incarnation, Nara-nārāyaṇa, They undertook severe penances to teach us. So what was the purpose of such severe penance? For sense controlling. The modern civilization is to give freedom to sense satisfaction, because they cannot control. Just like you are riding on a horse, but the horse is not under your control, then you say, "Let it go to hell, never mind." This is the position. Because they cannot control the senses, they have taken this philosophy that liberating sense gratification is the ultimate goal of life. And the result is that they are going to hell.



Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. The problem is they cannot control the senses. Therefore their philosophical idea is that sense gratification is the ultimate goal of life. They are thinking, which will never be successful, that by advancement of material comforts they will be happy. Therefore the śāstra says impossible or very difficult or by a kind of hope which will never to be fulfilled. It was never successful in the past, it is not successful in the present, therefore in the future also it will never be successful. But they have taken up this philosophy of sense gratification materially.

Because we have got this propensity that we shall be able to become happy by sense gratification, therefore God comes to teach them. Just like Bhagavad-gītā, Lord Kṛṣṇa says,

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



"As soon as people are misled in their occupational duty, I will take my incarnation." So Nara-nārāyaṇa, They are incarnation of God, but They underwent severe penances. The Nara-nārāyaṇa temple is there in Badarikāśrama in the Himalayas. People still go there to show their respects to Nara-nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi. So God or His representative comes always to help us, to deliver us from the wrong path of sense gratification. They executed very difficult...



Just like Dhruva Mahārāja, a five-year-old boy. He also executed very severe types of penances. For the first six months, he was eating only the dry foliage that had fallen on the ground, then water..., no. Altogether he underwent penances for six months, so the first month, second, third, like that. So first he used to eat the leaves of the tree, then dried leaves, then simply water, then simply air, then no eating at all. Within six months he was successful to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, face to face.

So penance required. This human life is not meant for enjoying senses like the dogs and hogs. That is not life. We have got advanced sense, consciousness, we can understand what is good, what is bad. At least that talent we have got, even though we are misguided. So we should take guidance from a perfect source of knowledge, and utilize it for making our life perfect. That is wanted; not that because "I want sense gratification, so let me have complete freedom for sense gratification. That is the idea now, life." No, that is not ideal. As I have several times explained to you that law is meant for human beings. What is law? Law means restrictions. You cannot have sense gratification unrestricted; that is law. Otherwise, what is the meaning of law? Just like when we are driving car, the law is red light, we have to stop. That is law. Because if you unrestrictedly drive your car, there will be accident. Either you will die or somebody will die.

Therefore law is required. How can you say that "Unrestrictedly I will enjoy my senses"? That is chaotic condition of life. The so-called civilization, so-called unrestricted sense gratification allowed in the name of freedom, that is disastrous. One must learn how to control. Controlling the senses, this is civilization. To become cats and dogs, that is not civilization. Dog civilization, cat civilization, hog civilization, camel civilization, this is going on.

So cats and dogs, they're voting. So what they will vote, cats and dogs? They will vote another big cat, big dog, that's all. So what the big dog, big cat can do? That is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ [SB 2.3.19]. A leader means voted by some hogs, by some dogs, by some camels, and by some asses. This is the position of the society. Suppose there are many dogs in this Los Angeles city... Of course, camels you haven't got, but there are many asses also. At least in Indian cities we find there are many hogs, many dogs, many camels, many asses. So if they are called for votes, "Now we are taking vote for this, for this," what is the value of that election? Is there any value?

So actually we are collecting votes from dogs, hogs, camels and asses. How? The dog means very obedient servant of his master. That is a good qualification, but after all he is a dog. But to execute the service of his master, he is offending so many people. We have got experience. We have nothing to do with the dog's master's house, but still from the house, we are passing from the street. Unnecessarily offending. Sometimes they come nearer. This is dog's business. He has no sense that "This man, they are not thieves or rogues, they are not coming here." But they will do their business because the master has trained him.

So similarly, people at the present moment, those who are serving under some master, capitalist, the master says that you have to vote for that person. They will vote, they have no personal discrimination. The master says, "I will give you some money," they will vote. Or in other words, kalau śūdra sambhava. Śūdra means servant. The dog is faithful servant; that is his only qualification. And hogs means no discrimination of food. So actually at the present moment people have no discrimination of food. Anything they will eat. Actually people are supposed to eat that which is beneficial for him. Not that anything and everything I shall eat. No. So therefore the hog has no discrimination of food. So if people become like that, no discrimination of sex, no discrimination of food, he is hog. He is not a human being.

So to become obedient servant and to have no discrimination of sex and food, that means dogs, and they are not human beings. And camel, although he is a big animal, he takes pleasure in eating his own blood. How is that? You will find the camels are very fond of eating thorns. So the thorns they eat, and the thorns cut the tongue, and the blood comes out. It makes a taste, and he is thinking that the thorns are very tasteful. That is camel. Similarly, we are everyone camel because we are enjoying sex. What is this sex? I am spoiling my blood. One drop of semina is created by sixty drops of blood. That is scientific. So when one discharges this semina, he thinks he is enjoying. He does not know that he is spoiling his blood. That is camel. He thinks he is enjoying. He does not think that "I am spoiling my blood. And if I spoil my blood more, then I shall be attacked with so many diseases, I will lose my resistance power." He does not know. But he thinks that sex enjoyment is very nice. It is not nice at all.

So therefore dog, hog, camel and ass. What is that ass I have several times given you. The ass means he is working for others for the washerman. So all these businessmen, very busy, but he is working for others, not for himself. He will eat, I suppose, a few slices of bread and a cup of tea or milk; that will satisfy him. But he wants daily one million dollars, and he has to work very hard because a million dollars is not so easy to get. The ass loads on the back tons of clothes of the washerman, and he carries it to the place where they wash, and again carries back. But he is satisfied with a little grass. The ass does not know that "I can get this little grass, there are thousands and thousands of tons of grass on the outer field. Why I am engaged in the service of this washerman and doing this?" He has no sense. He thinks that carrying the tons of clothes for the washerman he has responsibility in business, so many things.

So actually the modern men, without being properly civilized, without being properly educated, they are exactly like dogs, hogs, camels and asses. We take it like that, they are no better than. So what is the votes of them? What will they choose? They will choose another big camel or big cat or big dog, that's all, because he doesn't know. If you are human being, you know who is another human being. But if you are dog, camel and ass, how can you understand who is a human being? Therefore people sometimes misunderstand us, just like the dog comes: bow, wow, wow, wow. Similarly, the society of dogs, they also come, making their chase upon these Kṛṣṇa conscious people. They take away from the street. They do not know that they are the best persons in the world. They are disseminating the message of God, making people men of character. No illicit sex, no gambling, that is character. They are becoming saintly person, always chanting. But they have no respect. Because they are dogs, hogs, how they can respect? So because they have no discrimination, these animals, then how they will choose to make the president a first-class man? He has no choice.

So to become actual human being, one has to undergo tapasya. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa, jñānena, śamena, damena [SB 6.1.13]. This is the prescription, that if you want to become actually a human being, then you have to undergo tapasya, brahmacarya, śama, dama, titikṣā [Bg. 18.42]. These things have to be practiced. Not that because I want sense gratification, therefore let me under the name of independence, let me become naked and have sex life on the street. That day is coming. It already has come to some extent. They are taking this as freedom. This freedom is not very good. This freedom means that as soon as you become so free that to have sex life on the street like cats and dogs and hogs, you will get your next life. Nature will give you very good chance, that "All right, you have got this human form of life to understand God, but you have misused it. Now you want to become hog? Please become hog." How you can check it? Is there any science to check? Because after this death, all this science and philosophy is finished after this body is finished. Then you are under the control of nature. What will you do? The nature will force you to enter the womb of a hog or a dog. How you can check it?

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



You are not independent, you are part and parcel of God. God wants you to come back home and live peacefully. If you do not do that, then you will have to undergo the severe punishments of transmigrating from one body to another. And there are 8,400,000 bodies in which you will have to suffer. And you can see that they are suffering. So don't misuse this human form of life; don't give way to the sense gratification. Have a little tapasya. Not severe tapasya, not like Nara-nārāyaṇa. They went to the Himalayas and underwent severe, very severe, just like Dhruva Mahārāja. In this age it is not possible; therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given you a concession. You take these sixteen words, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Chant these sixteen rounds. If you can increase, all right, or these sixteen rounds. And observe these four principles-no illicit sex, no gambling, no meat-eating, no intoxication. Is it very difficult?



But we are not even prepared to undergo such a little tapasya, penance. What is that difficulty? We don't eat meat, and instead we get nice other food. So what is the difficulty? If we don't become hogs and enjoy senses like hogs without discrimination of mother, sister and daughter, if we become attached to one wife and enjoy life, what is the difficulty? No, although I have got my wife, I am implicated with others' wives; I have got husband, I am implicated with others' husbands. No tapasya. They are not prepared for any kind of tapasya. They want cats' and dogs' lives. Therefore their next life is waiting, cats and dogs.

So this is the position. Nara-nārāyaṇa, They underwent severe penances just like Dhruva Mahārāja. But in this age it is not possible. But at least observe these short penances, little penances, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and make your life successful. What is the difficulty? But we are not still prepared. And still we do not take it very seriously, because our past life is so sinful that even coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness we are being disturbed. Our sinful activities are so strong that even coming to the point of Kṛṣṇa consciousness we are falling down, again falling down. So be careful, be cautious, and execute your duty as Kṛṣṇa conscious people. You will be happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



720916SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.10

-

Los Angeles, September 16, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



pañcamaḥ kapilo nāma

siddheśaḥ kāla-viplutam

provācāsuraye sāṅkhyaṁ

tattva-grāma-vinirṇayam

[SB 1.3.10]



Translation: "The fifth incarnation, named Lord Kapila, is foremost amongst perfected beings. He gave an exposition of the creative elements and metaphysics to Āsuri Brāhmaṇa, for in course of time this knowledge had been lost."



Prabhupāda: So sāṅkhyam. Sāṅkhyam means... Sam means complete, khyam means description. "Complete description of creation." Kāla-viplutam, there is complete description how the cosmic manifestation is created, but people forget it, kāla-viplutam. So this knowledge is existing since the time of creation. Everything materially created has got six stages. The first stage is creation, and the second stage is growth. The third stage is maintenance, the fourth stage is production, the fifth stage is dwindling, and the sixth stage, vanishing. This is anything material.



The scientists, they are very much busy. Just this morning our scientist, Svarūpa Dāmodara, was speaking about an article: the scientists are very much busy that the source of supply is being decreased. Just like petroleum. Petroleum, gas, that is diminishing. Now, whole modern materialistic civilization is depending on the motorcars and aeroplanes, transportation. So if the petroleum supply is stopped, then what will be the condition of the society? Formerly there was no need of going to see a friend thirty miles away, because every friend was within the village. Now, because we have got motorcar, we create friendship with a man who lives fifty miles away. We accept a job fifty miles away. In Hawaii our Gaurasundara was going to attend office fifty miles off. By fifty miles off... In big, big cities like New York, Calcutta, we have seen people are coming to attend their office from hundred miles off. I have seen also in aeroplane there are many people... I have seen in England. Many workers or gentlemen, they are coming from Glasgow to London for working, by aeroplane.

So we have created a civilization that... We have created a facility for transport by motorcar or by aeroplane, but side by side, we have created another difficulty, that a man has to go to his work three hundred miles away. Side by side. Formerly, a man used to work on his field, a few steps from his house. Now we have created facility of transport; therefore we have to go to work three hundred miles away from home. This is the position. But they have no brain. They're thinking they're advancing. (chuckles) Advancing in this way, that "For my livelihood I have to go three hundred miles, three hours at least, not less than three hours. Or six hours I have to spoil. Then I can go to my office. Then I work there whole day, and again come, again six hours. Then I come at night to sleep along with my family for three hours." Yes. This is our facility. Yes.

One... There is a story. Not story, it is a fact. One day, one grown-up child was asking his mother, "Who is this gentleman?" The father was there. So the mother said, "He is your father, my dear child." So he did not see his father until he grew three years or four years old. Because when he was child, the father was rising early in the morning. At that time, child was sleeping. And he was going to office, and when he comes back, the child was sleeping. So unless the child grew four years old, he could not see his father. Is it not the position of this? It is a story or an instruction, because the man, the gentleman, was going office early in the morning... There are still. They start at six o'clock from home to catch the first train. We have seen in Calcutta. First train is seven o'clock, and they come in Calcutta after two hours, nine o'clock. Then attends office, and again he catches another train, five o'clock. He goes, late at night. In Bombay also, big, big cities. This is the position.

So we are advancing in science, but at the same time, the so-called science, at the same time we are creating many disadvantages. Many disadvantages. From practical experience I say that when I came to your country... In India it is very difficult to get a telephone. You have to wait in the waiting list at least for two years or you have to bribe the authorities, say, five thousand, two thousand, like that. So when I got this facility of telephone... Because as soon as I deposited forty dollars... Forty dollars? The next day the telephone was in my room. So I was very glad. But after getting my telephone, I was disturbed always. (laughter) Some of my students asking, phoning me, (telephone sound) cling, cling, and "Swamiji, how you are feeling?" At twelve o'clock at night. (laughter). Yes. So I asked him, it is the time to inquire? I am very sorry. Not only one, I become so much disturbed. Then I asked them, get out this telephone. Yes.

So try to understand. The so-called facility of the modern science means creating so many difficulties also. That is the position. Just like formerly, a preacher could not come to your country, say, fifty years or a hundred years ago. So he was preaching within his limit. But we have got now facilities, so we are preaching everywhere. So from Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we can utilize all facilities in the proper channel. But not materially. Now, we are utilizing this facility of aeroplane; that means we are getting good chance for serving Kṛṣṇa. But others, materialists, they are getting this facility so that his child cannot recognize him. So we can take all facilities... So therefore we are actually utilizing the scientific improvements for the benefit of the people; the karmīs, they cannot. They are in difficulties, in the actually...

So the sāṅkhya philosophy, sāṅkhya philosophy is analytical study of the elements of creation. Samyak khyāyate. Samyak means completely, khyāyate. So how? First of all, there was vibration; then, from vibration there was sky, creation, beginning of creation. And then, from sky there was sound; then, from sound there was air; then, from air there was electricity, or fire; then, from electricity there was water, and from water there is land. This is shortly described. Then how this mind is created, intelligence is created, how the controller created? These are described in the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also, in many places. So it is not that we are simply chanting and dancing. That is the ultimate goal of life. But we know how this creation has taken place, how it is being maintained, how it will be annihilated, what will happen after annihilation-everything we know by this sāṅkhya philosophy. But they do not know. The so-called scientists, they are troubled what will happen next. That is the...

So Kapila Muni is incarnation of God. He described the sāṅkhya philosophy and bhakti-yoga. In the Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, His instructions are there. He was giving instruction to His mother, Devahūti. His father left Him under the care of the mother. He went to forest for liberation. So when He grew up, He instructed His mother. He's known..., Kapiladeva is known as Devahūti-putra, the son of Devahūti. All incarnation of God is famous, especially by mother's name. Just like Kṛṣṇa is famous by Yaśodā-nandana, Devakī-nandana. He is very much pleased when His name is made in connection with His mother and father. Nanda-nandana, Vasudeva-nandana. Similarly, here also, Devahūti-nandana, Devahūti-putra Kapila. So this Kapiladeva sāṅkhya philosophy has described how the elements came in, how the subtle elements mind, intelligence develop, how these gross elements earth, water, fire, all these gross elements develop.

So there are eight elements, namely... They are described in Bhagavad-gītā also. Five gross elements: earth, water, fire, air, ether. These are gross elements. And the subtle or finer elements are the mind, intelligence, ego. These are eight elements. And the subjects of sense perception, and ten sense organs. Ten sense organs, five subject matter of sense perception, fifteen, and these eight elements, material elements, fifteen and eight, twenty-three, and avyakta, or the living entity. And then God. In this way the whole philosophy is described. That is called sāṅkhya philosophy.

So sāṅkhya philosophy is always there. Kāla-viplutam. In due course of time, everything becomes invisible or unknown. Just like Bhagavad-gītā. Bhagavad-gītā was spoken long, long ago, before speaking to Arjuna. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. Therefore, all Vedic knowledge, they are not research knowledge. They are existing always, since the time of creation. These so-called scientists, they are simply wasting their time by so-called research work. There is nothing to be researched. Everything is there. Every knowledge is there. How to make your life perfect, that is also there, but they will not consult this knowledge. They will try to make a research and waste time and waste money, public money, and pass on as great scientist, philosopher, leaders, politician, and mislead people, without any factual knowledge. Now they are thinking, at the present moment, the scientists, that things are diminishing. Actually, they'll diminish. It is already stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It will so diminish that there will be no more wheat, no more rice, no more food grains, no more fruits, and no more milk, no more sugar. It will be finished. Simply you have to eat stones and seeds and flesh. You'll have to. And the politicians will go on exploiting.

Everything is written there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. You consult Twelfth Canto. Beginning from Second Chapter you'll see, all these things are mentioned. People will decrease their span of life, their intelligence, memory, their propensity for mercifulness, and duration of life, so many things. That will be reduced. And you are seeing, they are being reduced. And people are becoming vagabonds. That is also stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That when I first read in India the statement lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam, that "In this age, dwindling age, people will think of himself, one will think he has become very beautiful by keeping long hairs." That is also mentioned. So when I came to your kind country, I saw these young people are keeping long hairs. So it was immediately corroborated. Similarly, everything is described there. The dām-patye ratim eva hi: husband and wife relationship means sex. This is the age. As soon as the husband will be unable to satisfy his wife by sex, he will find out another husband and file divorce. These are stated already in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And these are happening. And a man, when he lives for twenty to thirty years, he will be considered grand old man. These are all stated. So why research? You consult Vedic literature, you have got all information, everything. How the world is created, how it will be annihilated, how it is being maintained, who is the Supreme in this management-everything is there. That is called Sāṅkhya philosophy. Everything is there.

So Kapiladeva, He gave us this sāṅkhya philosophy. Later on, there was another. He imitated. He also named himself Kapila, and he gave the same philosophical process, sāṅkhya philosophy, Kapila. That is nirīśa; he's godless. Because all the scientists, all the philosophers in this age, their only tendency is how to get out God, "No more God. That is very primitive. To talk of God is a primitive idea. Now we are advanced in science; why we shall talk about God?" This is the tendency. This is the tendency. But how you can solve all these questions without accepting God? Without accepting a supreme source of everything, how you can solve? It is not possible. You are simply a product of this cosmic manifestation. Your brain, your teeny brain is composed of some muscles and veins. That is product of this material world. You cannot even produce a brain. Just consider. Can you produce a brain? You are eulogizing a great scientist like Professor Einstein. All right. Why not Professor Einstein creating a brain like him? Why? What is the difficulty? He may create a brain like him and keep it in the glass case so that there will be no shortage of scientific men. But why he dies? Why he dies? Who is forcing him to death? Why he becomes diseased? Why he becomes old man? Who is controlling?

So to accept the supreme controller is a must question. You must! Without it, you cannot go forward. You must have to accept. We can, we can appreciate the brain of a scientist, but how, what the is who has created that brain? We are seeing to that person, who has created, not to the brain. Just like a child appreciates a motorcar, how it is running. But his father appreciates the driver, that how the driver is running nicely. So therefore, we should not be surprised by the creation or the working of material nature. We should appreciate who is conducting, who is the background of this material nature.

That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate

[Bg. 9.10]



He says, mayādhyakṣeṇa, "Under My direction," Kṛṣṇa says, "Prakṛti, this material nature, is working." Mayādhyakṣeṇa. Just see how he is working, how prakṛti is working. Just like in this month in your country, it is called fall? September? After a few days, so many trees will fall, all the leaves will fall down. Again in April, immediately, millions of leaves will grow, immediately, all. If you have to manufacture these leaves, one after another, and set up in the tree, just see, how much difficult it will be. But by the laws of nature, by God's energy, immediately, within a few days, millions of trees are getting their leaves again and millions of trees, they are falling. Millions of fruits are coming out. Similarly, all this cosmic manifestation came into existence simply by the will of God. Not that... Just like in season, there are hundreds and thousands and millions of fruits. You haven't got to create each fruit. When the season is there, the fruits are all ready, immediately. Similarly, when God says, "Let there be creation," millions of planets, immediately created. That is God. Not that cheap God, "I am God." In your country they come, and you become cheated. We don't accept such cheap God. We want this God. Simply by His will, millions of universes are created.



yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kāla-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.48]



We are not seeking after a cheap God. Real God. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **.



So we are not so fool that... Why we shall make research? Everything is there. So we are confident. We know what is going to happen. It is not astrology. It is... Everything is there in the Vedic knowledge. Veda means knowledge, full knowledge. You take advantage of it and become learned.

Thank you. (end)



720917SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.11-12

-

Los Angeles, September 17, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



ṣaṣṭham atrer apatyatvaṁ

vṛtaḥ prāpto 'nasūyayā

ānvīkṣikīm alarkāya

prahlādādibhya ūcivān

[SB 1.3.11]



Translation: "The sixth incarnation of the puruṣa was the son of the sage Atri. He was born in the womb of Anasūyā, who prayed for an incarnation. He spoke on the subject of transcendence to Alarka, Prahlāda and others, (Yadu, Haihaya, etc.)."



Prabhupāda: Purport?



Pradyumna: "The Lord incarnated Himself as Dattātreya, the son of Ṛṣi Atri and Anasūyā. The history of the birth of Dattātreya as an incarnation of the Lord is mentioned in the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa in connection with the story of the devoted wife. It is said there that Anasūyā, the wife of Ṛṣi Atri, prayed before the lords Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva as follows: 'My lords, if you are pleased with me and if you desire me to ask from you some sort of blessings, then I pray that you combine together to become my son.' This was accepted by the lords, and as Dattātreya the Lord expounded the philosophy of the spirit soul and especially instructed Alarka, Prahlāda, Yadu, Haihaya, etc."



Prabhupāda: So here we see that you can have God as your son. There are so many instances. Just like Devakī got Kṛṣṇa as his (her) son; mother Yaśodā got God as his (her) son; Śacī-mātā, (s)he also got Caitanya Mahāprabhu as son. So this is better philosophy than to accept God as father. That is especially in the Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Others, the impersonalist, voidists, they have no conception of God. Voidists-"Ultimately everything is zero," and the impersonalists, "God has no form." Both are the same thing, in a different language. The voidists, they say, "Ultimately there is nothing but zero," and the impersonalists statement that "Maybe something, but it is not person, it is imperson."



Therefore in the Padma Purāṇa this Buddhist theory, voidism, and the Śaṅkara's theory, impersonalism, they are taken as one and the same. Pracchannaṁ bauddham ucyate. Pracchannaṁ bauddham. The Buddhists, they decline to accept the authority of Vedas, and the Māyāvādīs, the impersonalists, they want to accept the authority of Vedas, but under the garb of Buddhism. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given His remark, veda nā māniyā bauddha haya ta' nāstika. According to Vedic line of thought, anyone who does not accept the authority of Vedas, he is called atheist. Just like the Muhammadans, they also call "kafir." One who does not accept the authority of Koran, they call "kafir." And the Christians also, they call "heathens." So there are different terms. So according to our Vedic line of thought, anyone who does not accept the Vedic way of life, he is called atheist. Therefore Buddhist, according to Vedantists, Buddhist are called atheist. Actually Buddha philosophy does not accept God, neither soul. They simply philosophize on the material elements, and they want to finish the material exis..., dismantle the material elements. Nirvāṇa. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu has remarked that the Buddhists are honest. They frankly say that "We don't accept your Vedas." But the Shankarites, they are cheaters, because they are accepting Vedas, but on the basis of Buddha philosophy. That is cheating.

So there are many conception of God. But there is a conception of God: to accept God as son. That is only in Vaiṣṇava philosophy, because we are eternal servants of God. That is our philosophy. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. The living entity, his real constitutional position is to serve God. We have several times explained this fact, that the part and parcel of God must be engaged in the service of the Lord. Just like this finger is part and parcel of my body. Its duty is to serve the body. It has no other duty. The finger cannot go elsewhere and serve something else; it must serve my body. Therefore, it is part and parcel. Similarly, if I am part and parcel of God, then my only duty is to serve God. This is Vaiṣṇava philosophy. So therefore, in Vaiṣṇava philosophy, everything in relationship with God is service.

You have seen the picture in our Nectar of Devotion. Kṛṣṇa's friends... Kṛṣṇa is resting. They are all engaged in service. Somebody is fanning, somebody is massaging. Although they are friends, there is equality, none of them think that Kṛṣṇa is greater than them. No. They think, "Kṛṣṇa is our friend, very nice friend, very beautiful friend, and very powerful friend." Every day they go to the forest, and they see one demon is killed by Kṛṣṇa. So they become very much devoted. Their love for Kṛṣṇa increased by seeing Kṛṣṇa's activities, beauty, opulence. Similarly, the gopīs. So they did not think Kṛṣṇa is God. They did not know. Even Mother Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja, all the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, they did not know, neither they did care to know whether Kṛṣṇa is God or not. They simply loved Kṛṣṇa, without any identification. We are worshiping God, Kṛṣṇa, because we are impressed with so many things, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, He is the Absolute Truth. And therefore we are little inclined. "All right, let us serve Kṛṣṇa if He is God." You see? There is some condition: "If Kṛṣṇa is God, so if I do not love, if I do not worship, there may be something wrong." So that is business. But amongst the gopīs and the cowherds boy and the Vṛndāvana inhabitants, there is no business. "We love Kṛṣṇa unconditionally. That's all. We do not know anything except Kṛṣṇa." This is Vṛndāvana atmosphere.

So mother Yaśodā, Nanda and other elderly gopīs, they used to treat Kṛṣṇa as son, as beloved son, because if we accept God as father or mother... There is conception of mother also. The śāktas... There are many devotees of Durgā, Kālī. They also accept the mother. The Christians accept as father. The conception of father and mother, that is good, but there is little service... Because children, they take service from the mother and father. They give, render very little service to the father and mother. Every children, every man, every woman has taken so much services from the father and mother. Everyone knows that. Just like those who are mothers here, how much service they are giving to the little children, how much careful they are that their child may not be in some difficulty, always anxious. Similarly, this philosophy, to accept God as son, means opportunity for rendering more service than to accept God as father.

God is neither father nor... He is father. Actually He is father, because He is the origin of everything. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Kṛṣṇa also says, ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]. Pitā means father. So actually, God's position is father. He is father of everything. Not... All living entities, all material energy. As... If you discover something, it is called "the father of this scientific discovery." So He has discovered everything, material and spiritual both. Therefore He is original father of everyone. Not only of the living entities, but also stones, woods, earth, water, fire, everything. He has created. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva..., prakṛtir me aṣṭadhā, bhinnā prakṛtir me aṣṭadhā [Bg. 7.4]. In the Bhagavad-gītā. So He has created everything. He is actually the father. But out of love, the devotees, they accept the father as son, to give more service. Father is obliged to give service to the son. He has given birth; therefore he has obligation to maintain the son, to give service.

So here, if you accept God as son, then you cannot avoid the obligation of service. In other way you can avoid. This is compulsory. Therefore sometimes devotees, they pray... Here it is said..., prayed for. The sixth incarnation of the puruṣa was the son of the sage Atri. He was born in the womb of Anasūyā, who prayed for an incarnation. She requested that "You all three, you become my son." So next.

Pradyumna: Next verse?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tataḥ saptama ākūtyāṁ

rucer yajño 'bhyajāyata

sa yāmādyaiḥ sura-gaṇair

apāt svāyambhuvāntaram

[SB 1.3.12]



Translation: "The seventh incarnation was advented as Yajña, the son of Prajāpati Ruci and his wife Ākūti. He controlled the period changed by the Svāyambhuva Manu, assisted by demigods, as His son Yama and others."



Prabhupāda: So you are marking that so many incarnation of God have been described. We are now in the seventh. So there is chronological number, which incarnation, what is His chronological number, what is His father's name, what is His mother's name, what are His activities, how the bodily feature, what is the mission. Everything is described in the śāstra. Nowadays any rascal comes, and he says, "I am incarnation." What is your father's name? Whatever it is described? Whether in the śāstra? Because incarnation, we cannot accept any rascal as incarnation without proper identification. But it has become a fashion now. Any rascal comes, says, "I am incarnation of God." So where is the mention? Some rascal says, "I was formerly Rāma and Kṛṣṇa." Another rascal accepts, "Oh, you were Rāma and Kṛṣṇa?"



So this kind of rascalism is not very good. You must accept the incarnation of God according to the description in the śāstras. Not one rascal cheats you and you also become another rascal to accept it. Don't do that. You must know what are the indication of incarnation. This question was raised by Sanātana Gosvāmī to Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because in this age of Kali, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's incarnation is stated in the śāstra, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in the Upaniṣad, in Mahābhārata. There are evidences. He appeared as the son of Jagannātha Miśra, but His incarnation is stated in the śāstra. Therefore we accept Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu as incarnation. Caitanya Mahāprabhu never said that "I am incarnation." Rather, to warn the ordinary people that they should not accept any so-called incarnation, when somebody stated Caitanya Mahāprabhu that "You are incarnation of Kṛṣṇa," He immediately blocked His ears: "Don't say like that. It is great offense, great offense." Because He was playing the part of devotee. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was teaching us how to execute devotional service. And He deprecated Māyāvāda philosophy in so many ways. He was to establish the worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He was exemplifying Himself, how to become a devotee. So He never mentioned that He is incarnation. But we understand from the features of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu that He (is) incarnation of Kṛṣṇa.

It is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam [SB 11.5.32]. Kṛṣṇa-varṇam. Kṛṣṇa varṇayati, or in the category of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa-varṇam. And tviṣā akṛṣṇa, by His complexion He is not black. Akṛṣṇa. Akṛṣṇa means not black. So not black. It may be other color. Yes. That may be. But in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said... When Gargamuni was preparing the horoscope of Kṛṣṇa, he said, śuklo raktas tathā pīta idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ. Incarnation of God, either white, śuklo raktaḥ, either red, yellow, or black. These colors accepted. So Gargamuni said, śuklo raktas tathā pīta idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ: "Your son, this son, formerly He appeared in white color, in red color, in yellow color. Now He has appeared in black color." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu was yellow color. Therefore, when it is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, tviṣā akṛṣṇam, "He is not black," that means "He is pīta, He is yellow." Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam [SB 11.5.32]. "He is always associated by His devotees."

Caitanya Mahāprabhu, so long He lived on this planet, He was always associated with the devotees. The most confidential devotees, Caitanya Mahāprabhu: śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya, the central point, prabhu nityānanda śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda. So sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam, kṛṣṇa-varṇam. He is always chanting Kṛṣṇa. He is Kṛṣṇa Himself, tviṣā akṛṣṇam, but His bodily complexion is not like that. And other feature: sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam, and He is always associated with His devotees. They are His soldiers. Sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam. In other incarnation, Kṛṣṇa comes with weapon. As Lord Rāmacandra He came with bows and arrows. As Kṛṣṇa He came with disc and club. Here Kṛṣṇa has come compassionately to distribute mercy to the fallen souls. So He has not taken any astra, any weapon. His weapon is His associate devotee. Caitanya Mahāprabhu's associate, Nityānanda Prabhu, He is going to kill Jagāi and Mādhāi, not by weapon, but by His mercy. He went to preach Jagāi and Mādhāi, the drunkards, the woman-hunters, flesh-eaters, and they hurt Him. Still, He delivered them.

So these astra..., this is the astra. By argument, by philosophy, by entreating, by flattering, they are giving Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Advaita Prabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu. Yes. Otherwise, they are already killed. Kṛṣṇa, if He kills them, then everything is finished. They are already killed by so many bad habits. They are going to hell. So those who are already killed, so what will be benefit by killing them? So deliver them. Sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam. This is the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. It is stated. And how He is worshiped? Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. The worshiping method of Lord Caitanya incarnation of Kṛṣṇa is not very difficult. Simply yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtanaiḥ. You perform this yajña of saṅkīrtana: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. So Sanātana Gosvāmī, he was a minister. So to confirm this, he asked Caitanya Mahāprabhu that "How I can accept somebody as incarnation?" So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "That is not difficult. Everything is stated in the śāstras, and from the evidence of śāstra, you can accept who is incarnation."

So our point is that you do not become so foolish and rascal, that any rascal comes and poses himself as God, incarnation of God... You kick on their face. Please consult the śāstras whether his name, his father's name, his mother's name, his features of the body, his activities, are corroborating with the śāstra. Then accept. Otherwise don't.

Thank you very much. (end)



720918SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.13

-

Los Angeles, September 18, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



aṣṭame merudevyāṁ tu

nābher jāta urukramaḥ

darśayan vartma dhīrāṇāṁ

sarvāśrama-namaskṛtam

[SB 1.3.13]



Translation: "The eighth incarnation was King Ṛṣabha, son of King Nābhi and his wife Merudevī. In this incarnation the Lord showed the path of perfection, which is followed by those who have fully controlled their senses and who are honored by all orders of life."



Prabhupāda: So there are some important words in this verse. The first thing is dhīrāṇām. Dhīrāṇām mean sober, gentle. There are two ways, because there are two kinds of people in this world. One is called dhīra, and the other is called adhīra. Adhīra means almost animal. They cannot control their senses. The dhīra, one who can control sense. He is called dhīra. In the Rūpa Gosvāmī's obeisances we find, kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is appreciable by the both classes, dhīra and adhīra. Those who are advanced by austerities, controlling the senses, and those who are not so, very fallen, both of them, Dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau.



Another example of dhīra is there in Kumāra Sambhava. Kumāra Sambhava is a Sanskrit book, which I think we read in our college I.A. class, by Kālidāsa, poet Kālidāsa. So this theme of that book is that the demigods, they wanted to fight with the demons, and it was necessary that a son should be begotten by Lord Śiva. So Lord Śiva at that time lost his wife in the dakṣa-yajña. She gave up his (her) life. There was some misunderstanding between Mahārāja Dakṣa, father of Pārvatī, or Durgā. So she gave up her life because her father was against Lord Śiva. He was repudiating Lord Śiva, and she could not tolerate that "My father, you are so proud that you are blaspheming Lord Śiva because you think I am your daughter and your son-in-law is subordinate. So I am returning this body to you." So (s)he immediately gave up her body. So Lord Śiva, having lost his wife, he was on the Himalayas executing severe tapasya. So the demigods, they planned to break the tapasya meditation of Lord Śiva by sending Pārvatī, daughter of Himalaya. Lord Śiva's wife then took birth as daughter of Himalaya. So when she was young, grown-up, sixteen years old, so she was engaged to break the meditation of Lord Śiva. So Lord Śiva was in meditation, naked, and Pārvatī was induced to worship Lord Śiva and touch the genital. But Lord Śiva still was undisturbed. So at that time, Kālidāsa Kavi, that "Here is the example of dhīra. He is so much absorbed in meditation that a young girl, touching the genital, still, he is undisturbed. He is so self-controlled."

So this is dhīra. Dhīra means even there is cause of disturbance he will not be disturbed. That is dhīra. And one who is disturbed by the slight agitation, he is not dhīra. He is adhīra. So mostly, people are adhīra. They are agitated by a slight disturbance, because they have not been trained in such a way. Otherwise... Just like Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa was being elected as president in the rājasūya-yajña assembly of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, so somebody remarked that "This man..." Because those who were blind, they would see Kṛṣṇa as ordinary man... So "He is woman-hunter from the very beginning. So how He can be elected?" So at that time Bhīṣma, the most celebrated brahmacārī... He never accepted any wife or he had no connection with any woman. He immediately stood up. He said that "I am celebrated throughout the whole world as brahmacārī, but if I would have been in the position of Kṛṣṇa... He was dancing with young girls, but He was not agitated. But I would have been agitated. I admit. Therefore He is dhīra. He should be elected."

You'll find rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa was dancing with so many young girls, but you won't find there was any sex relation. There was nothing like that. So that is dhīra. They were devotees, gopīs. They used to come to Kṛṣṇa. But there is no such thing written, as pregnancy and abortion. No, nothing of the sort. That is called dhīra, that in spite of presence of the cause of disturbance... The gopīs came to Kṛṣṇa because He was very beautiful young boy. Actually they were attracted by His beauty. That is stated, kāmāt. They came as a lust. But when they came to Kṛṣṇa, they became purified. That is dhīra. Kṛṣṇa was kind enough. The gopīs, they wanted Kṛṣṇa, to associate with Him. So Kṛṣṇa gave them chance, "Yes, come on." The gopīs wanted Kṛṣṇa as husband. They made tapasya, austerity, to have Kṛṣṇa as husband. But at that time Kṛṣṇa was... The gopīs and Kṛṣṇa were of the same age. Just like boys and girls play together. But girls become at the age of twelve, thirteen years, their sex desires become strong. But boys, they do not become sex desire so strong, unless they are badly associated. So neither it was possible that Kṛṣṇa would marry so many girlfriends. But they wanted Kṛṣṇa as husband, all of them. Therefore Kṛṣṇa fulfilled their desire in the vastra-haraṇa. Because a woman can become naked only before husband. That is Vedic. So Kṛṣṇa somehow or other made them naked so that... He declared that "You wanted Me as husband. So much, that's all." So people misunderstand Kṛṣṇa. Unless understood through authoritative sources, Kṛṣṇa is misunderstood. But He is the dhīra. He is not adhīra. He is not like ordinary man. Dhīra.

So here it is said that urukramaḥ. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described here as urukrama. Urukrama means one who acts very wonderful things which is not possible for ordinary human being. So He wanted to show the real path of life. Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva, He was king, emperor of the world. So His instruction are there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. (tapping sound) He instructed... (aside:) What is this sound? He instructed His sons, "My dear boys, this human form of life is not meant for sense enjoyment, which is available in the life of dogs and hogs." It was His instruction. He instructed that human society should be dhīra, self-controlled. That is ideal human society. That is Vedic civilization.

Here it is also stated, sarvāśrama-namaskṛtam. Āśrama. Sarva-āśrama. Āśrama. I have several times described that the brahmacārī-āśrama, gṛhastha-āśrama, vānaprastha-āśrama, sannyāsa-āśrama. Sarvāśrama, all orders of life. Varṇāśrama. The Vedic civilization is based on four varṇas: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra; and four āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. So Lord Ṛṣabhadeva planned in such a way to teach His sons-He had one hundred sons-that it will be honored by all the āśramas. Out of His one hundred sons, nine became sannyāsī. Nava Yogendra, very highly elevated spiritually, nine sons. And eighty-one sons... Out of hundred, nine gone, ninety-one sons? So out of them, eleven became kṣatriyas, and others became brāhmaṇas, like that. So this proves that not that by birth one becomes brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya or vaiśya or śūdra, but it is by different qualification. Otherwise how Ṛṣabhadeva's son... He was kṣatriya, supposed to be kṣatriya. So His sons are also kṣatriya. How they became brāhmaṇa? No. That was the Vedic culture. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ. As soon as one is born, he is accepted as śūdra. Neither brāhmaṇa nor kṣatriya nor... Raw. By training, either he becomes a brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya.

Just like a man has got several sons, but all of them, in the beginning, they are illiterate. Now, in their grown-up age, by accepting different departmental knowledge, one becomes a medical practitioner, one becomes engineer, one becomes lawyer, or one becomes vagabond. So not by birth, one becomes engineer or medical man or this or... No. Everything by culture, by education. Similarly, the Vedic culture means everyone is given the chance to become first-class brāhmaṇa. That is called brahminical culture. Everyone is given. Because without becoming a brāhmaṇa, nobody can understand what is God. And the human life is meant for understanding God. That is the only business of human form of life. Not like cats and dogs-how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sexual intercourse, and how to defend. These the animals know. The birds, bees, they know how to do it.

This Ṛṣabhadeva, He taught that "My dear boys, this life, human form of life, is not to be wasted like hogs and dogs." Sense enjoyment is there amongst the hogs-better facility. No restriction. No restriction. In human society at least there is official some restriction. Mātrā svasrā duhitrā. All śāstra says, "There is no..." But there are societies-we do not want to discuss-who have sex relationship even with mother, sister, and daughter. Still. But it was formerly also. Not like that, very common. But śāstra says, mātrā svasrā duhitrā vā nāviviktāsano bhavet [SB 9.19.17]. "You do not sit down in a secluded place even with your mother, with your sister, with your daughter." So people may say, "One becomes agitated by association of mother, sister, and daughter, many fools or most degraded." No. Śāstra says balavān indriya-grāmo vidvāṁsam api karṣati. "The senses are so strong that even one is very learned, he becomes agitated." He becomes agitated, even in the presence of mother, sister, and daughter.

So senses are so strong. Balavān indriya-grāmaḥ. It is prohibited. What to speak of others. Therefore, the common moral teachings and the Vedic civilization is to accept any woman except his own wife as mother. Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu. Para-dāreṣu. Everyone is supposed to be married. Dāra means wife. Para-dāreṣu, other's wife. It doesn't matter if she is younger or older, but she should be treated as mother. Therefore it is the system in Vedic culture, as soon as one sees another woman, she (he) addresses her, "mother," Mātājī. Immediately, "mother." That makes the relationship. The woman treats the unknown man as son, and the unknown man treats the unknown woman as mother. This is Vedic civilization. So we should be very careful. In our society, you are all Godbrothers, Godsisters. Or those who are married, they are like mothers. So you should be very careful. Then you will remain dhīra, sober. That is brahminical qualification, brahminical culture. Not that "Because I have got facilities to intermingle with nice girls, so I shall take advantage and exploit them." Or the girls should take... No. Therefore our restriction: no illicit sex.

One has to become dhīra. Then the question of God consciousness. Animals cannot have God consciousness. Therefore it is specially mentioned dhīrāṇām. Vartma. The path which He showed, that is meant for the dhīra, not for the adhīra. Dhīrāṇām. And it is so nice that sarvāśrama-namaskṛtam. All āśramas will appreciate and offer obeisances. All āśrama means brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. So dealing with woman... Especially instruction are given to men. All literatures, all Vedic literatures, they are especially meant for instruction to the men. Woman is to follow the husband. That's all. The husband will give instruction to the wife. There is no such thing as the girl should go to school to take brahmacārī-āśrama or go to spiritual master to take instruction. That is not Vedic system. Vedic system is a man is fully instructed, and woman, girl, must be married to a man. Even the man may have many wives, polygamy, still, every woman should be married. And she would get instruction from the husband. This is Vedic system. Woman is not allowed to go to school, college, or to the spiritual master. But husband and wife, they can be initiated. That is Vedic system.

So dhīrāṇāṁ vartma. Because people must be first of all gentle. Then talk of Kṛṣṇa and God consciousness. If he is animal, what he can understand? This is Vedic system. Dhīrāṇām. Dhīra means must be gentle, perfectly gentle. Must address all woman as "mother." Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat. This is the training, that one should consider other's wife as mother, and others' money as like garbage in the street. Nobody cares for it. Similarly, one's other's money should not be touched. Even it is somebody has forgotten his purse, moneybag on the street, nobody will touch it. Let the man come back and take it. That is civilization. Para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat, ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu. And treating all other living entities as oneself. If somebody pinches me, I feel pain. Why shall I pinch other? If somebody cuts my throat, I become so sorry or so aggrieved. Why shall I cut the throat of other animals? This is civilization. This is Vedic civilization. And not that go on killing animals like anything and hunt upon the woman, topless woman, make business. This is not civilization. This is not human civilization.

Therefore it is called dhīrāṇām. Those who are sober, for them. Those who are rascals, not for them. The brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha sarvāśrama, āśrama, this is meant for the gentle class, not for the rascals. First of all, training period as brahmacārī. This brahmacārī, he is taught. He is taught to address all women as "mother." The brahmacārī goes to collect alms from door to door. Small boys. So how do they address? "Mother, kindly give us some alms." So immediately the household wife should come and give them. They will collect like that, for spiritual master. So if a boy is taught... Just like our these children are being taught chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. They are chanting. They cannot forget throughout life. Similarly, if a brahmacārī is taught from childhood, from boyhood address all woman as "mother," he cannot see otherwise. "S(he) is my mother." I remember, it is an example. Long ago, say, in 1925, long ago, so we were in a cinema house. So my eldest son, as soon as he would see one woman in the picture, "Here is another mother! Here is another mother!" (laughter) he would cry. Because a small child, he does not know any woman except mother. He knows everyone as "my mother." So if we train from the childhood that "You should treat all woman as mother," then where is the question of anomalies? No. There is no question.

So one should be trained from the very beginning how to become gentle. From the very beginning if one is taught to become ungentle, uncontrolled of senses, how at the end he can become gentle? And if the people are not gentle, how you can expect peace and prosperity? Therefore we see in your country, every house: "Beware of dog. Don't come here." Because... What is that? Because they cannot trust anybody. Anybody.

So this is not advancement of civilization. If you want to know what is civilization, you have to learn here: dhīrāṇām. In the Bhāgavata the description is there. So actually, Vedic civilization is meant for the most gentle, highly advanced, not for the cats and dogs.

Thank you very much. (end)



720919SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.14

-

Los Angeles, September 19, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



ṛṣibhir yācito bheje

navamaṁ pārthivaṁ vapuḥ

dugdhemām oṣadhīr viprās

tenāyaṁ sa uśattamaḥ

[SB 1.3.14]



Translation: "O brāhmaṇas, the ninth incarnation of the Lord, prayed for by sages, was King Pṛthu, who cultivated the land to yield various produces, and for that reason the earth was beautiful and attractive."



Prabhupāda: So this refers to King Pṛthu, Mahārāja Pṛthu. So his father's name was King Veṇa. And his father's name was... I don't remember. Perhaps Aṅga, like that. So the Veṇa's father married one woman. She was the daughter of Death, means the family was not very good. So as a result of this marriage, a son was born, whose name was Veṇa, who came out to be first-class rogue. So the father of Veṇa wanted to reform him in so many ways, but he could not. The son was not to be corrected. So the father became disgusted, and one day he left home without any knowledge of the family members or the officers and king. He left.



Then the great sages and brāhmaṇas, because without king there was irregularities in the kingdom... Just like we have got experience. If there is no good government, strong government, the rogues, thieves, smugglers and so many other disrupting elements, they will grow. Because they are always existing. They find out the opportunity. As soon as there is some revolution, political upsurge, or mismanagement of the government, these undesirable elements, they come out. So when the father of Veṇa Mahārāja left home, the kingdom became unruly. Therefore the sages and saintly persons, they asked the queen that "Your son, although he is worthless, so let him become king. There must be some king."

So this Veṇa was made king by the desire of the saintly person. The significance is that formerly the brāhmaṇas, the kṣatriyas, the vaiśyas and the śūdras, these four departments, they must remain. Varṇāśrama. That must be maintained, class division. So the brāhmaṇas, the saintly persons, sages, they used to recommend that "Yes, this person is fit for becoming king." Then the coronation was celebrated. Or... This means that the kṣatriyas were under the order of the brāhmaṇas. So when Veṇa become king, of course, the rogues and thieves, they were immediately subdued. Because rogues and thieves, and here the king is also greater rogue. So the smaller rogues were subdued immediately. That was one of the benefit, because he was very strong and cruel. Immediately, caught a rogue, he will immediately cut off his head. So they were subdued. But he himself is a rogue. Nūnaṁ mahatāṁ tatra. This is our experience. "Might is right." If you are stronger, then you can subdue less strong. But he became very much disturbing. He was atheist, and he ordered that "There is no God. I am God. So what I say, you have to abide." The brāhmaṇas were also... "You cannot perform yajñas. This is not required." In this way, he became too much disturbing.

Then one day all the brāhmaṇas and the sages, they came to give him instruction: "My dear king, it is not your duty to stop all kinds of religious activities." Just like the Communist government. Yes. But who hears? He said, "No. Why you are trying to pacify God? I am God. You just act. If you are actually God conscious, then you act according to my order." So when the sages and brāhmaṇas became disgusted, he was killed by the brāhmaṇas, by their order. You see? The brāhmaṇas were so strong. By simply cursing, they could kill anyone. So the Veṇa was killed. Then again the rogues and thieves came out. Then from the body of Veṇa, they created two sons. One son was black, and he was ordered that "You go to the forest." Because they could know that he was exactly son of the father. Niṣāda. Niṣāda. They were sent... He was sent to the forest. And then the King Pṛthu was born. The King Pṛthu, He is incarnation of, power incarnation of God. Śaktyāveśāvatāra So he proved himself as a great king on this earth. He produced foodstuff, foodgrains, profusely.

That from the life of King Pṛthu we can understand. We are discussing that in the Fourth Canto, the life of Mahārāja Pṛthu, how good government can be maintained. Pṛthu Mahārāja is the ideal king. He produced, he made arrangement. The earth was not producing sufficient foodgrains, so he attacked the earth that "Why you are not producing?" The mother earth said that "Because the people have become demon and they are simply eating, but they are not doing their duty. Therefore I have minimized producing grain." This is to be very important, that the earth can produce any amount of foodgrains. There is no question of overpopulation. There is no question of overpopulation, because everyone is being fed by the mercy of God. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān. God is giving everyone the foodstuff.

I have several times explained in this class that nobody has got any food problem. Simply the so-called civilized, advanced in science, these people have got problems of foodgrains. Otherwise, there are millions of elephants, they are eating very nicely. There are ants, there are elephants, there are tigers, there are monkeys, there are trees... So many, 8,400,000 forms of body. How they are eating? Unless they are eating... We kill animals, but the animals do not come to the..., to us, that "We are starving. Give us food." Never. By nature, there is arrangement, foodstuff. The cows, the other animals, they are eating grass. There is profuse growth of grass. So they are not eating your nice foodstuff, sandeśa, rasagullā. You are making sandeśa, rasagullā from the milk which they deliver. They are eating grass and delivering you nice foodstuff, milk. And from the milk, you can make hundreds and thousands of nice, nutritious, full of vitamin foodstuff. But no. We are so fool that instead of utilizing the milk, we are utilizing the blood. You see?

These rascals, the scientists, they do not know that milk is nothing but transformation of the blood. That everyone knows. So if you want to... That is nature's way, by God's will, that a cow gives forty pounds, fifty pounds milk daily, but it does not drink. Although it is her milk, no, it gives you, human society: "You take. But don't kill me. Let me live. I am eating only grass." Just see. And the civilized men killing them, killing them. And they want peace. Just see the fun. Without touching your foodstuff, the cow is eating the grass which is given by God, immense grass, and they are giving you the finest foodstuff, milk. Just after your birth you have only to drink milk, either mother's milk... Nowadays, mothers do not supply milk. That is also to be supplied by the cow. So from the very beginning of my life I am subsisting by the foodstuff given by mother, cow, and when I am grown up, I kill. This is my gratitude. Just see. And they are called civilized. Less than lowest animal, narādhama. They are called narādhama, lowest of the mankind. Those who are killing cows, maintaining slaughterhouse, they are lowest of the mankind. They are not human being. Less than animal. They have no gratitude.

So the idea is that there is no food problem. As the mother earth said to King Pṛthu that "I am restricting," so the more you become sinful, the food supply will be stopped. This is the law of nature. At the end there will be no foodgrains, at the end of Kali-yuga. That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. There will be no foodgrain, no fruits, no milk, no sugar. You have to live on flesh and blood. At that time, being hungry, you will kill your own children and eat flesh and blood. That day is waiting. So this is the civilization. Most heinous civilization. It can only be saved by spreading this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Otherwise there is no way.

So sinful civilization. Therefore our first restriction is no meat-eating. It is a most sinful act. Meat-eating, or intoxication, drinking, gambling, and illicit sex. These are the four pillars of sinful life. So unless you stop, you break these four pillars, how you can think of God? God is not so cheap. The rascal says, "You can do whatever you like. I give you... I push your eyes and you see God. You push your nose, you see God." You see? These nonsense things are going on. But God is not so cheap. He is cheap, very cheap. He is very kind. But we want to remain sinful. Therefore we cannot see God. Arjuna addressed Kṛṣṇa, paraṁ dhāma paraṁ brahma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān. "You are the most pure." So how you can approach God with sinful life? That is not possible. That is simply bogus thing, that you keep your sinful life, at the same time you want to see God, you want to talk with God. That is not possible.

So this point is that if the population of the world becomes sinful, demonic, then nature will not supply you sufficient food. She will diminish. We have got experience. In India we have seen, some years there is overproduction of mango. People... Very cheap. Everyone can purchase. And sometimes there is no supply, some year. Similarly, foodgrains also. Some year there is oversupply of foodgrain and sometimes there is scanty supply. Now, this supply of foodgrains, fruits, and everything, even milk... In our New Vrindaban, because the cows feel very safe, they give us sufficient milk. That is our experience. So you keep things in order according to the Vedic injunction, you get sufficient food. There is no question of scarcity. But if you become sinful, demons, then the nature's food supply will be ultimately stopped. You can produce your food in the factory... You cannot do that. You can produce motorcars to consume all the petroleum within the earth, and then you become no petrol. Then throw all these motorcars. Unless you find out some other energy That you can do. You can make things topsy-turvied. But by your so-called scientific advancement, you cannot increase or, I mean to say, stop nonproduction. That you cannot.

So there was such a time because Pṛthu Mahārāja's father was a demon. He stopped all religious activities. Therefore people became demonic, and there was restriction of food supply. Then Pṛthu Mahārāja made arrangement, and there was sufficient foodstuff. Dugdhemām oṣadhīr viprās tenāyaṁ sa uśattamaḥ. Since Pṛthu Mahārāja arranged the whole society to be religious, to be God conscious, everything become beautiful. This can be done even now. If people become Kṛṣṇa conscious, the whole world will become beautiful, Vaikuṇṭha, without any anxiety. That is possible. Because that is nature's law. Just like if you become criminal, the state police force will always harass you. You cannot get out of it. He'll harass you. But that is expensive job for the government. Because it requires extra police, extra management, extra everything. But if the people become honest, God conscious, so many expenditure will be reduced. And money will be saved for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness or for Kṛṣṇa's service. Then the whole world will become exactly as it was in the Pṛthu Mahārāja's day.

So Pṛthu Mahārāja was very nice king. He not only helped producing enough foodstuff, but he was examining each man, whether he is employed or not. There was no unemployment in Pṛthu Mahārāja's time. Everyone must have employment, engagement. Nowadays, in spite of so much advancement of science, there are thousands and thousands of unemployed people. They have no sufficient engagement. Of course, in your country, although there is employment, they have denied to accept employment. In India, for employment... There is employment bureau by the government. So if you go to any employment bureau, you will find thousands of men are standing in line to get a job. Unemployment. But it is the duty of the government to see that nobody is unemployed. Everyone must have some means of earning. That is good government.

So Pṛthu Mahārāja did it. The brāhmaṇas... Not that a brāhmaṇa will be employed as a śūdra. No. A brāhmaṇa must be employed as a brāhmaṇa. A kṣatriya must be employed for a kṣatriya. A vaiśya must be employed for a vaiśya. And śūdra... That was the system. The brāhmaṇas are rejected in the present society because they have no more interest in religious activities. They don't care for the śāstra, sādhu. No, don't care. They simply sense grati... Dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. Udaraṁ bharita. At the present moment people will be satisfied... Just like animal. If animal has got sufficient food to fill up the belly and sufficient arrangement for sex, then he is satisfied. He doesn't want anything.

So man has become like that. If his belly is filled up with some rubbish thing and if he is free to have sex life, then he thinks, "My life is perfect now." And more perfect life, dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. In this age, if one man can maintain his wife and children, he will be considered a great man "Oh, he is so able, that he is maintaining his wife and children." Maintaining wife and children, even cats and dogs can do. But in this age, if a man can maintain his wife and children, he will be considered as very expert. Because most people will have no wife, no children. This is the age. So more you become sinful, the more you become irresponsible, the more you become Godless-these things are awaiting.

Thank you very much. (end)



720920SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.15

-

Los Angeles, September 20, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



rūpaṁ sa jagṛhe mātsyaṁ

cākṣuṣodadhi-samplave

nāvy āropya mahī-mayyām

apād vaivasvataṁ manum

[SB 1.3.15]



Translation: "When there was a complete inundation after the period of the Cākṣuṣa Manu and the whole world was deep within water, the Lord accepted the form of a fish and protected Vaivasvata Manu, keeping him up on a boat."



Prabhupāda: So here is history also. This Vedic history is not that for one thousand years or two thousand years. No, not like that. One period. One millennium, Brahmā's one day, it is millions and millions of years. So just like there is night after day, day after night, similarly, the Brahmā's day, Brahmā's night, that is calculated. And one Brahmā's day. You know, that is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. So Brahmā's one day means one thousand times of the yugas. The yugas means the Satya-yuga, Kali-yuga, and..., Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, and Kali-yuga. So Satya-yuga's duration is about 1800,000's of years. The next, Tretā-yuga, duration about 1200,000's of years. And then Dvāpara-yuga, 800,000's of years, solar years.



We are calculating the years, the time also relative. That is the latest theory of the scientists, law of relativity. My hundred years and Brahmā's hundred years and an ant's hundred years, a germ's hundred years, they are not the same. Similarly time calculation, if you go in the upper planetary system, that time calculation is different. Just like in modern age, the sputnik age, they are flying sputnik. The first sputnik flight, they circumambulated this earth three times in one twenty-five hour and minutes. And they saw that there is night and day. Here in this planet our night and day experience is twenty-four hours. But as soon as you leave this planet, you fly in a different speed, there is three times night and day in one hour and minutes. So similarly everyone lives hundred years, but that hundred years are all relative. An ant's hundred years and man's hundred years is not the same. Similarly, a man's hundred years and a demigod's hundred years not the same. In different planetary system the time is... Similarly, if you go still up and up, the time is relative.

So we are calculating our three thousand years, four thousand years in our system. That three thousand or four thousand years, as soon as you go little up, it become one hour, twenty-five minutes. So Brahmā's one day is different. But it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā... You know, who are reading Bhagavad... Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. You try to understand Brahmā's one day equal to our one thousand times of the yugas. And the yugas, as I have already explained... The Satya-yuga, 1800,000's of years; Tretā-yuga, 1200,000's of years. In the Satya-yuga people used to live for 100,000's of years. Vālmīki Muni, he practiced yoga for 60,000's of years. So unless one has got 100,000's of years duration of life, how he could practice 60,000's of years? So we should understand, everything is relative. This is called relative world. Relativity, law of relativity.

So Brahmā's one day means 4300,000's of years of our calculation. Forty-three hundred thousands of years, little more. That is Brahmā's one day. And in that one day, 4300,000's of years, there are fourteen manus changing. So these are described here. The manu, Cākṣuṣa Manu, Vaivasvata Manu. There are fourteen manus. So the calculation is in one day of Brahmā, ah, in one month of Brahmā, there are about five thousand manus. So this calculation is taken in the duration of manu's life.

The Bhagavad-gītā says,

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



So this is the paramparā system. So here it is, Vaivasvata Manu. What is text number? Fifteen. Here it is. Vaivasvata Manu. So this Vaivasvata Manu means at the present moment the president of the sun planet is called Vivasvān. His name is Vivasvān. And because his son Manu... Vivasvān manave prāha... The Bhagavad-gītā was spoken long, long ago by Kṛṣṇa to the sun-god, Vivasvān. Vivasvān. They are trying to understand the historical dates. So how you can understand the historical date? It is beyond your calculation. You cannot calculate even one Brahmā's day. And in Brahmā's one day there are fourteen manus. So it is beyond your brain substance. You can have some idea.



Now here it is said Vaivasvata Manu. Vaivasvata Manu. There are different manus. Just like first of all it is said Cākṣuṣa Manu. Similarly, next it is said Vaivasvata Manu. So this Vaivasvata Manu is the son of sun-god. There are two kinds of kṣatriya families within this planet: one coming from the moon and the other is coming from the sun. The first person, I mean to say, first father of this kṣatriya family from sun, his first son is manu. And his name is Vaivasvata Manu. Because he is the son of Vivasvān, therefore his father's name is also added. In India the system is still that when a man will give you name, the first name is his own name, the second name is his father's name, and the third name is his village name. So that by three names he will understand that "This man is the son of such and such gentleman and coming from such and such village." Complete name. Just like when we give our identification, we give our own name, our father's name and address. That is complete identification. So still, not in everywhere, in almost all provinces of India, the system is still current. State..., especially in Maharastra province. Maharastra province, they exactly will give you his own name his father's name, and his village name.

So here also, Vaivasvata Manu. Vaivasvata Manu means the son of the gentleman whose name is Vivasvān. He is the president of this solar world, of the sun, sun planet. There is also president. You have got your president here. Why not in the sun planet? Why...? How can you deny with teeny knowledge that there is no life, there is no city, there is no...? Simply you go on smoking gāñjā and telling anything, but the fact is different. The fact is different. From common sense we can understand that this is a planet made of five elements: earth, water, fire, air, and ether. So this whole material world is made of these five elements. Somewhere, some portion is very prominent. Here the earth is very prominent. Similarly, in the sun planet the fire is very prominent. But there are five elements. Nothing is made... Just like if you go to a fireplace, there the temperature is different, but the fireplace is made of these five elements: earth, water, air, fire, ether. Nothing but.

Therefore if we study Bhagavad-gītā very carefully, you understand everything. A little brain required. Just like we can... Just you, when you go to the oven, fire, fireplace, that fireplace, the stove... What is the stove? The stove is made of these five elements, earth, water, fire, air, but there the fire is very prominent. Therefore you cannot touch it. You do not go there. Similarly, sun planet is not very wonderful thing. It is also made of the same ingredients as it is made here in this planet, because the whole material world is made of these five elements. But there the fire element is very prominent. Therefore we are thinking, "How one can live there?" How one can cook in the kitchen when the fire is so hot? It is possible. Just like you can see in the water. You cannot live in the water, but there are thousands and millions of living entities. They are very comfortably living. The same living entities, you bring on the land, they cannot live. But you can live.

So it is, God's creation is like that. According to karma, there are different species of forms of life, but they have got all facilities to live. That is God's creation. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. The direction is there, that this living entity wanted a body to swim in the sea very jubilantly, so now he has got the body of a fish. So let him live very peacefully. That is God's mercy. You take very much pleasure with that surf... What is called, in the sea?

Devotee: Surfboard.



Prabhupāda: Surfboard? Yes. (laughter) So if you increase your engage..., "How I shall be swimming and enjoy this sport all day and night?" then Kṛṣṇa will give you the body of a fish. (laughter) Yes. He is very kind. And you will very nicely live in the sea, always swimming without any difficulty. Every life. As you increase your propensity for a certain type of activities, nature is ready immediately: "Take this body. Why you are anxious? Take this body." Similarly, if you become anxious to have a body like Kṛṣṇa, that is also ready. Now it is your choice. If you like, you take the body of a fish, or if you like, you take the body of sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], eternal, blissful knowledge.



So we are trying to give that body. Not a fish body, cat's body, dog's body. That we have experienced, past life. We have got this life now to make discretion, to make choice, what kind of body we are going to get next. That is intelligence. That is intelligence. Not that to give away with the waves of this time. Māyār bośe jāccho bhese' Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura therefore sings that "Don't be carried away by the waves of māyā. Now you have got intelligence. You try to understand that you are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa and do the needful. Then get out of this māyā's webs." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, giving the right information, that "If you do not want to be carried away by the waves of this māyā, material nature, then take to this consciousness so that at the time of your death you will change this body to Kṛṣṇa planet, Kṛṣṇa, Goloka Vṛndāvana." Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says. Kṛṣṇa is not making lying propaganda. He has no business. He is giving you information, that if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, janma karma me divyam, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa-how He is acting, why He has come, why He has appeared, why He has given us the Bhagavad-gītā, what lessons He is giving-in this way, if you simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tat..., in truth, not whimsically, not sentimentally, with sound philosophy, knowledge, argument, you try to understand Bhagavad-gītā as it is, then you get tyaktvā deham... Then after giving up this body, undoubtedly you go back to Kṛṣṇa, go back to home back to Godhead.

This is the proposition, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Otherwise, these changes of Manu, changes of millennium, changes of devastation... In every... Manvantara. At the end of Manu, there is another devastation. Pralaya-samplave, cākṣuṣodadhi-samplave. After the span of life of Cākṣuṣa Manu, there is another inundation. And then again everything comes out gradually and the water dries. Just like you see the Pacific Ocean, it is drying. Of course, we shall not live, but if hundreds years after, if somebody comes here, he will see that the Los Angeles city has expanded and the Pacific Ocean has diminished. This is going on. In this way, one day will be, there will be no Pacific Ocean. And therefore, without water, everyone will die. Simply sunshine, bright sunshine. So then again, as there is after bright sunshine there is cloud and rain, similarly, again there will be rain. Then again there will be water. Samplave, inundation. This is going on. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. This material world, these scientists, the rascal scientists, they are trying to save it, "How to run on our motorcar, how our grandchildren who are coming, how they will drive this motorcar." They are thinking and trying to find out some energy. But the rascals, they do not know where they are going. He is thinking for the future grandchildren. What is the relationship with grandchildren? There are so many living entities, they are coming and going. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19].

So our relationship is just like sometimes there is wind and some straws gather together, and as soon as the wind is finished the straws are again strewn everywhere. So our this gathering, this father, mother, son, children, grandchildren, it is like that. By nature's blast, we gather together, again finished. So where is your grandchildren, where is your grandfather?

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



They are, by the freaks of nature, by the arrangement of nature, they are gathering together. So-called nation, so-called family, so-called society. Again, by freaks of nature, they are thrown here and there. Sometimes somebody is going to be cat, sometimes he's he is going to be dog. So if your grandchild, grandson is going to be a cat and dog, how he is coming to drive your motorcar? (laughter) But these rascals, they do not know. They are trying to make provision, "How my grandchildren will drive car. The petrol will be finished, and what other energy we shall make in stock so that my grandchildren will come and very comfortably drive his car?"



This is called māyā-mohita.

māyā-mugdha jīvera nāhi svataḥ kṛṣṇa-jñāna

jīvere kṛpāya kailā kṛṣṇa veda-purāṇa



That is stated in the Caitanya-cari... We are so much engrossed by the influence of māyā that we are trying to do so many things, but our only business is how to forget Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Our real business is how we can kill Kṛṣṇa-"There is no God"-how we can forget Kṛṣṇa. And we are very busy in finding out petroleum energy. This is our business. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, anādi-bahirmukha jīvera svataḥ kṛṣṇa nāhi jñāna [Cc. Madhya 20.117].(?) We are so much foolish, influenced by the illusory energy, that by automatically we cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Because we are influenced. Therefore this propaganda required. Not that automatically they will come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There is need of spreading, unless... If you want to save..., if you are actually benevolent to your countrymen, to your society, to the human society, you must preach this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Otherwise they are going away, they are carried away by the influence of māyā. That is... Therefore the most welfare activities, the most valuable welfare activity is to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement all over the world. Otherwise they are being carried away by māyā. Anādi-bahirmukha jīvera svataḥ kṛ..., ataeva kṛṣṇa kailā veda-purāṇa.



Now we have to accept knowledge from Vedas, Vedic knowledge, not this rascal's knowledge. Rascal knowledge is that "Yes," as soon as he comes to the imperfect point, "yes, we are trying." You are trying. What is this trying? Trying means that your knowledge is imperfect. And another rascal will come, he will say, "Now here is the perfect." And ten years after, another rascal will come," No, this is not perfect. This is perfect." This is going on. This is called scientific advancement. This is... Advancement means... But we don't change our Vedic knowledge. We do not say, "Now, Kṛṣṇa, five thousand years ago, said like this. Now we are advanced. We change this line." Of course, others are doing. In the scriptures... Just like the Christians, they are changing the words. But you cannot do that. Then where is the authority? If you change the word of the scripture, then where is the authority of the scripture? Just like in lawbooks, there is some law made already. Whimsically you cannot, I mean to say, erase the words and put something that "It should be changed like this." That will not be accepted. Law, if there is change... Actually, there is no change. There cannot be change. Real law means there is no change. Just like day and night, it is coming. The fortnight, the dark period and the light period, it is coming for millions and millions and time immemorial. The same law is going, going on. You cannot change. So as soon as you change, that means it is imperfect. You change.

So Vedic laws are not like that. You cannot change. Five thousand years ago Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You give up all other religious principles. Simply surrender unto Me." We are preaching the same thing. No change. No change. There is no possibility of change. Then how Kṛṣṇa is authority? So change means imperfect knowledge. This very change. And perfect knowledge... You will find that one who is very experienced medical practitioner, he gives you a prescription, and you visit him again and again, he gives you the same prescription unless you are cured. His prescription is so nice that he doesn't change. But a nonexperienced physician, every time you go, he will change the prescription. But actually, those who are experienced, he knows "This is the disease, and ultimately this medicine will cure. So let him repeat that medicine." So our is that platform. Harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. We repeat only. We don't change: "Now hari-nāma is not curing so let me add, instead of Hare Kṛṣṇa, 'John Kṛṣṇa,' if I may." No. No "John Kṛṣṇa." (laughter) That same Hare Kṛṣṇa must be repeated. And you will be cured. So change means imperfect knowledge. No change means that is perfect knowledge. So we follow that no change policy. No, not that because I think I have become now advanced, I change this to that. That mean I am not advanced. My knowledge is imperfect. Therefore I am changing.

So this verse, the appearance of Vaivasvata Manu is described. So Vaivasvata Manu is incarnation of God. Svāyambhuva Manu, Vaivasvata Manu. As I told you, there are fourteen manus within the day. Now out of that fourteen manus, this is the seventh manu. It is going on. This Vaivasvata Manu is the seventh manu. So another seven manus, when they will be finished, this one day of Brahmā will be finished, and there will be another devastation. This is the law of nature.

Thank you very much. (end)



720921SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.16 and Initiation

-

Los Angeles, September 21, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



surāsurāṇām udadhiṁ

mathnatāṁ mandarācalam

dadhre kamaṭha-rūpeṇa

pṛṣṭha ekādaśe vibhuḥ

[SB 1.3.16]



Translation: "The eleventh incarnation of the Lord was in the form of a tortoise whose shell served as a pivot for the Mandarācala Hill, which was being used as a churning rod by the theists and the atheists of the universe."



Prabhupāda: So yasyāntaṁ na viduḥ surāsura-gaṇa devāya tasmai namaḥ.(?) The mantra, there is mantra, that yasyāntaṁ na viduḥ. One cannot understand the antam, the ultimate end of the Supreme... Yasyāntaṁ na viduḥ. Viduḥ means "does not know." Surāsura-gaṇa. Sura. Sura means demigods, theists. Those who are believer in God, they are called sura, and just the opposite-asura. Asura does not believe in the existence of God. He thinks he is God. That is asura. Āsuri-bhāvam āśritāḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said āsuri. Āsuri, this word has come from this āsura. Adjective. Asura is nominative. So from āsura, it becomes āsuri. Āsuri-bhāvam āśritāḥ. Those who are atheists, they do not surrender. They do not like the idea of God or Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But they do not know what is God or what is the ultimate end, who is the original cause. They do not know. Even the theists, they also do not know. They know Kṛṣṇa, but it is impossible to understand what is the limit of Kṛṣṇa's energies, just like we were discussing this morning.



So unlimited, unlimited. Yasyāntaṁ na viduḥ surāsura-gaṇa devāya tasmai namaḥ. Devāya, that Supreme Lord, we simply offer our respectful obeisances. It is not possible to know perfectly what is the potency and energy of God. The atheists, they do not know at all. But theists, devotees, they know, but that is not complete. Even Kṛṣṇa does not know how much powerful He is. That is called unlimited. So surāsura-gaṇa udadhiṁ mathnatām. Churning. Once upon a time they churned the whole ocean. Now, churning the ocean... You have got experience, churning the milk in a pot or something else in a pot. But the pot is the ocean, the Pacific Ocean, and the rod is Mandarācala Hill. And one side, the asuras, and the other side, the suras. So the churning rod must be placed on something, a pivot. That is kamaṭha-rūpeṇa. Lord accepted the... Because the kamaṭha, the tortoise can live within the water and without the water also. They can live on the land and within the water. So the churning rod, Mandarācala Hill, was placed on the shell, on the back of the... Keśava dhṛta-kūrma-śarīra. Kṣitir iha vipulatare tiṣṭhati tava pṛṣṭhe. This pṛṣṭha, he is carrying.

kṣitir iha vipulatare tiṣṭhati tava pṛṣṭhe

dharaṇi-dhāraṇa-kiṇa-cakra-gariṣṭhe

keśava dhṛta-kūrma-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare



This Kūrma, kamaṭha-rūpeṇa. Now, the surāsura-gaṇa, they are standing on the ocean. If you go up to your waist in the water, you become dangerously situated. But they were standing. This proves the law of relativity. Everywhere this law of relativity is working. You do not think, because you cannot stand in the midst of the water of the ocean, therefore nobody can stand. That is nonsense. Ant, the small ant, it is also working. The same thing is going on in the ant society. They are also struggling for existence, eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. And we are also doing that. And higher than us, surāsura-gaṇa, they are also doing that. But although the quality of the work is the same, the quantity is different. Quality of the work the same. Eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. Everywhere, all living entities, they are struggling. Whole day they are working according to their capacity. And the qualities, what for they are working? Eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. That's all. If you just resist one ant, it is coming, if you try to stop, the ant will also resist. It will go this way, that way, this way. It will not agree, "Why you are stopping me?" But it is trying in its own capacity. Similarly, you are also trying to resist in your own capacity by discovering atomic bomb. But as you can smash millions of ants simply by rubbing your leg on the ground, similarly there are other beings who can finish you simply by rubbing their legs. Don't think you are all and all. The rascals, the so-called human scientists, they are thinking they are all in all. "I am the monarch of all I survey." That is not. In God's creation there is smaller than the smallest and the bigger than the biggest. Nobody can claim that "I am everything." No. That is not possible. So they were standing on the... Without standing, how they are churning? But the sea water is up to the knees. How they can stand? So the seven mile sea water is up to their knees. Your, an ant, even seven inches is sufficient water. And for you seven feet is sufficient water. Similarly, others, even seven miles is not sufficient. This is the order of... Don't think that these are all stories. Surāsurāṇāṁ mathnatām. "How they can stand on the ocean? How they can churn? Oh, these are all stories." They are not stories. It may be story for you. Just like if you speak to an ant or what is called, insect... There are many insects. They take their birth... We have seen it. In India we see. In this season there are insects. They are called divāli-pokā, insect divāli. Just in the evening they are born. And they flock together before a light, (sound imitation:) bawnh, bawnh, bawnh, bawnh, like that. And throughout the whole night they will do, and at the end of the night, in the morning, you will see, they are, in heap, they are lying dead. So their life, the duration of life is that night. within that night they take their birth, they grow, they beget children, family, and defend, eat, mate. Everything is complete within the night. And at the end of the night, it is finished. So similarly, if to these flies, if you say, "Oh, we are dying like this, but there is human being. This is only one night. And such... There is another day also of the same period. Then together, day and night, such thirty day and night makes their month. And such 12 months make their year. And such hundred years they live." So how the fly will understand? Similarly, we cannot understand. When the duration of life of Brahmā is described, we think it is story. Similarly, they will think also story. Nothing is story. In the Vedic literatures all informations are there. Their relative life, big and small, smaller than the smallest, bigger than the biggest. Don't think that these description in the Vedas, they are stories. They are not stories. They are facts. But we cannot accommodate in our poor teeny brain. That's all. So what we shall understand about God? It is not possible. Therefore it is said, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. In our present senses we always think of seeing. But we forget, what seeing power we have got? It is nothing. It is simply under certain condition we can see a little portion. We cannot see perfectly, so we should not believe in our seeing power. So therefore śāstra says, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ: "You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa and God by your present imperfect senses. That is not possible." Na bhaved grāhyam, "You cannot accept or you cannot receive by your blunt senses." That is not possible. Then how it is possible? "I have... My only asset is these blunt senses. How can I understand God?" Yes. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. If you engage in devotional service, then God will reveal to you, "Here I am. Here I am. I am like this." Just like Arjuna saw Kṛṣṇa. He understood God. So if we take the position of Arjuna, submissive... Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7], surrender, then God, by kindness, because you have surrendered, He will reveal to you. Otherwise by your so-called calculation, you cannot understand what is the greatest and what is the smallest. But there are things smaller than the smallest and the greater than the greatest. That's all right. Thank you. [break] (initiations begin)



Prabhupāda: So begin. [break] (fire sacrifice mantras) [break]



Śyāmasundara: Steve.



Prabhupāda: How many rounds you will chant?



Devotee: Sixteen.



Prabhupāda: So your name is Baladeva dāsa. Hare Kṛṣṇa. What are the rules? (Steve answers) Thank you



Śyāmasundara: Warren.



Prabhupāda: So Śatānanda dāsa. What are the rules and regulation? (Warren answers) (baby makes noise) Take her to her mother... How many rounds you will chant? (Warren answers) That's nice. Vāmanānanda. Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Śyāmasundara: Carol.



Prabhupāda: What are the rules? (Carol answers) Thank you. Very good. Karlapati(?) dāsī.



Śyāmasundara: Geoff.



Prabhupāda: So what are the rules and regulation? (Geoff answers) Jitavrata dāsa.



Śyāmasundara: Stuart.



Prabhupāda: Chanting should be done like this, not to touch this finger. Like this. What are the rules and regulations.? (Stuart answers) Sūtadeva dāsa.



Śyāmasundara: Tom.



Prabhupāda: Take. Govindam ādi-puruṣam... What are the rules and regulation? (Tom answers) Tāracandra.



Śyāmasundara: Janet.



Prabhupāda: So what are the rules and regulation? (Janet answers) Janapriya dāsī. Hare Kṛṣṇa.



Śyāmasundara: Vasumi. Vasumi.



Prabhupāda: She is Japanese?



Śyāmasundara: Yes.



Prabhupāda: You are Japanese?



Vasumi: Yes.



Prabhupāda: You know Japanese language?



Vasumi: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Huh? Not very much. All right.



Devotee: She knows Japanese; very little English. She comes from Tokyo.



Prabhupāda: Oh. Why she does not go to take charge of Tokyo branch? (laughter) Are you willing? You are not married? You are married or not?



Vasumi: Yes, I am married.



Prabhupāda: That's all right. Where is your husband? Oh. You know Japanese language?



Satyadeva: Just a little, Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: That's all right. So what are the rules and regulation? Rules and regulation? What are the rules and regulation? (Vasumi answers) What is her name?



Śyāmasundara: Mahāguṇa.



Prabhupāda: Very nice. Mahāguṇa dāsī. All right. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





720922SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.17

-

Los Angeles, September 22, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



dhānvantaraṁ dvādaśamaṁ

trayodaśamam eva ca

apāyayat surān anyān

mohinyā mohayan striyā

[SB 1.3.17]



Translation: "In the twelfth incarnation, the Lord appeared as Dhanvantari, and in the thirteenth He allured the atheists by the charming beauty of a woman and gave nectar to the demigods to drink."



Prabhupāda: This is very interesting verse. (laughs) (laughter) To have very charming wife is not very good. And in your country you have got all charming wife. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that there are four kinds of enemies in family life. These are very experienced version. He says, mātā śatru. In family means we live with father, mother, wife, children. This is family. In your country family does not mean father-mother, only wife and children. But in our country, according to Vedic civilization, family is a large conception. Father, mother, brother, sister, sister's son, brother's son. If there are difficulty, one has to su... So on the whole, father, mother, wife and children, consisting of, family.



Now Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "In the family there are enemies." How? Ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatruḥ. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said, "A father who is a great debtor, he is enemy." Because the son inherits the money of the father, similarly, the law is that if the father dies a debtor, the son becomes responsible to pay the debts. That is the law, Manu-saṁhitā. I do not know what is the law here. I don't think the son is responsible for paying the debts of father, but in India that is the law. One big barrister, Mr. C. R. Das, his father died insolvent, making debts. So when he became very rich, he called all the creditors and paid five to five, that "My father was debtor. You take this money." That is obligation. Therefore Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "The father who dies a debtor, he is an enemy." Ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatruḥ. Ṛṇa means debts. Kartā means one who has committed so many debts and dies. A father... Instead of enjoying father's property, he has to pay the father's debts. So therefore that father is called enemy. Ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatrur mātā śatrur vyabhicāriṇī. "And mother, if she marries for the second time, she is enemy." Ṛṇa-kartā pitā śatrur mātā śatrur vyabhicāriṇī, rūpavatī bhāryāḥ śatruḥ. "And very beautiful wife, she is enemy." And putraḥ śatrur apaṇḍitaḥ. "And if the son is a fool, rascal, he is enemy." Four kinds of enemy in the family.

So I think I have spoken about my own life. You know that I was a married man. So after being married, I did not like my wife. (laughter) Somehow or other, I did not like. I must say she is very faithful, very everything... Everyone praised. But I did not like, somehow or other. So I was preparing for next marriage. Next marriage. Because in India, at that time it was allowed, a man can marry more than one wife. Now the law is there. So my father, he was a saintly person. So he called me one day and said, "My dear boy, you are trying to marry again. I request you don't do that. You do not like your wife. That is a great fortune for you." (laughter) So I gave up that idea of marrying. Yes. So now I am realizing my father's blessing, yes, that if I would have been too much attached to my wife, then I could not have come to this position. That's a fact. So by ethical point of view, from spiritual point of view, to become too much attached to wife is an impediment for spiritual advancement.

Therefore it is said that anyān, apāyayat surān anyān mohinyā mohayan striyā. Those who are sura, demigods, they were given the nectar, and others... Others means opposite number of surān, or asurān, the atheist or the demons. They were enchanted by the beautiful form of Mohinī. Kṛṣṇa's another incarnation is female, Mohinī, charming-so much charming that even Lord Śiva was after the girl. Lord Śiva, he is supposed to be dhīra, but he became charmed, and he was after that girl. So when Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa is already beautiful, but when He takes the shape of a woman, how beautiful He became, we can just imagine. Woman are naturally beautiful. They are called "fair sex." So mohinyā. So this Mohinī, this attractive feature of woman, is advantage and disadvantage also. It requires simply handling. Then it is advantage. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu played this play, Mohinī role... Caitanya Mahāprabhu was playing drama. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very beautiful. He took the part of this Mohinī-mūrti. And she was dancing with the pot of nectar. So all the devotees, they offered their obeisances, because Mohinī-mūrti means God's incarnation. So "My dear Lord, Your this mūrti, this form, this charming form, is somewhere rākṣasī." Rākṣasī means, what is called, witches? Or the female demon. "And somewhere You are goddess of fortune."

So the wife... Never mind. Generally, beautiful wife means everyone's wife is beautiful. Unless one sees his wife beautiful, he cannot become a householder. You see? I think I did not see my wife beautiful. Therefore I had to take sannyāsa. (laughter) But generally, every one sees his wife beautiful. There was a great poet in Bengal, Bankima Candra. He used to say that everyone has got right to say his wife beautiful. That means the wife may be beautiful or not beautiful to others' eye, but the husband's eyes it must be beautiful. Otherwise there cannot be husband. So the fact is that our householder life is not a platform of being attracted by woman or by wife. No. Wife is not accepted for sex satisfaction, being attracted by her. No. Therefore wife is called dharma-patnī. Dharma-patnī. Dharma-patnī means a religious wife, or husband and wife should execute religious life, spiritual cultivation. That is the purpose of becoming householder. Gṛhastha-āśrama. Not that I become attracted by wife and I become absorbed in simply sex relation and forget my real duty, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is dangerous. So generally, if one's wife becomes very beautiful, he forgets his real duty, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and he simply becomes a pet servant of the wife. That is the... Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī says, anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. One should not be attracted for sex life. Yathārham upayuñjataḥ. But does it mean that husband will not have sex. No. Yathārham. As it is required. As it required means sex life with wife should be performed only for begetting a Kṛṣṇa conscious child. Nothing more. No more attraction. That life is better. That life means not only better. That is the ideal life. Wife and husband, combination, both should make progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Woman, they are generally equipped with the qualities of passion and ignorance. And men also may be, but man can be elevated to the platform of goodness. Woman cannot be. Woman cannot be. Therefore if the husband is nice and the woman follows, woman becomes faithful and chaste to the husband, then their both life becomes successful. There are three qualities of nature: sattva, rajas, tamas. So rajas, tamas generally, that is the quality of woman. And man can become to the platform of goodness. Therefore initiation, brahminical symbolic representation is given to the man, not to the woman. This is the theory. Therefore the combination should be that the husband should be first-class devotee, Kṛṣṇa conscious, and woman should be, woman should be devoted to the husband, faithful, so that she would help the husband to make progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then their both life is successful. Otherwise, if the husband simply becomes captivated by the charming beauty of woman and engages himself in the sex life, then his life is lost, and the woman, they are less intelligent, unless they are guided by proper husband, her life is also lost. So those who are not demigods... Here it is said, apāyayat surān. Sura-asura. Sura, those who are not developed to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are asura. So every husband should be a sura. Sura means devotee. And every woman should be religious. Religious means to become chaste, faithful to the husband. And the husband should become a devotee. Then both of them will make progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and that is the perfection of life.

So here it is very clearly described that anyān mohinyā. Mohinī, mohinyā striyā, by the formation. So we should not be attracted. But generally, people are attracted. The whole world, the material world is going on that the woman is attractive for man and the man is attractive for woman. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam. This is the general platform of attraction between man and woman. And when they are united by such attraction, then they become more materially knotted. And then they are after...

puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti

[SB 5.5.8]



Our material bondage is due to an illusion. What is that illusion? That "I am this body." Dehātma-buddhi. "I am this body, and anything which is required for this body or which I possess for the comfort of this body, that is mine." Both of them are illusion, because I am not this body; I am soul, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. But the illusion is everyone is thinking, "I am this body." "I am Indian," "I am American," "I am white," "I am black," "I am brāhmaṇa," "I am śūdra," "I am this," "I am that." So this is illusion. Therefore the Vedic system is, to save one from this illusion, the first stage of life is brahmacārī, to understand the value of life and strictly without any association with woman. That is called brahmacārī. Strictly.



So the whole Vedic system is to convince one that "You are not this body, and anything you possess in relationship with your body, they are all illusion. You are spirit soul, part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore your duty is some way or other, come out of this entanglement of the bodily concept of life and bodily possession. Come out. Be free. Brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20]. Now your position is jīva-bhūta." Jīva-bhūta means you are thinking that 'I am a product of this material world.' All scientists, all philosophers, they are the same concept, that "I am this body. Beyond this body there is nothing." All big, big professors, scientists, that "After this body is finished, everything is finished." But actually, that is not a fact. From Bhagavad-gītā you understand that na jāyate na mriyate. The spirit soul is never born, never dies. It is the body, material body, that takes birth and dies. But spirit soul remains. Dehāntara-prāptiḥ. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. He transmigrates to another body, just like we are transmigrating from one body to another. There are so many children here. Now they are doing so many things foolish, but we enjoy because we know that this body is foolish body. Nobody grudges if a child does something which not to be done. Just like most children, they are chewing their thumb, but if you do that, that cannot be allowed. Because your body is different, and his body is different.

So these rascals, they do not understand the simple truth, that this body is different from my..., from the body of a youth or boy. They are different bodies. They are thinking the body is growing. The body's not growing. Body is changing. Just like in cinema, photograph, you see some body is moving, but that is not moving. That is different body changing, the photographs. But because it is shown so swiftly, we see that one body. As soon as the machine is stopped, the body is stopped. Immediately. We have experience. So these bodies are different bodies. Otherwise, a child does so many things foolishly and the elderly boy or a youth, he does not do so. Because the body is different. Why do they not understand? This is called ignorance. The body is different. Similarly, as everyone has got past, present and future... You are all young men. You had your past. You had a child's body or boy's body. In future you will get a body like me, aged. Similarly, I had my past. I was, I had a youth's body. Now I have got aged body. Then why not future, another body? This is very common conclusion. And it is given, it is confirmed. Not that we are imagining. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. As the child is changing body to boyhood, boy is changing body to youthhood-dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā [Bg. 2.13]-and the youth is changing body to old age body, similarly, the old also will change the body, again will get a small baby's body and again, again. That is the way of nature.

So every one of us, spirit soul, part and parcel of God. Now we are embarrassed due to our ignorance. So when this ignorance is moved, we become enlightened, that is called brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20], self-realization, spiritual realization.

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



So without being brahma-bhūta, that "I am spirit soul," Kṛṣṇa consciousness does not become very perfect. If we are in the bodily concept of life, then it is rather difficult. It will take time. Because unless you come to the platform to understand that you are not this body, you are spirit soul, the actual devotional service does not begin. But to the neophyte student, the chance is given to develop this devotional service: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ smaraṇam arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyam [SB 7.5.23]. The method is by constantly being engaged in devotional service, one becomes realized soul. God helps him, Kṛṣṇa helps him. Then he becomes a perfect, liberated soul.



Liberated soul means hitvā anyathā-rūpam. Now we are working under the designation of this body. Everyone is working under this designation of this body. When we become above the designation of the body, that is our real, constitutional position. So first of all, to realize that "I am not this body," and the next stage is that "I am spirit soul, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore as part and parcel is meant for giving service to the whole, therefore my constitutional position is to serve Kṛṣṇa." That is perfection of life.

Thank you very much. (end)



720923SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.18

-

Los Angeles, September 23, 1972



Prabhupāda:



caturdaśaṁ nārasiṁhaṁ

bibhrad daityendram ūrjitam

dadāra karajair ūrāv

erakāṁ kaṭa-kṛd yathā

[SB 1.3.18]



So in the previous verses all the incarnations of God, they have been given there-father's name, mother's name. Kṛṣṇa avatāra also, His father's name, mother's name is there. But here Narasiṁha, there is no name of the father and mother. This verse is peculiar that there is no names. Why? Because this Narasiṁha incarnation came out of a column. Hiraṇyakaśipu was so angry talking with his son. He saw that his son is very strongly Kṛṣṇa conscious; he could not induce him to forget Kṛṣṇa. So he was very angry. So he was ready to kill him with his sword. At that time Prahlāda Mahārāja, the little boy, five years old, he was just looking at the column in the hall. So his father marked it and immediately asked, "Do you think your God is there in the column?" He said, "Yes, my father." Immediately he broke the column, and Nṛsiṁha came out.



Therefore God is everywhere, not that because God takes birth as human being, from the womb of a human being, it does not mean that He is ordinary human being. He can come out from any source, not necessarily that He has to, but when He plays like a human being, He comes out like that. As if Devakī has become pregnant and the child is there within the womb. But that was simply a conception. Actually, when Kṛṣṇa appeared before His father and mother, He appeared as Lord Viṣṇu, four-handed. So later on, He became like ordinary child.

So the purport is, God is everywhere. That's a fact.

eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.35]



He is even within the atom. So He can come out from anywhere provided He is called by a pure devotee. And He is all-powerful. He can come out from anywhere and everywhere. He is everywhere. And this word is nara-from human being-but He is not nara, He is nara, meaning He is appearing like human being, half human being, and siṁha, half-lion. And the nails of the hands, and this great giant atheist was killed within a second. And keeping Brahmā's promise, he took benediction that he would not be killed by any man, any demigod, any animal, by any weapon, in daytime, in night, so many things, definition by negation. First of all he wanted directly, "Kindly make me immortal." So Brahmā said that "I am not immortal. How can I make you immortal? You can ask something else?" So he thought, "Let me become immortal indirectly. I shall not die in daytime, nighttime," because he has no idea that beyond day and night there is also another time. That he forgot.



This is Kṛṣṇa's māyā. We are very intelligent to surpass the law of the Lord, but Kṛṣṇa is so much more intelligent that you cannot surpass. You can conceive in different ways, that "I shall get out of the laws in this way or that way." But you cannot do so; you will forget something. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā.

sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛti jñānam apohanaṁ ca... [Bg. 15.15].

"I am situated in everyone's heart. Memory, knowledge, forgetfulness, they are coming from Me." If you want to forget Kṛṣṇa, He will give you good intelligence how to forget. But if you want to serve Kṛṣṇa, He will give you good intelligence how to serve. It depends on your choice. Therefore our business is to surrender. "Kṛṣṇa, God, now I am surrendering. I have experimented with all my knowledge, all my intelligence, everything. They have all become failures." They are sure to become failures because our knowledge, our intelligence, our talent, strength, opulence, everything depending on God. Kṛṣṇa, He gives you a little knowledge; therefore, you can become very proud of your knowledge. He gives you a little intelligence; therefore, you can become proud of your intelligence. But as soon as He likes, He can withdraw immediately, and you become forgetful.

Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu, just a strong atheist. He thought, "I am the biggest atheist. People are after God. They should come to me and worship me as God. I am God." But his godship or his lordship was finished within a second. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja, his son, when he was offered a benediction by the Lord, "My dear Prahlāda, you have undergone severe penances, suffering for My sake. Now you can take any benediction from Me, whatever you like." First of all he said, "My dear Lord, I am not a businessman that I serve You for getting some profit. I am born of a father-rajo-guṇa, passion-so naturally my body is made of the modes of passion. And You are so powerful You can give me anything I want. So if You allure me in that way, I think You should not do that. I may be allured, because my body is passionate." So Narasiṁhadeva became very happy, "Yes, here is a true devotee." A true devotee does not make any exchange business, "God, I have rendered You so much service. You give me something." People generally, they want, "I have become a devotee, I have done so much. So God must give me something as I desire. If He does not give, then I do not care for such a God." That is exchange business, that is not devotion.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



Devotion means no desire, not covered by knowledge and fruitive activity. Simply favorable executing devotional service; favorably, not unfavorably. This is pure devotion. Similarly, in the Nārada-pañcarātra it is said:



sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



One has to become pure, completely. "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim." "I am Christian," "I am this," "I am that," these are all upādhis, designation.



So one has to become free from all designations, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught:

nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro

nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

kintu prodyan-nikhila-paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtābdher

gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ

[Cc. Madhya 13.80]



"I am not a brāhmaṇa, I am not a kṣatriya, I am not a gṛhastha, I am not a vānaprastha," everything, all the eight varṇāśramas, He denied. "I don't belong to any group." Then what You are? "I am the servant of the servant of the servant of the servant-one hundred times down the servant." Of who? "The maintainer of the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa." A pure devotee does not belong to any group, and he wants to become the lowest servant, not the first-grade servant. That is pure devotion.



So Prahlāda Mahārāja, a pure devotee, he did not like to make any exchange. Then again he was offered a chance, "You can at least, whatever you have desire within your mind, you can ask from Me." So again Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "My dear Lord, in this material world, who could be more powerful than my father? I have seen it. Even big demigods, they were trembling in the presence of my father, he had so much power. Practically he was the topmost of all material power. But I have seen also that within a second You have finished everything. So what is the value of this material power? Why should I ask from You? Kindly engage me as servant of Your servant. If You want to give me something, please engage me as the servant of Your servant." And still, because he was Vaiṣṇava, he prayed to Lord Nṛsiṁha, "For my personal, I am quite satisfied. If I can chant Your holy name, then there is nothing more I want. But there is one thing I want." What is that? "My father was a great atheist, and demon, and he has committed so many offenses unto You. But I request that You forgive him." This is Vaiṣṇava son. And Lord Nṛsiṁha said, "My dear Prahlāda, before you are requesting like that, your father, his father, up to fourteen fathers, all are delivered because you are his son." Such a devotee, taken birth in a family, this is a special concession. Whatever the others may be, they are all delivered.

Therefore the best service one can do or render to his family, to his country, to his society, to his person, is to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the best service. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ [Bg. 18.66]. If anyone has become Kṛṣṇa conscious, he has finished all other business. If he simply sticks to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then all other business is automatically finished. That is stated in the śāstra:

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

[SB 11.5.41]



"Anyone who takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord," the Lord also says, "suppose if you do not do your duty in relationship to your country, to your family, so many we have got obligations. There may be sinful activities." But Kṛṣṇa says, "If you surrender, I will give you protection from the resultant reaction of all sinful activities." The same thing is confirmed in the Bhāgavata. "If anyone gives up all these occupational duties and simply takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is no more servant or debtor or obliged to anyone." For a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, his only duty is to serve Kṛṣṇa. Of course, "Kṛṣṇa" means so many things-Kṛṣṇa is not alone-at least Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's devotees. The nondevotees are also included, but directly the devotees are included. So when you serve Kṛṣṇa, then we must take consideration of Kṛṣṇa's devotees also. If we neglect Kṛṣṇa's devotees and simply try to go directly to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is not so cheap. Kṛṣṇa wants to see, just like there is a common word, "If you love me, love my dog." Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja requested, "Kindly engage me in the service of Your servant."



Thank you very much. (end)



720924SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.19

-

Los Angeles, September 24, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



pañcadaśaṁ vāmanakaṁ

kṛtvāgād adhvaraṁ baleḥ

pada-trayaṁ yācamānaḥ

pratyāditsus tri-piṣṭapam

[SB 1.3.19]



Translation: "In the fifteenth incarnation, the Lord assumed the form of a dwarf-brāhmaṇa, Vāmana, and visited the arena of sacrifice arranged by Mahārāja Bali. Although at heart He was willing to regain the kingdom of the three planetary systems, He simply asked for a donation of three steps of land."



Prabhupāda: So Vāmanadeva.



chalayasi vikramaṇe balim adbhuta-vāmana

pada-nakha-nīra-janita-jana-pāvana

keśava dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare



So Bali Mahārāja, he was the grandson of Prahlāda Mahārāja. They were in the demon's family. But in the demon's family also, there is sometimes Prahlāda Mahārāja, Bali Mahārāja. Prahlāda and Bali, they are our ācāryas. There are twelve bona fide ācāryas. Balir vaiyāsakir vayam. The ācāryas are mentioned. Dvādaśa-mahājanāḥ. Svayambhū. Svayambhū means Lord Brahmā. (aside:) Don't make sound. Svayambhū, Nārada. Nārada is also one of the authorities. They have been accepted at (as) authority for understanding religious principles. Religious principle is not to be understood by from a rascal. No, that anyone comes and says religious topics. No. We have to receive it from the authority.



So Bali Mahārāja is one of the authorities. Out of the twelve authorities, first is Lord Brahmā; the next, Nārada; the next, Lord Śiva; then next, the Kumāras; then Kapiladeva; then Manu, Vaivasvata Manu; then Prahlāda Mahārāja; then Janaka Mahārāja; then Bhīṣmadeva; then Bali Mahārāja; then Śukadeva Gosvāmī; and then Yamarāja. It is stated in the śāstra that mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. You cannot understand transcendental subject matter simply by dry speculation and argument. You cannot understand. Neither by reading Vedic literature. The conclusion is that you have to follow those who are authorities. Mahājano yena. Dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Guhā. Guhā means the cave, mountain cave, and guhā means the heart. So suppose something is very valuable is there in the cave of the mountain, and you do not know how to search it out. But if you know somebody who knows it, if you follow him, that "He is going there so I may also follow..."

So religious principles cannot be manufactured, neither it can be made by speculation. So actually, there cannot be many religions. The rascal theory that "There are as many religious system as I can believe... You believe something, that's all right. I believe something, that's all right. He believes something, that's all right." No. It is not like that. Then everyone will believe like any nonsense thing, that becomes religion? No. Religion means dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Religion means the codes, the laws, given by God. That is religion. Man cannot manufacture. I have several times explained. Just like law, state law. The state law can be given by the government. You cannot manufacture law. Nobody will care for your law. The state law is that "You must keep right your car. As soon as there is red light, you must stop." If you violate, you will be punished, although it is very simple thing. Similarly, religion means the law of God. You cannot violate it. If you violate, then you will be punished. If you think that "This religious system is very stiff. Let me manufacture my own religion," so that kind of religion is not accepted by the Vedic culture. And when actually the real religion is violated... Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati... [Bg. 4.7]. Glāniḥ means violation. Tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham. At that time the Supreme Lord or His representative comes to establish real religion.

That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.

...dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge.



Dharma-saṁsthā... Real religious principle. Real religious principle means to abide by the laws of the Supreme Lord, God. But they do not believe in God. "Everyone is God. I am God, you are God, he is God, everyone is God. So whatever law you give yourself, that becomes your religion." This is going on. So God is not so cheap that you become God, I become God, he becomes God. The śāstra says, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. God is Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, the original God. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda [Bs. 5.1]. God, Kṛṣṇa also says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no superior authority than Me." The Vedānta-sūtra also says, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The original source of everything. Who is that original source? God. Who is that God? Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. "I am the origin of everything." Iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ. "Those who are budha..." Budha means one who knows, one who is in the knowledge. Bhāva-samanvitāḥ. Bhāva-samanvitāḥ, knowing everything in ecstasy, "Oh, here is God." Budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ.



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



So everything is there. God is there. His name is there. His address is there. His law is there. Everything is there. But the rascals will not accept it. That is the position. Therefore we have to follow the mahājana. So Bali Mahārāja is one of the mahājana. How he became mahājana? Because he's surrendering fully unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This Vāmanadeva, incarnation of... Keśava dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa. So the incident is that Bali Mahārāja was very powerful, and he conquered the whole universe, even the demigods all. So Viṣṇu is always in favor of the demigods because demigods, they are also devotees. The difference between sura and asura... Asura means envious of the demigods. That is called asura. Sura-dviṣa. The another name of the asura, "those who are envious of devotees." That is the only business. There, two classes of men are always there. Sometimes one class in more in number, and other class is more in number. But two classes. Dvau bhūta-sargau loke [Bg. 16.6]. "There are two classes of men, living entities." Daiva āsura eva ca. "One is called daiva, demigods, and the other is called āsura." So who is daiva? Viṣṇu-bhakto bhaved daiva. "Those who are devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, they are called demigods, or Vaiṣṇava." All Vaiṣṇavas are demigods. And those who are not... Āsuras tad viparyayaḥ. "Anyone opposite number, against Viṣṇu, they are all called asuras."



So sometimes in asura's family also, there are Vaiṣṇavas. By the grace of Nārada. Nārada makes... Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja became a great devotee by the grace of Nārada, although he was born of a father, atheist father, Hiraṇyakaśipu. So Nārada Muni's business is to travel all over the universe and make Vaiṣṇava. So this Bali Mahārāja, he conquered all over the universe, and the demigods were defeated. So Vāmanadeva, He also one of the considered demigods, Upendra. So He went to Bali Mahārāja by a trick. Because Bali Mahārāja... Kṛṣṇa knows that Bali Mahārāja was the grandson of Prahlāda Mahārāja and he was a great devotee at heart. He knew that. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Lord is situated in everyone's heart. He knows everyone. So therefore, in order to return back the kingdoms taken from the demigods, He made a trick. He went there. Bali Mahārāja was performing a great sacrifice, Bali-dhare.(?) So He went there and asked Bali Mahārāja, "Bali Mahārāja, you are performing such a great sacrifice. I am at your door. I am brāhmaṇa. Will you kindly give Me some donation?" "Yes, why not? That is my... I will give you. Whatever You want, I will give You."

So immediately his spiritual master, the demon's spiritual master Śukrācārya... Śukrācārya means... Śukra means semina. Seminal ācārya. Means... You do not know. In India, there is a class of men, they are called gurus. The professional guru, rather. So Śukrācārya. Śukrācārya, he was very learned scholar. He knew everything, that "Here Vāmanadeva, He is incarnation of Viṣṇu. He has come to cheat Bali. He will ask something and then He will take everything from Bali." He knew it. So sometimes cheating also done by the Supreme Lord for the sake of the devotee. So this is not cheating. Just like father sometimes cheats a son. Suppose something is there, and two brothers, small children, they are fighting. One has taken, another is crying. So the one will not deliver to the other. So father says, "My dear child, will you kindly give me this." So he gives to the father and he delivers to the other child. (laughter) You see? So sometimes God has to do such cheating of affection. That is not cheating actually. But the cheating propensity is there in God. Otherwise where we get it? (laughter) But we use cheating for our personal sense gratification. But if you use that cheating propensity for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction, then it is all right. Manimiti kṛtaṁ pāpaṁ puṇyāyaiva kalpate.(?)

So the Bali Mahārāja was cheated by... But he, being cheated, he became conqueror. So this Śukrācārya said to Bali Mahārāja, "Don't promise to this Vāmana anything. He is Lord Viṣṇu. He has come to cheat you." Bali Mahārāja became more enlightened. "Oh, He is Lord Viṣṇu? But you have taught me that everything should be given to Viṣṇu. So if Viṣṇu has come at my door, why you are asking not to make any promise?" So that means Śukrācārya were playing duplicity. He taught something, and now he's saying another thing. Therefore Bali Mahārāja said that "I cannot accept. I give up your company from this day, that you are checking me to offer everything to Viṣṇu. Oh, I do not want such spiritual master"

So that means... That is the shastric injunction, that anyone who is not a Viṣṇu devotee, or Vaiṣṇava, he cannot become guru. That is the injunction of the śāstra. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ. A brāhmaṇa, very learned, he knows his duties, brahminical duties very well... Just like Śukrācārya. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇaḥ. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇaḥ. Brāhmaṇa have got six kinds of occupation: paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana dāna-pratigraha. Brāhmaṇa should be very learned, he should teach others also Vedic knowledge, paṭhana-pāṭhana. Yajana-yājana. He must be devotee or great worshiper, and he should teach others also how to worship. Yajana-yājana. Dāna-pratigraha. He will accept charity from others, and he will give in charity again to others. These are the six occupation of a brāhmaṇa. So śāstra says, ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipraḥ, "A brāhmaṇa, well conversed with these duties of brahminical duties," and mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ, "and expert in studying the mantras, Vedic mantras, and tantra, other Vedic literature," avaiṣṇavo gurur na sa syāt, "but if he is avaiṣṇava," means he does not worship Lord Viṣṇu but other demigods, "then he cannot become guru." That is not allowed. You cannot become guru. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro mantra...

So this Śukrācārya, he was against Viṣṇu. So Bali Mahārāja immediately rejected him. Therefore he became a mahājana, exemplary. Because you cannot give up your spiritual master. That is a great sin. Once accepted, the spiritual master takes responsibility for the disciple. And disciple also must be obedient to the spiritual master for life, for good. That is the relationship. So if one rejects spiritual master, he becomes a great sinner, most sinful. So Bali Mahārāja rejected his spiritual master. That's a great sin. But he rejected on shastric ground, because he objected for Viṣṇu worship. Therefore such spiritual master should be rejected. Should be rejected. Therefore he became mahājana, authority. Anyone who is obstruction to worship the Supreme Lord, he should be rejected immediately. That is bhakti. Ānukūlyasya grahaṇaṁ prātikūlyasya varjanam. Anything favorable for advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be accepted; anything unfavorable, that should be rejected. This is śaraṇāgati. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. We have to worship Kṛṣṇa, whatever is favorable. It is not that because the microphone is material, therefore I cannot use it. There are some so-called transcendentalists... Why not? If I speak through the microphone, I can serve better Kṛṣṇa. Why shall I not accept it? So ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. Anything which is favorable for serving Kṛṣṇa, we shall accept. After all, everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Nothing belongs to you. Simply we are thieves. We are using Kṛṣṇa's property for our own sense gratification. Stena eva sa ucyate [Bg. 3.12]. All thieves.

So just like this Bali Mahārāja, he conquered. So actually nothing belongs to Bali Mahārāja, but he thought So Kṛṣṇa, to save him from this theft criminality, He approached him, "My dear Bali Mahārāja, will you kindly give Me three feet land." So after rejecting his spiritual master, who opposed, he promised, "Yes, I shall give." So by one feet the whole lower portion of the universe was covered. The other feet, the upper portion of the universe was covered. Still, the third feet remained. So Vāmanadeva asked, "Now, Bali Mahārāja, all your possession is now covered by My two feet. Where is to keep the other feet?" Bali Mahārāja said, "Yes, there is place. You just put Your feet, foot on my head." So in this way Bali Mahārāja surrendered everything. Sarvātma-svāpateyam. He, personal property and the personal body, everything dedicated to Kṛṣṇa. He became mahājana. There are nine processes of bhakti:

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



So Bali Mahārāja dedicated ātma-nivedana, everything: his property, his personal body, everything. So in exchange, Vāmana, Lord Vāmana became his doorkeeper. So Vāmanadeva said, "My dear Bali Mahārāja, you are so great a devotee. So in return for your service, I shall remain always your doorkeeper."



So by offering everything to Kṛṣṇa, nobody is loser. You must always remem... They are gainer, the best gainer. Because after all, everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Why should we foolishly say, "It is mine, it is mine?" Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Janasya moho 'yam. This is called illusion. Nothing belongs to me, but I think that "This is mine, this is mine, this is mine." The whole world is going on (like) that. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. "We are Americans," "We are Indians," "This belongs to me," "That belongs to you." We make such, I mean to say, shareholder. But shareholder for other's property. Everything belongs to God. Not only this world-there are many millions and millions of planet. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram. Loka means planet. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-loka-maheśvaram. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka... [Bg. 5.29]. He is the proprietor. But we are dividing: "This is American," "This is Indian." But how long you will remain American and Indian? Say, fifty years. Then if you are going to be a dog, then who is saving your country? This is going on. Nothing belongs to us, except everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and we are all offspring of Kṛṣṇa. Everyone has got the right to father's property, but not to encroach others' property. Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam [Īśo mantra 1]. If people accept this philosophy, then the whole world becomes Vaikuṇṭha. There is no quarrel. There is no... Everything becomes happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



720925SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.20

-

Los Angeles, September 25, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



avatāre ṣoḍaśame

paśyan brahma-druho nṛpān

triḥ-sapta-kṛtvaḥ kupito

niḥ-kṣatrām akaron mahīm

[SB 1.3.20]



Translation: "As Bhṛgupati, the sixteenth incarnation of the Godhead, the Lord annihilated the administrative class, or kṣatriyas, twenty-one times, being angry with them because of their rebellion against the brāhmaṇas, or the intelligent class."



Prabhupāda: So keśava dhṛta-bhṛgupati-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare. Kṣatriya-rudhira. What is that verse? Can anyone cite?



kṣatriya-rudhira-maye jagad-apagata-pāpaṁ

snapayasi payasi śamita-bhava-tāpam

keśava dhṛta-bhṛgupati-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare



So Bhṛgupati. Brahma-druha. The administrative class, the politicians, they must obey the order of the brāhmaṇas. That is Vedic culture. Therefore although there was monarchy, king, one king, no democracy, but because the king would follow the instruction of learned sages and brāhmaṇa, they would rule over the country very nicely. Take, for example, if your president takes our advice how to rule, then everything will be very nice. Of course, we shall immediately ask the president to stop the slaughterhouse. But it is very difficult. You see? Neither the president is ready... Even if he is ready, he cannot do. Everything is constitutional.



So brahma-druha. The society must be brahminic. Vedic culture means to create every person a brāhmaṇa, not to keep him śūdra. Of course, in the modern educational system, the purpose is to elevate the general people. But they do not know how to elevate. Therefore there is so much trouble. The elevation should be... There must be some purpose, end. What purpose education is being given? It is purposeless education. Mostly, at the present moment, education means to give facilities for sense gratification. That's all. Boys and girls in the school and colleges, just from the very beginning they are given all liberty for sex life. So this is not education. Education means to lead the people gradually to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is education, God consciousness. Because human life... This is the only life. There are 8,400,000 species of life. This human form of life is the only opportunity to understand God. Cats, dogs, even demigods, they also, because their opulence, sense gratification, is so great that they have no time. Just like here in this world also, those who are too rich, they are simply after sense gratification. They have no time to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So to become too much materially opulent means that is another danger. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said therefore, jaḍa-vidyā jato māyāra vaibhava. The expansion of material advancement... Material advancement means expanding the sense gratificatory process. That is material. The more you expand how to satisfy your senses, that is material. And the more we expand how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, that is spiritual. That is the difference between material and spiritual. It does not mean that material stone, material, and spiritual means it becomes zero. They are thinking like that. Śūnyavādi. They think spiritual means just the opposite number of material. "So material, we have got variegated experience, solid experience, so make it zero." That is not spiritual. That is simply negation. That philosophy is the Buddha philosophy, that "You are suffering from some disease painful, so I cut your throat. That's all. Everything finished. No more suffering. Zero. Make it zero." No. The process should be, if you are diseased, if you are suffering, the suffering should be stopped. Not that to kill you to stop the suffering. No. That is our philosophy.

We are changing. Why one is suffering? He is suffering for indulging in sense gratification. We are educating people that "You enjoy your senses through Kṛṣṇa. Through Kṛṣṇa. You like to dance? Yes. You dance through Kṛṣṇa. You want to eat nice? You eat through Kṛṣṇa. You want to sing? You sing through Kṛṣṇa. You want to paint? You paint through Kṛṣṇa." This is our education. Not directly for my sense gratification. I want to paint nice picture. So because I wanted my sense gratification, now painting has become several logs. Especially in your country. What is that painting? That means the tendency toward making it zero. Śūnyavādi. We say, "You have got taste for painting. You are nice painter. Just paint Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. You see how nice it is." So painting is not to be stopped. It is simply diverted for Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We don't want to kill, but we simply divert to Kṛṣṇa. Purification, that is. If you don't divert your attention to Kṛṣṇa, then more and more, you will become sinful, and everything will be polluted.

So that was being observed formerly. As soon as there was some discrepancy in the brahminical culture... Brahminical culture means the aim of advancement of civilization is spiritual realization, self-realization, Viṣṇu. Ultimately, Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the prerogative. That is a special chance for the human being. This chance is not for any other living being. So for this purpose, there are so many rules and regulation: Manu-saṁhitā, the social system, the political system, the spiritual system, so many things. Everything chalked with an aim: how to understand Brahman. Brahma jānāti iti brāhmaṇaḥ. As soon as one understands what is Brahman, Parabrahman, Kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahman-then his life is perfect. That was the aim.

So actually, the administrators, the brāhmaṇas, sages, they gave their verdict, that "My dear king, you rule over the country in this fashion. People will be happy." So when the kings became sensuous, they thought that the kingdom is their father's property. They haven't got to do anything with the people. They can employ the taxes for sense gratification, as it is going on now. Whatever taxes are levied, they are divided among the government servant. That's all. You don't get any benefit. You are simply paid, to pay tax. That's all. You don't get any benefit. That is everywhere, the modern government. So such thing happens because this material world is such that even if you make very nice arrangement, it will deteriorate. The time factor. So sometimes, when it happens so that the administrators, nṛpān, the kings, were neglectful in their proper duty, so it was so much aggravated, at that time Jamadagni, Bhṛgupati, he took the matter, took his sword. He was a brāhmaṇa, but to chastise these irresponsible kings, He killed them, killed them seven into three times, twenty-one times. And from history it appears that many of the kṣatriyas, they left India and they came to this part of the world. And so far my guess is concerned, you Europeans, Americans, you belong to that kṣatriya family descendant. But because you were separated directly from the Vedic culture, now you have become different. Now again that Vedic culture has come to your service. Take advantage of it. You see?

So one has to take this Vedic culture to make his life perfect, and... Of course, formerly the brāhmaṇas were so strong. That... they did not like to govern directly. They used to live in the forest, cultivating spiritual knowledge, writing books. They had no interest in taking charge of government. No. They never stood for election. There was no election. So kṣatriya-rudhira. So He purified this earth, the surface of the earth, by washing it by the blood of these kṣatriyas. This is the incarnation of Jamadagni, or Paraśurāma. Paraśurāma. Some of the sages, saintly persons, are still living. Still living. They are tri-kāla-jña. They have no past, present, future. When this whole universe will be annihilated, then they will go to Vaikuṇṭha or spiritual world personally. So Paraśurāma, Vyāsadeva, and many others, they are supposed to be still living. What is the purport?

Pradyumna: "The kṣatriyas, or the administrative class of men, are expected to rule the planet by the direction of the intelligent class of men, who give direction to the rulers in terms of the standard śāstras, or the books of revealed knowledge. The rulers carry on the administration according to that direction. Whenever there is disobedience on the part of the kṣatriyas, or the administrative class, against the orders of the learned and intelligent brāhmaṇas, the administrators are removed by force from the posts, and arrangement is made for better administration."



Prabhupāda: Yes. That was the custom. Not that by removing the king from the throne or killing the king, the brāhmaṇas and the sages would come there to sit down on the throne. No. His son will be given chance to become king. The descendant was picked up, and they would take charge of the minor king, advise him, but they will never touch the throne. There are many instances. Just like Veṇa Mahārāja. He became too much atheistic. He was also killed by the brāhmaṇas and the sages. Then his son Pṛthu Mahārāja became king, and he was a good administration, administrator. So in this way, things were going on.



So the aim was how to make people happy by enlightening them in spiritual knowledge. Not that how to make better arrangement for eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. That was also going on. But the main purpose of life was brahminical culture. Brahma-druha. When the kings were neglectful to see that the people are being enlightened about spiritual self-realization, that wasn't good administration. Without that aim, no nation can become happy. No community can become happy.

So the responsibility was that time to the administrator. They would see that everyone, every brāhmaṇa, is following the rules and regulation of a brāhmaṇa; every kṣatriya is following the rules and regulation of kṣatriya. Vaiśya, śūdra... And nobody can interfere the other's business. Everyone is employed in his own business. And tax. Tax. The brāhmaṇa had to pay no tax. Only kṣatriyas, they were tax collector. And śūdra also, they had no property; therefore there was no tax. Only the vaiśya class, the productive class, they had to pay tax. And that tax also was very simple. There was no encroachment. You simply give one fourth of your profit to the government. That's all. No more tax. Sales tax, this tax, income tax, excise tax, this tax-simply tax, tax, tax. No. Not like that. Whatever he has got profit. "Got" means whatever profit he has made... If he has no profit, there is no tax. That was the government system. So how he will pay if he has not made any profit this year? Just like we are hearing there is no good monsoon in India this year. So there will be no very much good production. But if there is no good production, the government should not levy any tax. But now, at the present moment, "You go to hell, but you must pay the tax. And we divide the tax amongst ourself." That's all. Finished. Or we employ the taxes for fighting, for declaring war. That's all.

So at the present moment we are in a very, very deplorable condition, no good government. Simply by changing, by so-called parties, the government cannot improve. The government can improve when there are Kṛṣṇa conscious person. So if some day you turn all the people Kṛṣṇa conscious, then you become president.

Thank you very much. (end)



720926SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.21

-

Los Angeles, September 26, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tataḥ saptadaśe jātaḥ

satyavatyāṁ parāśarāt

cakre veda-taroḥ śākhā

dṛṣṭvā puṁso 'lpa-medhasaḥ

[SB 1.3.21]



Translation: "Thereafter, in the seventeenth incarnation of Godhead, Śrī Vyāsadeva appeared in the womb of Satyavatī, wife of Parāśara Muni, and he divided the one Veda into several branches and sub-branches, seeing that the people in general were less intelligent."



Prabhupāda: So this Parāśara actually was not husband of Satyavatī. When Satyavatī was not married, Parāśara gave birth to Vyāsadeva. Later on Satyavatī became the wife of Mahārāja Śantanu, father of Bhīṣmadeva. This Satyavatī was the daughter of a fisherman. She was neither born of a brāhmaṇa father or kṣatriya father. So formerly, a higher-caste man could accept a girl born of lower caste, but a lower-caste man could not accept a girl born of higher caste. That was the system. Because in the śāstra it is... Ordinary, I mean to say, instructive śāstra.



Just like Cāṇakya, in his moral lessons, he says that viṣād apy amṛtaṁ grāhyam. When there is a tub of poison, but, if there is little nectar, then you take it. Don't think that "It is in the poison pot, why shall I take it?" No, you can take it. Viṣād apy amṛtaṁ grāhyam amedhyād api kāñcanam. Suppose in a very filthy place where people pass stool, urine, there is some gold. So you should take it. Don't think that because the gold is in the polluted place, gold has become polluted. No. You take it. Viṣād apy amṛtaṁ grāhyam amedhyād api kāñcanam, nīcād apy uttamā vidyā. Vidyā, education, was to be received from a brāhmaṇa, because it was the brāhmaṇa's business to become highly learned scholar and make others educated. Teacher's business was entrusted to the brāhmaṇas, administration to the kṣatriyas, production to the vaiśya, and labor to the śūdra. So because generally we have to take education from highly learned brāhmaṇa, but if a person born in low family, he has got some talent, education, so don't hesitate. Take from him. Not that, "Oh, he is low born. Why shall I take education from him?" No. The śāstra says, "No, you can take. It doesn't matter. He has got the learning. You take that. Make him a teacher." Nīcād apy uttamā vidyā strī-ratnaṁ duṣkulād api. Strī-ratnam. If a girl is very qualified, beautiful, even she is born of a low family, you can accept her. This is the injunction of the śāstras.

So Satyavatī happened to be a daughter of a fisherwoman, and, but she was very qualified, beautiful. So before her marriage, Vyāsadeva was born out of her womb. It is not that..., that before marriage girls were not giving birth to child. It was there, the society. But the society was so elevated that this was not done commonly. In extraordinary cases. So Satyavatī gave birth to Vyāsadeva, such a son, Vyāsadeva, incarnation of God. Vyāsadeva is not ordinary being. An incarnation of Nārāyaṇa. And he was meant for expanding Vedic knowledge. Then again, Vyāsadeva was born, but nobody could understand. She remained a virgin girl by the blessings of Parāśara Muni. Then she was again attractive to Mahārāja Śantanu. Mahārāja Śantanu became attracted by Satyavatī, and he wanted to marry. But Mahārāja Śantanu had his son. So her father objected. So king proposed to the fisherman that "I want to marry your girl." So the father said, "No, no, I cannot allow my girl to marry with you because you are already married. You have got your son, elderly son, Bhīṣmadeva." So he was a little sorry, Śantanu Mahārāja.

The son could understand that "The father is sorry because he was refused the hand of the girl Satyavatī." So he approached father. Not father. He approached the father of Satyavatī, that "Why you are refusing my father?" "No. You are present. How can I offer my daughter?" "No. Even if I am present..." Because the law is the eldest son will be enthroned after the death of the father. So he was eldest son. So Satyavatī's father was hesitating. So Bhīṣmadeva promised that "I will not accept the throne. The child born of Satyavatī, he will accept, he will be given the throne. You give your daughter to my father." He still refused. He still, "Well, our son may be king, but then again, your son will become the king." In this way, he was hesitating. So Bhīṣmadeva immediately promised that "I shall never marry. Don't hesitate." So in this way he induced the fisherman to give his daughter to his father.

So father could understand that "My son is so great that he wanted to satisfy. I wanted this girl, and he has managed." So he gave him a benediction to Bhīṣmadeva, "My dear son, you are so benevolent, so magnanimous. So I give you one benediction that you'll not die unless you desire to die. Unless you fix up your mind, 'Now I shall die,' you'll never die. You remain a very strong brahmacārī." So Bhīṣma remained very strong brahmacārī. There is another incidence of Bhīṣmadeva's life, that Pāṇḍu-vaṁśa. So one girl was attracted. So she was conquered. So the girl thought that "I will be able to marry Bhīṣmadeva," but when she came at home, Bhīṣmadeva said, "No, you have been conquered to be married with my brother. I am brahmacārī. I cannot marry you." So the girl said that "You have kidnapped me, conquered me. You must marry." So "No, I shall not marry." Then the girl approached to his spiritual master, this Jamadagni, Bhṛgupati, that "This boy he has conquered me. Still, he is not marrying me." So Jamadagni said, "Bhīṣma, you must marry this girl." Bhīṣmadeva said, "No. I have promised to my father never to marry. I cannot marry." Then Jamadagni said, "If you don't marry, then I will force you to marry." So there was fight between Bhīṣmadeva, spiritual master and... (laughter) So the spiritual master became defeated. (laughter) Then he gave his blessings. "All right, you remain brahmacārī." (laughter)

So this was the society principle, how to keep principle. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya. A very exalted status of society. So this Satyavatī is a famous woman in the history. Satyavatī. The whole Pāṇḍu-vaṁśa from Satyavatī. So now, here it is said that tataḥ saptadaśe jātaḥ satyavatyāṁ parāśarāt. Parāśarāt, semina given by Parāśara Muni in the womb of Satyavatī, satyavatyām. And cakre veda-taroḥ śākhāḥ. Veda, the knowledge, he divided. Vyāsadeva divided into many branches. Therefore Vyāsadeva is known as Veda-vyāsa. He expanded the Vedic knowledge. Formerly there was only one Veda, Atharva-veda. And this Atharva-veda was learned by tradition, by hearing from the spiritual master. There was no book. Therefore Veda is known as śruti. Śruti means hearing. The spiritual master will recite Vedic mantra, and the disciples will hear. Just like we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra or any other Vedic mantra. You hear. But there was no need of book. His memory was so sharp that once heard from the lips of the spiritual master, the students become completely well versed. There was no need of book.

But Vyāsadeva saw that next age, this Kali-yuga, people will be less intelligent. Here it is stated, dṛṣṭvā puṁsaḥ alpa-medhasaḥ. Alpa. Alpa means the brain substance not in much quantity. This is psychologically true, that within the brain, the brain substance, if there is more, then one is more intelligent. So here it is alpa... Just see, modern scientific psychology, how it was known, long, long millions of years ago. At least five thousand years ago. Alpa-medhasaḥ. And this is scientific fact. Those who are students of psychology, they know it. I was student of psychology, and our professor... He was a Scotman. He explained this brain substance, cerebular substance, Dr. Urquhart, that the more brain substance is there, more one becomes intelligent. And it has been found that a woman does not have more than thirty-six ounce of brain substance, whereas in man it has been found that he has got up to sixty-four ounce. Now, this is modern science. Therefore generally, generally, woman, less intelligent than man. You cannot find any big scientist, any big mathematician, any big philosopher amongst woman. That is not possible. Although in your country, you want equal status with man, freedom, but by nature you are less intelligent. What can be done? (laughter)

So therefore, woman is advised by the Manu-saṁhitā, they should remain under the intelligent man, not declare freedom. That will be their life nice. Therefore it is advised that until one is married with an intelligent husband, she must remain under the control of her father. Still in India, until a girl is married, she cannot move freely. Where is our Śyāmasundara? You know, what happened about that Sharma girls. Two girls in Nairobi, they wanted to join our society. So Brahmānanda, as other girls are joining, he welcomed, but it created a havoc to the family of the girl. They went here and there. "Oh, the girl has gone out of home. There will be no marriage." That's a fact. In India still, in respectable family, if a young girl goes out of home for three days, it will be difficult, or she will not be married. So this still I saw in Nairobi.

So anyway the system is unless one is married, a girl, she must remain under the control of the parents. Therefore it is the parents' duty to see that the girl is married to a suitable boy. That is the duty. When the girl is married, then parent's duty is finished. Not by the age. Up to this point. So during young time, say, up to, say, forty years, she should remain under the husband. And when there are grown-up children, she should remain... Just like that Mrs. Sharma. (?) She is under the care of her elderly sons. So Manu-saṁhitā says that na strī svātantryam arhati. Woman should not be given independence. She must remain... Just like... That is not bad. Just like a child remains under the control of the parents. That is good. Similarly, woman remaining under the control of father or husband or elderly boy, that is good for them. And still, they are very happy. Just like you see Kuntī. Kuntī was widow, but she was very qualified woman, so many ways. But still, she remained under the control of the five boys, five children, Pāṇḍavas. Kuntī also gave birth to a child before her marriage. That is Karṇa. That is Karṇa. So it was not very common affair, and in extraordinary cases it so happened.

So now, in this age, people are not very intelligent. They are claiming, "We are advancing in science. The brain has advanced and so on, so on." Formerly there was animal brain. The Darwin's theory: "Now the brain has evolved." No. Actually, they are degrading. They are degrading. Formerly the brain was very sharp. Otherwise why it is said, dṛṣṭvā puṁso 'lpa-medhasaḥ? The opposite word of this alpa-medhasa is su-medhasa. Alpa means less, and su means very nice. So su-medhasa. We are all alpa-medhasa, less intelligent, in this age. Out of so many alpa-medhasa rascal... In other, in a harsh words, alpa-medhasa means rascal, less intelligent or no intelligence. So there is su-medhasa. Su-medhasa. That is also stated. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ.

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



In this age, one should worship the incarnation of God, Kṛṣṇa, if he is su-medhasa, he is intelligent. Just like this alpa-medhasa, less intelligent. Su-medhasa means highly intelligent, intellectual. How? Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ, performing the saṅkīrtana-yajña. So those who are joining the saṅkīrtana-yajña, they are very intelligent, su-medhasa. They are not all hodgepodge, alpa-medhasa: something this, something that, something... No. Just fix up your mind in saṅkīrtana-yajña. Your life will be successful. Therefore it is called su-medhasa. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ.



So everything is there Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That is the topmost knowledge. That is transcendental knowledge. That is not material knowledge. Material knowledge, if you write some book, it has no meaning, because it is defective. But Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is not ordinary knowledge. It is transcendental knowledge. There is no defect. Our this mundane brain is defective. We can't... Just like our scientist, Svarūpa Dāmodara. He was speaking that they make experiment in the laboratory according to formula, but still, there is some mistake. Still, there is some mistake. Practically, scientific advancement, scientific knowledge means to find out mistakes. What you were are speaking? What is the exact language you told?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: I said there is always some statistical factor, which is called error. (laughter) Error is always slipping in.



Prabhupāda: So nobody can be perfect. Therefore all these so-called perfect leaders, they should close their business. (laughter) It is already experimental, all nonsense. Come to Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and chant. That's all right. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





720927SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.22

-

Los Angeles, September 27, 1972





Prabhupāda: Where is your tilaka? No tilaka. Hm. Why there is no light? You can open it. Cannot open? All right. Recite.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



nara-devatvam āpannaḥ

sura-kārya-cikīrṣayā

samudra-nigrahādīni

cakre vīryāṇy ataḥ param

[SB 1.3.22]



Translation: "In the eighteenth incarnation, the Lord appeared as King Rāma. In order to perform some pleasing work for the demigods, He exhibited superhuman powers by controlling the Indian Ocean and then killing the atheist King Rāvaṇa, who was on the other side of the sea."



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. To kill the miscreants and to protect the devotees, He descends. That is avatāra. They have two business. Not that avatāra means keeping some long beard or having an artificial helmet. Rascals may be allured by them, but those who are sensible, who have got sense, they will see with reference to the śāstra, the avatāra, every avatāra...



We are reading so many avatāras. The activity of that particular avatāra is also mentioned, that "This avatāra will, incarnation will appear accepting such and such person as father and mother, and His activities will be like this." So how any rascal can come out and say, "I am the avatāra, I am the incarnation"? So that some other rascals may believe, but those who have sense, they will not accept. Here it is clearly mentioned, Lord Rāmacandra. He appeared just like ordinary human being. Nara-devatvam āpannaḥ, accepted. There were many other kings as good as Lord Rāmacandra, but why people are after Rāmacandra? Because He is God. Unfortunately, there are so many rascals. They pose themselves as incarnation of Rāma, incarna..., Kṛṣṇa. And people are all foolish śūdras, no education, no knowledge, and they are accepting.

So Lord Rāmacandra appeared for the purpose of satisfying the sura. Kṛṣṇa appears for protection of the sura. Sura and asura. Asura means nondevotees, and sura means devotee. So for killing the asuras, Kṛṣṇa does not require to come down. Any agent. There are... Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. By simply advising the King of heaven, Indra, to send a strong wind, so many asuras can be immediately annihilated. So for that purpose, Kṛṣṇa does not require to come. He comes for satisfying the devotees. The devotees are so anxious to see Him. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared not to kill his teeny father. To kill his teeny father... Simply by directing the māyā, he could be killed. But He wanted to come before Prahlāda Mahārāja, that "You are My such nice devotee. You are suffering for Me. Now I have come. You see." This is the purpose. By the by, to kill the atheist, keeping the promise of Brahmā intact... He took benediction from Brahmā that "I shall not die in this way and this way, this way." All the promises of Brahmā kept. He appeared in such a form that it will not clash with the promise of Brahmā. Therefore He had to take the form of such a thing which does not clash with the promise. Brahmā was a devotee. He has given him some benediction. So Kṛṣṇa did not violate that. It must be kept. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. Just see (the) kindness of Kṛṣṇa. He kept Brahmā's promise, He kept the atheist Hiraṇyakaśipu's aspiration, and He satisfied Prahlāda And everything was done simply by incarnating as Narasiṁhadeva. This is Kṛṣṇa's plan. He comes, but by one stroke, He serves so many business. That is Kṛṣṇa.

So here is also, Lord Rāmacandra appeared. The main business was to kill Rāvaṇa. Not main business. Main business is to satisfy the devotee, side by side, to kill Rāvaṇa. And Rāvaṇa was on the other side of Indian Ocean. So Hanumān, a devotee of Rāmacandra, he jumped over the ocean simply by chanting "Jaya Rāma." You see? But Rāmacandra thought Himself that He is unable to jump over. He had to construct a bridge. You see? But what kind of bridge? Bridge, a stone bridge that was floating on the sea. The law of gravitation did not work. That is God. He can nullify any law. He can introduce any new law. And nobody has got experience that stone thrown on the water floating. No one has got... Naturally, it goes down. But this is God, that He nullifies the general law, as He desires. Sarva-śakti-sampannaḥ. That is all-powerful. That is greatness. Not that if you have got a small body and the elephant has got a very big body, therefore he is great. No. That is not greatness. The elephant, in spite of having such a big body and thousand times stronger than the human being, he is controlled by a small human being. That means intelligence is strength, not this bodily. Buddhir yasya balaṁ tasya. Anyone who has got intelligence, he has got strength. Just like by intelligence, they have discovered the nuclear weapon. By dropping a nuclear weapon hundreds and thousands of soldiers can be killed. There is no more need of maintaining a huge army. So many men now released. Those who have got atomic bomb... At least, I know in Russia, they know, "We have got atomic bomb. What is the use of maintaining such a huge army? Let them work for other production."

So it is intelligence, that work. So how much intelligence has got God, we can imagine. If we, our teeny brain, we are so intelligent... But unfortunately the rogues, having got a brain from God, they are denying God. Just see. The rascal does not consider that "I am working with my brain. That's nice. I have got a very good brain." Su-medhasaḥ. "But who has manufactured this brain?" You manufacture this brain. That you cannot. So the brain is important or the manufacturer of the brain is important? Who is important? This is intelligence. So we are not after the so-called big brain. We give them all respect. But we are after the manufacturer of the brain. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. He can manufacture thousands and millions of brains like that, like Professor Einstein or anyone. That is God.

So God is great. We have to understand how great He is. Not that simply sophistically, "God is great, and I do everything. God cannot see. Let me commit all kinds of sin." But God is great; He will see. "No, no, God cannot see. I can cheat God, although He is great." That is our philosophy. "God is great, but I am so great that I can cheat God." That is Hiraṇyakaśipu's philosophy. But He proved, God proved, "Yes, you have cheated Brahmā in so many ways with the idea that you will live forever. Now see. I am here. How great I am." So that is the appreciation of the greatness of God. If we read śāstras and see scrutinizingly, we can understand, "Yes, God is great." Not theoretically. Practically we can see how God is great. Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "The Personality of Godhead, Śrī Rāma, assumed the form of a human being and appeared on the earth for the purpose of doing some pleasing work for the demigods, or the administrative personalities to maintain the order of the universe. Sometimes great demons and atheists like Rāvaṇa and Hiraṇyakaśipu and many others become very famous due to advancing material civilization by the help of material science and other activities with a spirit of challenging the established order of the Lord. For example, the attempt to fly to other planets by material means is a challenge to the established order. The conditions of each and every plane are different, and different classes of human beings are accommodated there for particular purposes mentioned in the codes of the Lord. But puffed up by tiny success in material advancement, sometimes the godless materialist challenges the existence of God. Rāvaṇa was one of them, and he wanted to deport ordinary men to the planets of Indra, or heaven, by material means, without consideration of the necessary qualifications. He wanted a staircase..."



Prabhupāda: Just now they are planning that everyone will go to the moon planet without any qualification. That is their plan. It is Rāvaṇa's plan. Rāvaṇa said that "Why you are undergoing so much severe austerities to go to heaven? I shall make a staircase, and you go directly, without having performed any austerities." So to go to the moon planet, according to the Vedic description, it requires a qualification. The moon planet, that is one of the heavenly planets, and if anyone can go there, he gets ten thousands of years span of life. And the standard of living is very higher than this planet. These are the description in the Vedic literature. In the Bhagavad-gītā also, it is said, yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25]. If you want to be promoted to a heavenly planets, then you just perform the duties to please the particular demigod, you'll be... So these materialist scientists, they are thinking that they can go anywhere by the force of their so-called scientific advancement. But it has not proved successful till now. But still, they will say, "Yes, in future we shall go." All right, in future. "Trust no future, however pleasant." That's all. Go on.



Pradyumna: "He wanted a staircase to be built up directly reaching the heavenly planet so that people might not be required to undergo the routine of pious work necessary to enter that planet. He also wanted to perform other acts against the established rule of the Lord. He even challenged the authority of Śrī Rāma, the Personality of Godhead, and kidnapped His wife, Sītā. Of course, Lord Rāma came to chastise the atheists, answering the prayer and desire of the demigods. He therefore took up the challenge of Rāvaṇa, and the complete activity is the subject matter of the Rāmāyaṇa. Because Lord Rāmacandra was the Personality of Godhead, He exhibited superhuman activities which no human being, including the materially advanced Rāvaṇa, could perform. Lord Rāmacandra prepared a royal road on the Indian ocean with stones that floated on the water. The modern scientists have done research in the area of weightlessness, but it is not possible to bring in weightlessness anywhere and everywhere. But because weightlessness is the creation of the Lord by which He can make the gigantic planets fly and float in the air, He made the stones even within this earth to be weightless, and prepared a stone bridge on the sea without any supporting pillar. That is the display of the power of God."



Prabhupāda: So incarnation, in the śāstras... Here in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, some of the incarnations are described. But all incarnations are described in the śāstra. We should not be blind to accept any rascal and rogue as incarnation of God. Incarnation of God is not so cheap. That we should understand.



Thank you. (end)



720928SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.23

-

Los Angeles, September 28, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



ekonaviṁśe viṁśatime

vṛṣṇiṣu prāpya janmanī

rāma-kṛṣṇāv iti bhuvo

bhagavān aharad bharam

[SB 1.3.23]



Translation: "In the nineteenth and twentieth incarnations, the Lord advented Himself as Lord Balarāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa in the family of Vṛṣṇi, or the Yadu dynasty, and by so doing He removed the burden of the world."



Prabhupāda: So ekonaviṁśe. Eka ūna. Ūna means less. Eka means one. And viṁśa means twenty. So this is the way of Sanskrit literature: ekonaviṁśe, "less than one of twenty." That means nineteen. Ekonaviṁśe viṁśatime. And next, twentieth. So Balarāma first appeared, and then Kṛṣṇa appeared. Ekonaviṁśe viṁśatime vṛṣṇiṣu, in the family of Vṛṣṇi, Vṛṣṇi dynasty. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Vārṣṇeya because He appeared in the Vṛṣṇi family. Just like sandalwood. Sandalwood is known as "Malayan sandalwood." Malaya. There is a country, you know. East Asia, Malaysia. Now it called Malaysia. So formerly they were growing sandalwood in large quantity. Now they are growing rubber, no more sandalwood. They are not interested with the sandalwood. They are now interested in rubber wood. Because you have got motorcars, you require motor tires. So formerly these Malaysian sandalwood was very famous. So sandalwood can grow anywhere, but because in Malaysia sandalwood was very largely growing, therefore sandalwood was generally known as malayaja-candana. Malayaja, in Sanskrit. "The sandalwood of Malaysia."



Similarly Kṛṣṇa can appear from anywhere. Janma karma me divyam. Kṛṣṇa's birth, appearance, work, they are not ordinary. Divyam, transcendental. Yo jānāti tattvataḥ. If anyone understands, tattvataḥ, in truth, then the result is tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], then such person, after giving up this body, he does not take any more a material body. Punar janma naiti mām eti. "He comes to Me." That is success of life. If you simply try to understand Kṛṣṇa, the, His transcendental appearance, disappearance, activities, if you try to understand, then your life is success. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are trying to make people understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, he will become liberated from this material bondage. Actually, every one of us trying to get out of some kind of bondage. We feel that "I am bound up under certain circumstances, so I must get out." This is called ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti.

Duḥkha-nivṛtti means avoiding painful situation. So everyone is trying to avoid painful situation. That's a fact. We are struggling. I have got income, say two hundred dollars, so that is not sufficient for me. So I am struggling hard to get five hundred dollars, to avoid this painful situation. Again when in five hundred dollars I feel another pain, so I try for one thousand dollar. In this way go on increasing, and the painful situation will never be mitigated. That will continue. Otherwise, why millionaires are committing suicide? He has got money. But they do not know that any amount of material comforts will not make them happy. That is not possible. So we have repeatedly discussed this fact that other countries... Like India is advertised very poor country. But still, majority of the people in India, they are happy. People do not know. Although materially they haven't got possession... They have got only two cloth or even one cloth. In the village you will find, they are so poverty-stricken. But still, they are following the Vedic principles, taking bath early in the morning, going to their business, whatever they get, eating, husband, wife, children. They are happy. People say "Primitive." But you want, after all, happiness. Primitive or advanced, what is that? In advanced civilization, if you commit suicide, why not primitive?

So they do not know. They do not know what is actual happiness. Therefore the struggle is going on. They do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. These rascals, they do not know that real happiness is Viṣṇu, God, Lord Viṣṇu. When we approach Viṣṇu Just like we are. Our happiness is here, Kṛṣṇa. For Kṛṣṇa, we are working day and night. The karmīs are also working day and night, but they are not happy. We are happy. That they do not know. We are also doing the same thing. We are not lazy. We are not sleeping. Everybody is busy. Somebody is going to write, somebody is going to type, somebody is going to sell books, somebody is preparing prasādam, somebody is cleansing, somebody is going to saṅkīrtana. Not a single moment we are lazy. But because we are working for Kṛṣṇa, there is happiness. Nobody is paid here a single farthing. Rather, he brings money. But still, he is happy. But the karmīs, they are getting money, salary; still, they are not happy. Why? This is practical. Here we sometimes chastise that "You cannot live with us. Go out." But he cannot. Unless there is happiness, why he is sticking to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Those who are going back, again coming. They could not find any happiness. Again, they say... Here, the people say, "These are foolish people, working under some idea." But they are happy. Must be happy. But they do not know this. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know how happiness can be attained.

Happiness can be attained when you come to God-because you are part and parcel of God. The same example. A little child is crying. Nobody could pacify it. As soon as the child is put on the breast of the mother, immediately happy. Because the child is the part and parcel of the mother. And immediately he understands that "Now I have come to safe, my mother." Immediately happy. This is practical. Similarly, we are all part and parcel of God, Viṣṇu. So unless we come to Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa is Viṣṇu there is no happiness. It is not possible. It is not possible. But the rascals, they do not know. They are trying to become happy by so-called scientific advancement. What is this science? Ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti. The aim of life is to come to the platform of happiness, where there is no distress at all, simply happiness. That is our aim. There cannot be any distress. Only happiness. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12).

So you see so many pictures of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is playing with His cowherd boys; Kṛṣṇa dancing with His girlfriends, gopīs; Kṛṣṇa is stealing butter; Kṛṣṇa is doing so many-simply happiness, simply happiness. You won't find Kṛṣṇa is morose and sitting or crying. (laughter) Even if He is killing some demon, very laughingly, as easy job. You see? So either He is killing or dancing, He is happy. So we are giving this information of happiness, the topmost happiness, without any... Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). In the Vedānta-sūtra it is said that spirit soul, the Supersoul or the individual soul, their nature is to become happy. Ānandamaya. Happy. Spiritual life means happiness. There is no distress. But that happiness can be attained in cooperation with the Supreme. We are sparks of fire. So with the fire, if the sparks are "fut-put"... You see sometimes, the sparks; it looks very beautiful. The same spark, as soon as falls down from the fire, extinguished. The fiery quality immediately extinguished. So our material condition is like that. We have given up the company of Kṛṣṇa, and we wanted to be happy in this material world; therefore we are suffering. So same spark, particle of carbon, if you put again to the fire, it will again become red hot and fire. So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that we are trying the sparks, which by chance has fallen down from the fire, to pick it up again and put it in the fire. That is real happiness.

So here it is said that rāma-kṛṣṇāv iti. God appeared as Rāma and Kṛṣṇa. There are some foolish persons who are misled by another imitation Ramakrishna. You see? But those who are intelligent... This rascal Ramakrishna said that "I am the same Rāma-Kṛṣṇa." Another rascal believed, "Oh, he is Rāma-Kṛṣṇa." Why I say rascal? Because here it is said, rāma-kṛṣṇāv iti bhuvo bhagavān aharad bharam. There must be symptoms of Rāma-Kṛṣṇa. Anyone will say, "I am Rāma-Kṛṣṇa," and he becomes Rāma-Kṛṣṇa? How? What is the test? The test is bhagavān aharad bharam. When Kṛṣṇa and Rāma appeared, Balarāma, He killed so many demons to make the world peaceful. The beginning of killing was their maternal uncle Kaṁsa. Not only that beginning. From the beginning of Kṛṣṇa's birth, Pūtanā, Aghāsura, Bakāsura, the Keśī, and so many asuras... Every day, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma used to go in the forest and some asura would come to disturb Them, to kill Them, and Kṛṣṇa will finish them. And the friends will come at home and narrate the story to their mothers, "Mother, Kṛṣṇa is so wonderful. Such a big demon came and He killed immediately in this way and that way." That is Kṛṣṇa. Not that because one has got some so-called meditation, He becomes Kṛṣṇa without any test. But what is the proof that he is Rāma-Kṛṣṇa? But they do not take the proof. They simply pose a bogus man as Rāma-Kṛṣṇa.

So this Rāma-Kṛṣṇa is different from this bogus Ramakrishna. Rāma-Kṛṣṇa Bhagavān. They are actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and They proved it. Not that Rāma-Kṛṣṇa is dying out of cancer disease. Yes. We are not after such kind of Ramakrishna. Besides that, when there is real Rāma-Kṛṣṇa, why I shall go to the false and imitation Ramakrishna? They say the same Rāma-Kṛṣṇa. That's all right, the same, but I don't find any proof that the same. So why shall I take to this imitation Ramakrishna? Why not take this real Rāma-Kṛṣṇa?

So we should be intelligent enough. We should not be bluffed. Kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei baḍa catura. Without being very intelligent, nobody surrenders to Kṛṣṇa.

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



So anyone who has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, He is the most intelligent man. Jñānavān. Kṛṣṇa says, unless one is fully wise, after many, many birth, after many, many birth... Because everyone is trying to place a competitor of Kṛṣṇa. Just like I have said it... "Oh, why that Rāma-Kṛṣṇa? Here is another with big beard, Ramakrishna." So... But he is not wise? That kind of Ramakrishna is for the foolish man, and those who are presenting, he is also foolish. But bahūnām... In this way, foolishly accepting something as God... When one actually becomes wise, after many... If he is actually searching after God... Catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtino 'rjuna, ārto arthārthī jñānī, anisandes(?) tu..., jñānī ca bharatarṣabha. Jijñāsur jñānī ca bharatarṣabha. Jijñāsuḥ [Bg. 7.16].



So four classes of men comes to God. If they are pious, if the background is piety; then out of that class of men, inquisitive, jijñāsu; jñānī..., jñānī means those who are wise; and ārta, distressed: arthārthī, those who are in need of money. Generally people, ordinarily, if he is pious, then when he is in distress, he prays to God, "My dear Lord, I am in distress. Kindly save me." Or if somebody is in want of money, he also approaches God, "My dear Lord, for want of money I am suffering. Kindly give me some money." These are two classes. And the other two classes, jñānī, simply for knowledge, what is the actual constitutional position of God. He is called jñānī. And inquisitive, and inquiring what is God. So these four classes of men try to understand God or approaches God.

So out of these four, two classes, those who are in distress, or those who are in want of money, as soon as they get money, they forget God. Or as soon as their distress is over, they forget God. But these two classes, inquisitive and wise, they continue to search out what is God. So out of these two classes, when one understands what is God, he is perfect. Bahūnām. That becomes possible after many, many births. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān [Bg. 7.19]. What kind of knowledge? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. Kṛṣṇa is everything, Vāsudeva. "Kṛṣṇa's another name is Vāsudeva." Sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. That type of great soul is very rare. So in other words, those who have taken Kṛṣṇa as everything, they are the greatest soul, the topmost soul within the world. They cannot be misled by imitation Ramakrishna. They are interested with the real Rāma-Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva.

So Kṛṣṇa appeared in the Vṛṣṇi family, and our business is to understand Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, we cannot understand Kṛṣṇa fully. He is unlimited. But still, by following the footsteps of great mahājana, great devotees, personalities, we can understand to some extent what is Kṛṣṇa. So we may not understand fully. If we simply take it for granted, even without understanding Kṛṣṇa, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme and our business is to love Him... Real our aim is how to love Kṛṣṇa. Just like the gopīs. They did not know that Kṛṣṇa is God. Or the cowherds boys, they did not know. Even mother Yaśodā did not know that Kṛṣṇa was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But their love for Kṛṣṇa was spontaneous. They did not know anything beyond Kṛṣṇa. If you come to that stage, that is perfection. Not that we want to know what is God. What you will know? What knowledge we have got we can understand what is God? But we can see by God's activities.

When Kṛṣṇa appeared, His all activities were uncommon activities. So far as a human being, He was not human being, but He was playing as human being. The human being marries. So His marrying is also wonderful. He married 16,108 wives. This is uncommon. This is uncommon. Nobody can marry like that. Not only marrying. Mussulman nawabs, they used to marry also many wives. Not many wives. One nawab was there, he married 160 wives. They have got in Lucknow... When you go to India, you will see. That is now fallen. That all the wives of the nawab was living... That's a... Now it has been turned into a big park. There are small houses. So he could not reach all the wives every day or every night. That was not possible. Humanly it is impossible. One hundred sixty, that means if he goes, visits every, it will take at least six months. So after six months one queen or nawab, might have seen her husband. But Kṛṣṇa was not like that. Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself also in sixteen thousand forms, and each and every one of his wife was accompanied by Kṛṣṇa personally.

So this incarnation all described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. These symptoms, the father's mother's name, the place, the activities, everything is being described. So we cannot be cheated by a false incarnation of God. That is not possible. So the cheated, those who want to be cheated, they are cheated. But we don't want to be cheated. We want real God. Therefore nobody can cheat us.

Thank you very much. (end)



720929SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.24

-

Los Angeles, September 29, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



tataḥ kalau sampravṛtte

sammohāya sura-dviṣām

buddho nāmnāñjana-sutaḥ

kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati

[SB 1.3.24]



Translation: "Then, in the beginning of Kali-yuga, the Lord will appear as Lord Buddha, the son of Añjanā, in the province of Gayā, just for the purpose of deluding those who are envious of the faithful theist."



Prabhupāda: So these words are significant. Bhaviṣyati. Bhaviṣyati means "in future He will appear." Other avatāras, just like Lord Rāmacandra, Kṛṣṇa, They have been described that "He appeared for doing this work." Similarly, in future also, who will appear, that is also listed. So no pseudo incarnation can come in, because past, present, future, everything is described there. Bhaviṣyati. This Bhāgavata-grantha, śāstra, was written five thousand years ago. Now five thousand years ago there was no Buddha. But in future He will come, and that is mentioned here: bhaviṣyati. Not only Buddha's name only, but His mother's name and the place where He would appear. This is called śāstra. No speculation. Fact. Either past, present, or future, it doesn't matter. Tri-kāla-jña.



So we accept knowledge from such person who knows past, present, and future. Persons who do not know even present, what is going on, how we can accept knowledge from him? This is not our process. Our process is to receive knowledge from a person who knows past, present and future. Just like Kṛṣṇa and the ācāryas. They know. So our knowledge is perfect because we are receiving knowledge from the perfect as it is. Therefore our knowledge... It is not that I am perfect. I may not be perfect; I may be perfect. But because I am accepting the perfect knowledge, therefore whatever I speak on that basis, that is perfect. This is our process. You don't require to research. What research you will make? You are yourself insufficient. What research you can make? Your senses are insufficient. You try to see the cosmic manifestation with your microscope or telescope, but that is also manufactured by you. You are imperfect, so whatever you have done, that is all imperfect. How you can know? If you are imperfect... The four defects of the conditioned soul... One is sure to commit mistake. Anyone, any big man of this world, he must commit mistake. He is illusioned. He is accepting something for something. Every one of us, we accept this body as "I am," self. And we are fighting on this basis. "I am American, you are Indian," "You are Hindu, I am Muslim." Only on this bodily concept of life. But Bhāgavata says, as soon as we find a person on the platform of bodily concept of life, he is animal. That's all. Sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Go-kharaḥ. Go means cow, khara means ass. So anyone who is under the bodily concept of life, he is fool, rascal. That's all.

So these śāstras are written. Just like Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva is speaking that kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati. Kīkaṭeṣu means the province of Gayā, still existing. Bhaviṣyati. When? Tataḥ kalau sampravṛtte. Kalau. This age is called Kali-yuga. Sampravṛtte: "just in the beginning." So Buddha appeared 2,600 years ago. So for thousands of years, it is beginning. Just like the sunset and the sunrise, there is an intermediate period. It is neither light nor dark. That is called intermediate period. Similarly, at the end of every millennium, yuga, and the beginning of another yuga, that is called sampravṛtti, "just beginning." So sampravṛtte, just in the beginning. Because the duration of Kali-yuga... This yuga, Kali-yuga, it will exist for 432,000 of years. Altogether, all the yugas taken together, they are 4300,000's of years. Out of that, Kali-yuga is 432,000's of years. So out of that 432,000's of years, we have passed only five thousand years. We have passed only five thousand years. The Kali-yuga has begun from after the death of Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

During the time of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the Kali-yuga could not enter. He was so strong king. Kali-yuga means these four principles: illicit sex, intoxication, gambling, and meat-eating. This is Kali-yuga. Before the beginning of Kali-yuga, there was no such thing in the world, all over the world. With the beginning of the Kali-yuga, these things have begun: illicit sex, intoxication... Now it is so spread that every home, every house, every country, is full of these four principles of sinful life.

So tataḥ sampravṛtte kalau sammohāya sura-dviṣām [SB 1.3.24]. Sura-dviṣām. Dviṣa means, "I don't like to see you." That is called dviṣa. Dveṣa. Icchā-dveṣa. We have got two kinds of likings. We want to see somebody, and we want to, we do not want to see somebody. Icchā-dveṣa. These are our activities. Icchā-dveṣa samutthena sarge yānti parantapa [Bg. 7.27]. Our creation within this material world, icchā-dveṣa... We wanted to enjoy this material world, and we did not like Kṛṣṇa. Dveṣa. Dveṣa means, "I don't like you." There are so many things, we say, "I don't like." So as soon as we don't like Kṛṣṇa, God, and want to enjoy this material world, then we fall down, immediately. Icchā-dveṣa samutthena sarge yānti parantapa. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sarge means... This is the cause of our creation of this material body. Just like when you enter into the water, just like so many swimmers now entering within the..., you have to take a particular type of dress. As you are going to the moon planet, you have to fortify yourself with a particular type of dress. It costs about forty millions dollars? Something like that. You see? Similarly, the spirit soul... We are all spirit soul. When we want to enter this material world, we get this material body. This is the process. Now... Just like they take pleasure diving within the water, swimming like the fish. That natural tendency is there. You cannot say, "Why I have come to this material world?" Why you are swimming within the water? Why? Who has induced you? There is no such question. But the fact is as soon as you want to enter this material world, you have to accept this dress. Otherwise you cannot work here. This is the fact.

So our problem is that we have entered this material world out of our own will. Icchā-dveṣa samutthena [Bg. 7.27]. No one... Kṛṣṇa has not pushed us. You wanted something for your enjoyment, so-called enjoyment. Kṛṣṇa has provided you. Just like you want to enter into the prison life, therefore government creates a prison house. Government does not like that there should be prison house, and government has to make a department, criminal department, and spend millions of dollars for nothing, for maintaining the prison house. Government has no such thing, plan. But because you want to enter into the prison house, therefore, before your entering, government is prepared, "Here is your house. Please come." So that is the way of material creation. There was no need of this material creation. Some rascals questioned that "Why God has created this miserable world?" But you wanted, therefore God has given you. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. Kṛṣṇa says. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. You wanted such a thing. The same example, the prison house. The prison house, government is not canvassing, "Please, you all gentlemen and ladies, come here." No. You are going. You are going. Similarly, this material world is created for you because you wanted it. And here you cannot expect..., as you cannot expect in the prison house to live very comfortably... Because after all, it is prison house. There must be tribulation so that you may not come again. You cannot expect that prison house will be very comfortable and you live forever.

So upon these infliction of so many condition, so many miserable condition, still, we do not want to leave this place. Just see how much attachment we have got. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. This place has been described that it is a place for suffering. It is not the place for enjoying. But still, we are not inclined to leave it. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. You cannot make even compromise: "All right, it is a place of suffering, but we have got our radio and television. We shall live here." No. You may have your radio, television, and if you make compromise, nature will not allow you. After some years you kick out: "Please get out of this apartment." "No, I have got my television and this and..." "That's all right. You get out." Aśāśvatam. You cannot make even compromise, that "All right, it is miserable place. I will live here." But you will not be allowed to live here. But these foolish rascals, they do not understand. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19].

Therefore Lord Buddha appeared. These rascals... Sammohāya sura-dviṣām [SB 1.3.24]. Sura-dviṣām means rascals, atheists. "There is no God." In Buddha religion they don't believe in God. "Yes. There is no soul. There is no God." That is Buddhist theory. Śūnyavādi. "Everything void. Make void." Buddha philosophy is that "These bodily pains and pleasure are due to the combination of matter." This body, this gross body, or the subtle body, is made of physical matters: earth, water, air, fire, and ether, and mind, intelligence, ego. These are gross and subtle matters. So Buddha philosophy is that "Due to the combination of this matter, we are feeling pains and pleasure. So everyone is trying to eradicate all kinds of pains. That is the struggle for existence. So these pains will be automatically mitigated if you break this combination." That is Buddha... Nirvāṇa. That is called nirvāṇa. Break. Just like this house is combination of several material thing. Now, when it is broken... You have seen, so many houses have been dismantled. There is no more house. And as soon as there is no more house, there is no question of living or feeling pains or pleasure. That is Buddha philosophy.

The Śaṅkara philosophy is "No, simply breaking is not the solution. There is soul within this." Dehino 'smi yathā dehe. Śaṅkara gives him that "Wherefrom this living cognizance come? There is soul." That is Śaṅkara philosophy. But he is nirviśeṣa-vādī, nirākāra. That consciousness has no form, he says. Then farther development is this Vaiṣṇava philosophy, that as soon as there is consciousness, that is a person. These are the gradual development. Actually, they are not contradictory. But according to the time, circumstances, different types of philosophies are there. Just like Jesus Christ. He is advising, "Thou shalt not killing." That means the people were so much accustomed to kill. Very first-class gentlemen. Simply wanted to kill. So what advice can be given there? First is that "Thou shalt not kill."

So according to the time, circumstances, men, the different scriptures are there. The ultimate aim of scripture is to bring one to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But everything is not explained because the people are unable to understand. Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are making movement, but not that everyone is understanding. Those who are very intelligent, or those who are, whose background is pious, they can understand. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Those who are miscreants, mūḍha, rascal; narādhama, lowest of the mankind; and māyayā apahṛta-jñāna, and knowledge is taken away by māyā-such person never submit to Kṛṣṇa. But who submits? Catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ sukṛtinaḥ arjuna Those who are pious, out of them, four classes of men, ārto arthārthī jñānī jijñāsuḥ. Ārta means distressed, and arthārthī means need of money, jñānī means man of knowledge, wise man, and jijñāsu, inquisitive.

So Lord Buddha appeared at a time where people were too much addicted to animal killing. Still it is going on. Keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra, jaya jagadīśa hare. Sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam. Paśu-ghātam. Any religion where paśu-ghātam is there, that is not religion. That is not religion. That is simply barbarianism, under the name of religion. So God Himself becomes so much disturbed that these rascals are simply killing. At that time, of course, the Buddha religion was not there. The so-called followers of the Vedic religion. In the Vedas there are sanction for killing animal in a special sacrifice, but people took it as general, and they began to kill animals like anything, under the protection of Veda. Therefore when Lord Buddha began to preach his philosophy, ahiṁsā, nonviolence, he did not accept the authority of Vedas. Because people will misuse it. Therefore he said that "I don't care for your Vedas." Just like Lord Jesus Christ rebelled against the whole Testament. He formulated his own testament, New Testament. Similarly, Lord Buddha also, he rejected Vedas and He presented his own philosophy: ahiṁsā, nonviolence. Ahiṁsā paramo dharmaḥ. Because he was very kind upon on the poor animals. Sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam. Paśu-ghātam means animal killing. Nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātam. Śruti-jātam. Śruti means Veda. So in the Vedas, although there are, in particular cases, there are animal sacrifice... That is also very restricted. But we cannot say that there is no animal sacrifice. There is in some cases. So Lord Buddha, nindasi, He decried, "No, I don't accept your Vedas." Therefore Buddha religion is different from Vedic religion, because he rejected Vedas. And the Vedic followers, because he rejected Vedic principles, Vedic followers said that he, "You are nāstika." Nāstika means unbeliever.

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu has explained this Buddha religion. Veda nā māniyā bauddha haya ta' nāstika. Because nāstika means, atheist means one who does not follow the principles of Veda. That is the, in every religion there is such restriction. Just like Christian religion. One who does not believe in Christianity, they are called heathens. Similarly, in Muhammadan religion also, one who does not believe in the Muhammadan religion, they are called kafirs. So everyone has got manufactured some word. But so far our religion is concerned, we accept anyone, either he is a kafir or he is a heathen or he is a Hindu or Muslim or..., because Kṛṣṇa is for everyone. But here, Lord Buddha also, he is also for everyone. But he wanted to cheat, sura-dviṣām, sammohāya. Sammohāya, the sura-dviṣām, means those who are envious of the devotees, atheist class of men, just to cheat them. But when Kṛṣṇa or God cheats, that is also for the welfare of the people. So he wanted to stop animal-killing. So he said... (end)



720930SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.25

-

Los Angeles, September 30, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



athāsau yuga-sandhyāyāṁ

dasyu-prāyeṣu rājasu

janitā viṣṇu-yaśaso

nāmnā kalkir jagat-patiḥ

[SB 1.3.25]



Translation: "Thereafter, at the conjunction of two yugas, the Lord of the creation will take His birth as the Kalki incarnation and become the son of Viṣṇu Yaśā. At this time the rulers of the earth will have degenerated into plunderers."



Prabhupāda: So there are some remarkable points in this verse. Dasyu-prāyeṣu rājasu. Rājasu means government. Rāja, king, or government. So monarchy is now abolished practically all over the world. Now it is democratic government. So this so-called democratic government or Communist government, as they are going on, they will become rogues and thieves, dasyu-prāyeṣu. All the rogues, thieves, plunderers, they will capture. Because it is by vote. So dasyu... Just like plunderers, rogues, they on the point of revolver, they take away your money, so they will take vote on the point of revolver. Actually, it is happening. In Korea it so happened, that sometimes the Communists are coming in power, and sometimes the capitalists coming in power, America and Russia. So poor people, as soon as there is Communist government, they are under the influence: "If you don't do this, then you'll be shot." By force. The people do not know what is government generally. They want to live peacefully. They want a secure place. So that is not their business, modern government. Their only business is how to collect tax and divide it amongst the government servants. That's all.



So this is the beginning of Kali-yuga. Only we have passed five thousand years, but the duration of Kali-yuga is 432,000's of years. So only we have passed five thousand years. In this way... This is called sandhyā, junction. I have already explained that junction means day and night. Day passing, night is coming, that is called junction. Morning passing, noon coming, that is another junction, meridian. So early in the morning and during sunset and in the middle, joining of noon, morning and noon, these are called tri-sandhyā. Tri means three. Three kinds of junction. So everyone has got this tri-sandhyā of his life. Just like in our life. When we were babies, children, that is the beginning. Say, up to fifteen years, sixteen years, that is one portion, sandhyā, junction. Then another junction, youthhood; then another junction, old age. This is the nature's way. There must be three periods of anything material.

So this Kali-yuga has already begun. So in the beginning sandhyā, junction, Lord Buddha's description is given already. Lord Buddha will cheat the atheist class of men. God is very kind. So sammohāya sura-dviṣām [SB 1.3.24]. Those who are atheists, just to bewilder them: "Yes, there is nothing after death, it is all zero, but you worship me," Lord Buddha said. "Yes, sir, we shall worship you." So the only business, God's business is, "This rascal may some way or other worship Me." Because they are rascals. So here Lord Buddha by policy induced them to worship Lord Buddha. Lord Buddha is incarnation of God. Keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra. His philosophy is "No, there is no God, but you worship me." But the policy is to worship God. But they do not know. They are thinking that "We are worshiping somebody, some great soul," but he does not know that he is God, incarnation of God.

So similarly, when people will be so much degraded that they will not be able to understand anything about God... That time is coming gradually. Already the time is there. People are not at all interested in God's business. In your Western world all the churches are vacant. Nobody is interested now in church. Especially in Europe, we have seen... In your country also. So people are being degraded, godlessness. Because godless means animal. What is the difference between animal and man? The animal cannot be instructed anything about God. It is not possible for them to understand. But a man, however degraded he may be, if he is trained up, he can understand about God. Just like five years ago, you did not know about Kṛṣṇa. But because you are being trained up, because you are human being, therefore you are taking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Which was unknown to you five years ago, now you are taking it to very seriously. Why? Because you are being trained up.

Similarly, God consciousness is there, dormant in every living entity. But the perception varies according to the development of body. Just like child. You say something serious, say, about sex life, they do not understand. But the same child will understand sex life when the consciousness is developed. Similarly, in this material world, our consciousness is covered, God consciousness. So there are different species of life. Just like the aquatics in the ocean. There are so many living entities. But if you preach there Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is not possible Their number is far greater than human being. Still, they have no capacity. Next development, plants and trees, there also, no sensation. You cut the trees, no protest, because there is no sensation. There is practically consciousness... There is consciousness, very slight. Sir Jagadish Candra Bose has proved that when you cut tree, he feels, and that is recorded in what is called, that machine? So everyone has got consciousness. Living entity means there is consciousness. But they have their consciousness only for eating, sleeping, sex life and defending. There is consciousness amongst the fish. Their consciousness is so strong, two miles away if some big fish is coming, they can understand. Immediately they can take precaution defending. These are all described.

So different animals in different species of life, they have got one type of consciousness very strong. Just like you can see the vultures. It is a low-graded animal. But it goes four miles above the earth and it can see where is a dead body. You cannot do that. You cannot see even twenty yards after. But the animal, another animal, the vulture, he can see... From four miles away he can find out where there is a dead body. So this consciousness of eating, sleeping, mating and defending, that is common. In one animal or, it is very strong. In another man, animal, it is not so strong. But this consciousness is there. But this God consciousness is not there except in human being.

So the human society is becoming so degraded that they are trying to forget God. That is their advancement of civilization. The more you deny existence of God and become a so-called rascal scientist, then you are advanced. This is the position. So this position will degrade so much after, say, 400,000's of years, gradually degrading, that at time, Kṛṣṇa will come in His incarnation as Kalki. At that time the Kalki's business will be simply to kill. That's all. No more. No more preaching of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Simply kill them. That is Kalki avatāra. That Kalki avatāra is given the father's name. This is called śāstra. This is called scripture. Four hundred thousand's after, 400,000's of years after, Kalki will come. Now, His father's name is given there. Just like Lord Buddha's mother's name is there. So you cannot imitate that "I am Kalki avatāra." You have to give evidence, what is your father's name. Just see. This is called śāstra. Any rascal comes, "Oh, I am Kṛṣṇa. I am this avatāra and that avatāra," but where is the evidence from the śāstra? We cannot accept. Just like any gentleman comes, we want to see the credential. Just like in politics, when some ambassador comes to a new country, then he has to officially present his credential so that he will be accepted that "This gentleman is representative of such and such country." That is nice. Unless you give credentials, identity, how I can accept you? So... But people have become rascal. Anyone comes, he says that "I am incarnation of God," because the people are rascals, they accept another rascal. But if you follow the śāstras and scriptures, then there you will find all the avatāras, their credentials are there-What is the father's name, what is the name of the place he takes birth or appears, what is his business. So... What is the time. Everything is given there. So why should you be misled?

So we accept incarnation of God when all the descriptions are corroborated in terms of the authorized śāstra. Otherwise we reject. That is our business. So in this verse... Why we accept Vedic scripture as solid truth? Because there is no mistake. Otherwise, how it is predicting that yuga-sandhyāyām, "In the last conjunction of the yugas, there will appear the Lord"? Kalkir nāmnā, nāmnā kalkiḥ. "His name will be Kalki. But He is not ordinary person." Nāmnā kalkir jagat-patiḥ. "He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not ordinary man. And His father's name is..." Janitā viṣṇu-yaśasaḥ. "His father's name will be Viṣṇu Yaśā." The Yaśā title are there in India still. One Mr. Yaśi (Joshi) corresponds with us. So the Josha, or Joshi, this title is already there. So they are brāhmaṇas. Here, all the descriptions are not there, but in other place, all the descriptions are there. Not only his father's name, name, His village or the place, Sambhal. There is still a place Sambhalpur in India. So everything is there. We should not be misled that "Here is another avatāra, here is another avatāra, here is... So many avatāras." No. So this is called śāstra: what will happen after 400,000's of years, that is mentioned. Future. Just like Lord Buddha's name was there. Bhaviṣyati yuga-sandhyāyām. Bhaviṣyati. Bhaviṣyati means "He will come." He was not visible. This is śāstra. Śāstra means tri-kāla-jña. The writer of śāstra should be a full cognizant of past, present, and future. That is called unmistakable. Past, present, and future. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "I know past, present, and future."

So that is God or God's scripture. Past, present, and future. This Bhāgavata was written by God Himself, Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. That we have described, eleventh or some avatāra. So the Kalki will appear. The śāstra is giving indication that after such and such year. And another point is this dasyu-prāyeṣu rājasu. The..., more and more the government will be just like thieves and rogues. We are already experiencing. Now a new law has been passed in India that nobody can keep property more than five to seven lakhs of rupees. So people's incentive to earn money is now being cut down. Formerly it was freedom that you can earn your money as much as you like. Now if you think that "I will earn money, hundreds and thousands of money," but what is the use? The government will take away. That means you will be lazy. The economic development will be checked. Because one who works so hard for economic development because he is under the inspiration that "The more I earn, I will be able to enjoy more." But when this impression is given that "More we earn, it will be taken by government, and I will not be able to enjoy it," naturally he will not work.

So there are so many difficulties. But these difficulties will increase. It will not decrease. They are making so many plans to minimize the difficulties. But actually, because they are fools and rogues, they cannot make anything improvement. They have become involved in more difficulties. That Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung, sat-saṅga chāḍi' kainu asate vilāsa te-kāraṇe lāgila ye karma-bandha-phāṅsa. We do not consult the śāstra or the unmistakable way of improvement. We manufacture our own concoction. And therefore we are becoming more and more entangled. We do not take right direction. That is our folly in this age. We do not accept authority. We want to become authority ourself: "I am authority." Everyone wants to become authority. And that is being supported by so-called swamis, "Yes, you can manufacture your own religion."

But that is not the process. You cannot manufacture your own religion. Religion is given by God. Religion means the law of God. That's all. So how you can manufacture your law? That is not possible. Even if you do manufacture, what is the benefit? It will not be accepted. It will not work. Suppose if you manufacture some law at home, will it be accepted by the public? No. Nobody will accept. So similarly, this Kali-yuga is so dangerous that gradually we are becoming involved in more difficulties. That is the way of Kali-yuga. The symptom of Kali-yuga is disagreement, fight, quarrel. Kali means this quarreling, fighting, unnecessarily fighting. Just like recently in India we have seen. Formerly there was Hindu-Muslim riot, sporadic riot in some village. Say, some fifty men this side, some fifty men that side, they fought, say, for two hours, and it is finished. Again they are friendly. Now, since India has become independent, the Muslims have become Pakistan and the other part... They are not all Hindus. Suppose Hindus, they have become Hindustan. They organizedly fight. Now recently, last year, they fought and spent millions of dollars unnecessarily. This is going on. This is called Kali-yuga. Unnecessarily they will disagree, unnecessarily they will fight and spoil energy, spoil money. This is called Kali-yuga. The brain is so crazy that they do not consider that "Why you are fighting? Why you are spending money?"

Just like in your country and Russia, they are spending millions of dollars for one crazy thing, going to the moon planet. Just see. Simply wasting time and money. That's a fact. Three or four years ago, some press representative asked me, "What is your opinion," in, I think, San Francisco, "about this moon expedition?" So I asked the reporter, "Shall I flatter you or shall I tell the truth?" So he said, "Tell the truth." "Simply wasting time and money, that's all." This is the truth. Now I think they have realized, and your senate is denying any money for moon expedition. Is it not? Somebody was telling me.

So anyway, actually, human life is meant for some other purpose-God realization. Because this is not possible in other lower animals. And we get this chance by evolutionary process. We come to this human form of life, civilized form of life. Now we should know what is God, who is the supreme controller, who is the supreme source of everything. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is the life for inquiring about Brahman, the Supreme, the great. But we are neglectful. This is called Kali-yuga. And we are so much degraded... Gradually, we are becoming degraded. So 427,000's of years, if we again come and go, come and go... Because after... Dehāntara-prāptiḥ, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. If you continue transmigration from one body to another, then you will have to meet that age. But before meeting that age, try to understand Kṛṣṇa. This is our movement. Then, in this life in this very life, after giving up this body, you haven't got to come here again. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. No more coming to this rascal world. Go back to home, back to Godhead.

Thank you very much. (end)



721001SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.26

-

Los Angeles, October 1, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



avatārā hy asaṅkhyeyā

hareḥ sattva-nidher dvijāḥ

yathāvidāsinaḥ kulyāḥ

sarasaḥ syuḥ sahasraśaḥ

[SB 1.3.26]



Translation: "O brāhmaṇas, the incarnations of the Lord are innumerable, like rivulets flowing from inexhaustible sources of water."



Prabhupāda: So incarnation of God, there is no limit. The example is given. Just like there is no limit of waves in the ocean, similarly, there is no limit of incarnation. Sattva-nidheḥ. Nidhi means ocean, and sattva means existentional. And sattva means also goodness. Sattva-nidheḥ. So goodness, here in this material world there is the modes of nature: goodness, passion and ignorance. But real goodness is in the spiritual world. Here in the material world the goodness is, of course, taken as the highest quality, but such goodness is liable to be infected by the other two qualities, passion and ignorance. It is exposed. And here also, goodness is also the cause of bondage in this material world. As passion is cause of bondage, ignorance is also cause of bondage, similarly, the material goodness is also cause of bondage. So we have to transcend the material goodness also. Then, when we get stability of goodness, that is spiritual life. When it is disturbed by passion and ignorance, that means it is not yet perfect. Therefore, sometimes we find a student is doing everything nice goodness, but he is attacked by passion and ignorance, and he becomes entangled.



So real goodness means without being attacked by the other modes, passion and ignorance. That goodness is in God. Hareḥ sattva-nidheḥ. When you go to the spiritual platform, sattvaṁ viśuddham... That spiritual platform is called goodness unaffected by other qualities. Sattvaṁ viśuddham. Viśuddham means complete pure. No adulteration. So long we are in the material platform, the goodness is liable to be adulterated. Just like we purchase milk from the market or anything. There is adulteration. Although there are so many laws by the government, "You cannot adulterate, you cannot do this, you cannot...," but people, propensity is to adulterate. So you cannot get pure thing. The whole atmosphere is so polluted. Therefore here the so-called goodness also is the cause of bondage. "Now I have become a Vaiṣṇava. I have become now learned." And God is so clever that "Now you fight with this passion and ignorance, if you are so good." And he fails, falls a victim. You see? So by pure devotional service only, you can remain in pure goodness. Otherwise it will be adulterated. Pure devotional service.

What is that pure devotional service? Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. No material desire. Because desire is the cause. If I think... I am brahmacārī, but I am thinking of always sex or woman... They have been described in the Bhagavad-gītā as cheater. Therefore we have to think of Kṛṣṇa always. Otherwise, as soon as there is little loophole, māyā will enter immediately and make your goodness adulterated. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate [Bg. 14.26]. Avyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena. Without any adulteration. Anyone who is engaged in devotional service without any adulteration,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Guṇān, plural number. Guṇān means this material world: goodness, passion and ignorance, three kinds of qualities. He can surpass these three qualities of material. Sa guṇāṇ samatītya etān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. At that time he becomes completely spiritualized. He is spirit soul.



Every one of us, we are spirit soul, part and parcel of God, but we have been now covered by the material qualities. So the example is given... I think I have several times recited this example. When the spirit soul is separated from God... Just like a small sparks is separated from the whole fire, (knocking sound) falls down... What is that sound? So the sparks falls down on the ground. So there are three possibilities. If the sparks falls on dry grass, then immediately there is little fire, because grass is dry. And if it falls down on the green vegetation, then it is not immediately extinguished. There is little heat. But if the sparks falls down in the water, then immediately extinguished. So as soon as we are separated from God... We are all parts and parcel of God. Separation means when I want to imitate God. I want to become exactly... Because enviousness, due to enviousness... Icchā-dveṣa samutthena [Bg. 7.27]. When we become envious... "Oh, God is enjoyer, so why not I become an enjoyer?" "Yes," God says, "you become enjoyer." So then he falls down in this material world.

So if he falls down or contacts the mode of goodness, that is considered the fire spark falling on dry grass. Dry grass means... Goodness means one who is situated almost on the spiritual platform. Just like the brahminical qualification: truthfulness, controlling the senses, controlling the mind, simplicity, full of knowledge, practical application of knowledge in life, and completely faith in God. That is brahminical qualification. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. And passion means strong desire to enjoy this material world. Generally, the kings, the politicians, they are very much passionate to encroach upon other's property, other nations, like that. And ignorance means they are neither passionate nor good. "All right, let me eat something and sleep." That's all. That is ignorance. They are satisfied if they get good opportunity for sleeping. That's all. That is ignorance.

So these three qualities are there within this material world. And one has to transcend these three qualities. And that can be done... Anyone can do that. Kṛṣṇa does not say that only the person who is in goodness, who has the brahminical platform, he can be engaged. Actually, he can be engaged, not in the passion. But if you be engaged in devotional service, then immediately you transcend all the qualities. You become more than brāhmaṇa-Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava means he is transcendental to the brahminical qualities also. But if you do not maintain even brahminical qualities, then where you are a Vaiṣṇava?

So to become a Vaiṣṇava is not so easy thing, because it is transcendental to the brahminical quality. But it is very easy. Lord Caitanya has made it easy, provided you stick to the principles. If you simply chant regularly Hare Kṛṣṇa... This is the special facility for the people in this age. You can remain steady in transcendental position. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. As soon as you remain in the offenseless chanting platform, immediately you become transcendental to these material qualities. Very simple. You don't require to study Vedānta. The Vedānta is there. It reveals,

yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



The Vedānta philosophy will reveal automatically. You haven't got to study. But provided you have got unflinching faith in God and spiritual master, all this Vedānta knowledge will be revealed within you. Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that you can make advancement in spiritual life by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and guru. You don't try to overlap guru and get Kṛṣṇa's mercy immediately. That is not possible. That is not possible. You have to go through the proper channel. Anyone who is thinking that "I shall make spiritual advancement without guru," he is wrongly thinking. It is not possible. Just like if you want to see a big man, you have to go through the servant of that man. You have to take permission. The servant may say, "Sir, such and such man wants to see you. He is very nice man, appears to be a good man." "Oh," the master says, "he is good man? All right, bring him." By the recommendation of the servant.



Therefore we sing daily, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. By the mercy of guru, immediately we become, get the mercy of God. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi **. Yasyāprasādāt. By... If guru is not satisfied, then na gatiḥ kuto 'pi. He has no gati. Gati means advancement. He has no advancement. Dhyāyaṁ stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyam. Therefore this Gurvaṣṭaka, saṁsāra-dāvānala, we have to sing. So God's incarnation, here it is said, "There are many incarnations." So guru is also incarnation of God, mercy incarnation of God. Guru means that... God is within you, caitya-guru, the guru, or the spiritual master, within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So this Paramātmā is also incarnation of God. And the same Paramātmā, when He comes before you, being very much merciful upon you, to teach you from outside, that is guru. Therefore it is said, sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. Guru is the mercy incarnation of God. Sākṣāt, direct. Hari-tvena, he is Hari, God. Samasta-śāstraiḥ. It is not that somewhere it is stated, somewhere it is not stated. No. In all Vedic literature. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktaḥ **. Uktaḥ means "it is said." And tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ. Sadbhiḥ, those who are real devotees, they accept this. "Yes, guru is exactly representative of Kṛṣṇa, mercy representative."

But from the guru's side, a disciple may respect... May respect, must respect. It is not "may." Must respect guru as God. But guru should not say that "Now I have become God." Then he is immediately fallen. If guru says, "I am incarnation of God, so you simply worship me..." So many things are going on. Māyāvāda philosophy, "There is no difference between God..." But a real guru says that "I am servant of the servant of the servant of the servant of God." Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ [Cc. Madhya 13.80]. Real guru will never claim, although He is given the honor of God, but He does not claim, never claims that He is God. He always claims that "I am the most fallen servant of God." This is the position.

So as there are incessantly waves of the ocean... You have seen when you go to the beach, always wave; twenty-four hours, there are wave. Similarly, incarnations are also coming. Why not? There are innumerable universes, not one universe. We have studied in the Brahma-saṁhitā, yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ [Bs. 5.48]. Jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ. Jagad-aṇḍa means universe. So in each and every universe there are the nātha, the controller. Nātha means controller. The Brahmā, Lord Brahmā. So just imagine, through the inhaling and exhaling of Mahā-Viṣṇu in the Causal Ocean, so many universes are coming out. And each and every universe there are so many planets, and it requires to preach the glories of the Lord. So just imagine how many incarnations are required to enlighten the people in each and every universe. As we are trying to forget Kṛṣṇa, or God... We are all sons of God. But God cannot forget us, because we are sons. God is trying to reclaim us. He is coming. Kṛṣṇa is coming personally to canvass that "Why you are rotting here? Why don't you come? You just surrender and be happy." "No. I shall work here." "That's all right."

So working, beginning from Brahmā down to the hog, they are trying to be happy by working themselves. But they will not surrender to Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa wants them back to home, back to Godhead. Therefore He says in the Bhagavad-gītā that,

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



"You have committed so much sinful activities during your material existence. There is no limit. But if you surrender unto Me, I immediately make you immune from all reaction of your sinful life. Immediately." Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. When He met Jagāi and Mādhāi... You know the story. Their life was sinful. What is that sinful? That illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating, and gambling. This Jagāi-Mādhāi. They were born in nice brāhmaṇa family, but due to bad association, they became drunkard, prostitute hunters, gambler, and meat-eater. So they were simply creating disturbance. So these people will create disturbance. The whole world is disturbed. Why? Because it is full of these sinful men: drunkards, woman hunters, gamblers, and intoxicants. The whole world. And they are expecting peace. Nonsense. Where is peace? First of all educate them to become sinless. Then you talk of peace. There cannot be peace.



So these two brothers were creating disturbance in the, on the street, and there was a crowd. Lord Nityānanda saw the crowd and inquired from persons, "What is this crowd?" Lord Nityānanda and Haridāsa Ṭhākura were out for preaching. So people informed that "There are two brothers, most sinful, and they are creating disturbance. So there is crowd." So immediately Nityānanda Prabhu said, "Why not deliver these two brothers immediately? Then it will be a great credit for Caitanya Mahāprabhu." This is preacher. He is thinking the credit of the master, not for himself. He risks his life. And the Jagāi-Mādhāi brothers hurt Him on the head by throwing a stone. So blood also came out, but still, they said "All right, it is all right. You have hurt Me. Blood is oozing out. That doesn't matter. You chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." That is preaching. Not that I remain safety and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. No. We have to go out, meet the Jagāi Mādhāi. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Because the world is full of Jagāi-Mādhāi.

So when Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu became very angry because these people, these two brothers, injured Nityānanda Prabhu, so He became firelike. So you should be firelike when a Vaiṣṇava is insulted. Not that at that time tṛṇād api sunīcena, to become straw. No. You should be fire when Viṣṇu and Vaiṣṇava is insulted. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu showed this example. He became very, very angry: "I shall kill these two brothers immediately. Nonsense." So Nityānanda Prabhu entreated,"Oh, My dear sir, this time You have promised not to accept any weapon. In Your incarnation as Lord Rāmacandra, You took up weapon. As Kṛṣṇa also, You took a weapon. But this time You wanted to deliver these poor souls. So don't kill them. Excuse them. Accept them." This is Nityānanda Prabhu's business, guru's business. So Lord Caitanya simply asked them, "Now if you..." They also in the meantime fell down on the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya, that "We are so sinful. We have done wrong. Kindly excuse us."

So Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu made one condition, that "Your life is full of sinful activities. So if you simply promise that 'I shall not do anymore,' then I can accept you." So they said, "Sir, I'll not do. We'll not do anymore." This is required. When you are initiated, you promise "No illicit sex, no intoxication, no meat-eating, no gambling." And if you do privately all these things, then what kind of man you are? Don't be cheater. Be plain. When you promise that "We shall not do these things," don't do it again. Then you remain in goodness. That's all. Nobody can disturb you. And if you pollute yourself silently, then this goodness will go on. So this is the warning. Once you are initiated on the promise that you shall not do these all nonsense, then you remain perfectly in goodness. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti. Māyā cannot do anything. But if you cheat yourself, cheat your spiritual master, cheat God, then you will be cheated by māyā.

Thank you very much. (pause) Begin. Begin. (pause) Begin! Begin. Don't delay. (kīrtana) (end)



721002SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.27

-

Los Angeles, October 2, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



ṛṣayo manavo devā

manu-putrā mahaujasaḥ

kalāḥ sarve harer eva

saprajāpatayaḥ smṛtāḥ

[SB 1.3.27]



Translation: "All the ṛṣis, Manus, demigods and descendants of Manu, who are especially powerful, are plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord. This also includes the Prajāpatis."



Prabhupāda: So prajāpati, the beginning there was only Lord Brahmā. The whole planetary system was to be populated. Therefore first of all Brahmā, and then the seven ṛṣis, then the Kumāras, then Rudras. In this way... Manus. Then Manu's son, his son, his son. In this way the... (aside:) What is that sound? The whole universe is populated. It is not the rascal Darwin's theory that "There was no human being. It came out of a stone, the life." The first is the most intelligent person, Lord Brahmā.



So they are called prajāpati. Prajā means generation. Pati means master, husband. So all these prajāpatis, as we learn from Bhagavad-gītā... Manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt. Vivasvān manave prāha. Vivasvān, sun-god, he spoke to his son Manu, Vaivasvata Manu. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. Kṛṣṇa said that "First of all I told to Vivasvān, the sun-god, and then he described, he handed over the knowledge to his son, Vivasvān, Vaivasvata Manu." This is the age of Vaivasvata Manu. So in one day there are fourteen Manus, in one day of Brahmā. So in one month how many?

Devotee: Two hundred twenty.



Prabhupāda: Two hundred twenty. In this way, in one year, there are so many Manus in Brahmā's... Some five thousand Manus in one year. So, so many Manus, and his sons are coming. Manu. From Manu, the word man has come. Manuṣya. The man, this word, is from Manu. We are all sons of Manu. There are two descendants of Manu. No, two descendants, kṣatriya family. One from the sun-god and one from the moon-god. Two families, kṣatriyas. Royal order. So Manu is from the sun, and the descendants, sūrya-vaṁśa, they are from Manu. Manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt. Manu, his son was Ikṣvāku. Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, king. He was the king of this planet, the original forefather of Lord Rāmacandra's dynasty. Mahārāja... Lord Rāmacandra appeared in the family of Manu. And similarly... Sūrya-vaṁśa. Similarly, Lord Kṛṣṇa also appeared in yadu-vaṁśa.



So these families, dynasties, are very, very old. Every... According to Vedic system, any family-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, those who are higher caste-they must give at least seven generations account. Otherwise he is not a respectable family. Seven generations. His father, his father, his father, his father, his father, like that. When there is marriage, then there is check corroboration. The bride's party and the bridegrooms party, they should narrate their seventh generation. If within their seventh generation it, what is called, collide, becomes the one man, then there will be no marriage, because it becomes the same family. One cannot marry in the same family. He must pick up another family. Otherwise one could marry his own sister. No. That is not possible.

So these family descendants... Still there is gotra. Gotra means in which family one is coming. Everyone must say his gotra and family title. Gotra means the guru, disciplic succession. Acyuta-gotra. We Vaiṣṇava, our gotra is acyuta-gotra, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's name is Acyuta. Because we give up our other family gotra. We accept. Actually, originally everyone is coming from Kṛṣṇa. From Kṛṣṇa the Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu. From Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. From Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Brahmā. From Brahmā, the sages, the Manus. In this way, everyone is descended from Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa confirms also in the Bhagavad-gītā,

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad-yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



"I am the origin, or seed-giving father." Trees, plants, aquatics, by their karma they have to accept different dress, but as spirit soul, everyone is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7].



So it is said here that manu-putrā mahaujasaḥ. Of course, those who are Prajāpatis, they are very famous. Naturally. They are the original. But all of them are kalāḥ sarve harer eva. Kalā. Kalā means just like part of the, part, plenary expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Then the expansion of the plenary expansion, then again expansion, again expansion. In this way, the first expansion is called prakāśa. Just like first expansion is Baladeva, from Kṛṣṇa. These things are described in Teachings of Lord Caitanya. You must read. The first expansion is Baladeva. The next expansion is from Baladeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa. From Saṅkarṣaṇa, Vāsudeva, Aniruddha, Pradyumna, like that. So the first expansion is called prakāśa. Then there are divisions: prābhava, vaibhava... In this way, as you have learned from previous verses, many thousands of expansions. We are also expansion, but we are separated expansion, living entities. Svāṁśa-vibhinnāṁśa. Svāṁśa. Just like this my hand is my part and parcel of my body, direct expansion. And from the hands there are so many hairs. They are also from the hand. Just as my head. And from the head there are so many hairs. So they are also expansion. But they are separated expansion. I can cut my hair, but I cannot cut my throat.

So there are expansions, svāṁśa, personal expansion, and separated expansion. The personal expansions are called viṣṇu-tattva. Baladeva... Just like Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu, His personal expansion is Nityānanda Prabhu and Advaita Prabhu. And Śrīvāsādi they are separated expansion. Although they are associates, but Śrīvāsa, jīva-tattva; and Nityānanda Prabhu and Advaita Prabhu, viṣṇu-tattva. And Gadādhara is śakti-tattva. So in this way, God is person and His personal expansions are innumerable, unlimited. Viṣṇu-tattva. They are worshipable. And other tattva, śakti-tattva and jīva-tattva, they are meant for service. But all together taken, that is one. That is Absolute Truth.

So there are many different philosophical views of the Absolute Truth, how He is one with the energies and the separated expansion. So here it is explained that kalāḥ sarve harer eva. Everyone is expansion from Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But those who are prominent, they are called prajāpatis. Prajāpatis means directly expanding. These Kumāras, they were also offered to become prajāpati, but they refused their father's request. So "We are not going to marry and beget children." So Brahmā was angry. So when he was angry, then Lord Śiva, Rudra, from his eyes generated. In higher circle the generation can be produced from any part of the body. But we cannot understand. We simply know one part wherefrom the generation comes. No. In higher circle... Just like many living entities came out from Brahmā's nostril, eyes, ear. Just like Lord Brahmā himself came out from the navel of Viṣṇu. This requires specific power. Not that we have got some stereotyped ideas. Therefore we sometimes find difficulty to understand the description of the Vedas and the Purāṇas. They do not believe. As soon as we say that there was a lotus flower sprouted from the navel of Lord Viṣṇu, and on that lotus flower Brahmā generated, they call it a story. No. These are not stories. These are fact. But our philosophy is Dr. Frog's philosophy. You see? I can simply understand that three feet water in the well. That's all. If there is beyond that, description of Atlantic Ocean, it is beyond my conception. I therefore refuse. This is going.

This is the so-called scientists, philosophers. They have got a teeny brain, which they cannot accommodate so many big things. Therefore they disbelieve. And therefore they are nāstika. But every description in the Vedic literature, they are fact. That is called āstikyam, to have staunch faith. Our process is, therefore, whenever we speak something, we have to quote some Vedic version. Then it is corroborated. It is fact. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Vedas, Vedānta says, The Absolute Truth is that which is the origin, source of everything. There must be something, original source. Otherwise how things are coming? This conviction means faith. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja. So those who will argue, "Why shall I surrender to Kṛṣṇa?" But one who will accept, he becomes benefited.

So Vedic knowledge should be accepted as it is. Don't try to comment. If you go on commenting with your teeny brain, then you will never be able to achieve the success. That is the process. Vedavān. I have given you several times this example, that in the Vedas it is said that cow dung is pure, although it is the stool of an animal. We accept: "Yes, it is pure." And actually you find, yes, it is pure. If you analyze, you'll find all antiseptic properties. Now how in stool? Stool is septic. Septic tank, where has stool. But this stool is anti... It is practical. You can see. But wherefrom we get this information? From the Vedas. The knowledge received from the Vedas, there is no mistake. There is no illusion. It is perfect. Just like here, we have read the passage that four lakhs of years, 400,000's of years after from this time, there will be incarnation of Kalki. His father's name should be Viṣṇu Yaśā. The place where He will appear, it is Sambhal. Everything is stated there. Now 400,000's of years it will... Lord Buddha appeared 2,500 years after the Bhagavat was written. That's came a fact.

So if we take the Vedic statement, Vedic literature statement, as fact, then our knowledge is perfect. You don't require to research. There is no need. It is perfect knowledge and very easy. Kṛṣṇa says that imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. So Kṛṣṇa said this. Arjuna was playing just like ordinary man, although he is not ordinary man. Just to give us lessons, he was asking question just like ordinary man. So when Kṛṣṇa said that "I spoke this Bhagavad-gītā science of God, or philosophy, to Vivasvān, the sun-god," He clarified the matter. He said... Arjuna said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are my contemporary, of the same age. So how can I believe that You spoke Bhagavad-gītā some 400 millions of years ago to sun-god? How can I believe You?" So Kṛṣṇa answered, "Yes, you were also present, but you have forgotten. I remember." That is the difference between God and human, living entity. God knows everything, past, present, future. We do not know. We are teeny. We cannot be equal with God at any stage of life. Even Arjuna, who is constant companion of Kṛṣṇa, he is also forgetting that... Kṛṣṇa replied, "Both you and Me had many, many births. We appeared. But you have forgotten; I remember. That is the difference."

So the difference between God and ordinary living entity must be there. Anyone who is claiming as the Supreme Lord or God, he is a blasphemer. He is a rascal. He's a cheater. So you should not be influenced by such rascals. God is always great, always great. There is no equal, no greater. That is called great. Nobody can be equal with God and nobody can be greater than God. Everyone under God. Asamordhva. Therefore God's another name is Asamordhva. "A" means none. Sama means equal. Ūrdhva means greater. Asamordhva So everyone is emanation from God, but nobody is equal with God. But the viṣṇu-tattva, They are the same. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa and Rāmacandra, Nārāyaṇa, Viṣṇu, because They are viṣṇu-tattva. Baladeva. They are equally powerful. But jīva-tattva, we living entities, although we are part and parcel of God, we are not equally powerful. That is called the philosophy of acintya-bhedābheda-tattva, simultaneously one and different. Simultaneously one and different. Just like in Bible also, Jesus Christ is claimed as one with God, but at the same time different. As son, he is different. As representative of God, he is one. That is the philosophy, perfect philosophy. All living entities, anything within this manifestation, even this whole world, is one with God. Idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān ivetaraḥ Nārada Muni said to Vyāsadeva. Idaṁ hi viśvam. This whole universe is God. Idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ivetaraḥ. But it appears like different.

So now, according to this formula, idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān... Then forgetfulness of Bhagavān. Forgetfulness of relationship with Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa, is materialism. The... Actually, everything is Bhagavān, but when we forget the relationship of this world and Bhagavān, Kṛṣṇa, that is materialism. Just like we are offering some foodstuff to Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa is eating matter? No. Kṛṣṇa cannot eat matter. He is spirit. Then how we are offering the same rice and ḍāl to Kṛṣṇa which is also being cooked in the hotel? The thing is that here is the sense that "This rice or ḍāl is given by Kṛṣṇa." There is remembrance of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is spiritual. And there, in the hotel, they do not know Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is matter. That is the difference between matter and spirit. Actually, everything is emanation from Kṛṣṇa, so there cannot be anything matter. Idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān. But the forgetfulness... The material world is... What is this material world? The material world is everyone is forgetting Kṛṣṇa. Their only business is to forget Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is material. But if Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there, the mat..., no more material world.

Just like this temple. This temple is spiritual, Vaikuṇṭha. It is not Los Angeles. Don't think like that. It is Vaikuṇṭha. Because here every second the remembrance of Kṛṣṇa is there. Therefore it is not Los Angeles. Or anyone who remembers Kṛṣṇa always, twenty-four hours, he is living in Vaikuṇṭha. He is not in the kingdom of māyā. That is required. Satataṁ cintayanto mām: [Bg. 9.14] "Always thinking of Me." In the Bhagavad-gītā you will find, satataṁ cintayanto mām. So if you keep this practice, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, then you are not in the material world. You are always in the spiritual world. For practical example: just like there are foreign embassies in foreign countries. So long they are within the embassy, they are not living in the foreign country. That is the law. Suppose I belong to some foreign embassy. So I have done something criminal. So the American government cannot arrest me from the embassy. When I come out, he can arrest. So ships also, when they are on the port of a foreign country, so on the ship also the foreign police force cannot arrest anyone. These are the etiquette, law.

So if it is possible in ordinary dealings, so why not possible spiritually? And that's a fact. If you keep always yourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you do not belong to this material world. Then actually you are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, your spiritual identity.

Thank you very much. (end)



721003SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.28

-

Los Angeles, October 3, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ

kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ

mṛḍayanti yuge yuge

[SB 1.3.28]



Translation: "All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord, but Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there is a disturbance created by the atheists. The Lord incarnates to protect the theists."



Prabhupāda: This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā:



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

[Bg. 4.8]



So everything is property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So this material world is also the property of Kṛṣṇa. Because here the people do not care for Kṛṣṇa, that does not mean that it is not the property of Kṛṣṇa. Just like in the prison, within the prison walls, the prisoners, they say, "We don't care for the government." They say like that. But it does not mean that the prison house does not belong to the government. It is government property. But these rascals, they are being forced to live in the prison house, and still they say, "We don't care for the government." This is rascaldom. You are under my control, and as soon as you are in wrong, I am kicking you on your face, still, if you say, "I don't care for you..." You can say that. But there is force that you say, "Don't care," but I force you. You have to care.



This is material world. They are saying "Don't... There is no God. We don't care for God. We are, everyone, God." But māyā, the police force, is there, kicking on the face. And they are subjected to so many tribulations, miserable conditions of life. Especially birth, death, old age and disease. Now you don't care for God. So why don't you stop your death? You stop your death. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham, "To the rascals and the demons, I am death. I take away everything." Sarva-haraḥ. Sarva-haraḥ means these rascals are trying to possess so many things: cars, motorcars, skyscraper building, bank balance, big family, big friends, big empire, and so many things. But when death comes, he cannot protect himself, what to speak of protecting other things. You see? So he's under full control, the demons. And every moment, he's under control. Suppose I have got money. I can eat so much. But as soon as you eat little more, immediately you are under control; you cannot eat for three days. Indigestion, immediately. And still, the rascal says that "I am not controlled." If there is little pain here, he immediately becomes: "Where is doctor, where is doctor, where is doctor?" And still he says, "I'm not controlled," and "I am God."

He does not know what is the meaning of God. God is never controlled by anyone. That is God. That is the definition of God. If you are God, then why you are being controlled? Because they're rascals, demons, foolishly speaking something nonsense. But we should know that God means controller. He's not controlled. And when God was present on this planet, He showed what kind of God He is. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. Anyone, any demon who tried to imitate God, they were all killed, all killed. The Kaṁsa, his only policy was to kill Kṛṣṇa. "As soon as Kṛṣṇa comes, kill Him." So many plans he made. He... Kṛṣṇa happened to be his sister's son. So he imprisoned the sister and brother-in-law so that "He may beget children, but in my front... I must remain... As soon as children, child is born, I shall kill."

So this is the policy of the demons. Therefore, indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokam [SB 1.3.28]. When people become, the inhabitants of all different planets, they become very much perturbed on account of these demonic... In this Kali-yuga especially, the demons are so large in number that people are actually in harassment. Every year, they are presenting taxation bill. And wherefrom the taxation will come? The taxation will come from your pocket and my pocket. They will charge income tax, and the storekeepers will increase the value of commodity. So you have to pay. So you are, we are complaining, "Oh, the things are going high price." But why? Because the demons are levying taxes. The... It is not the scarcity of goods. There is sufficient commodity, sufficient. But they have made a economic plan. Just like in your country, the government said that "You don't produce more." Why? If one can produce... Kṛṣṇa has given food. You have to simply little work and produce your food. But in order to keep the balance of price, they say, "Don't produce." Why not produce? So many people are, they are... If actually we produce foodstuff in the ordinary way, then we can produce foodstuff so much that ten times of the whole population of the world can be fed. Ten times. There is no question of scarcity or poverty. There is no question. We create. These demons, they create.

You have no experience. I have got experience. Or some of the Indians who are present... In 1942, the government created artificial famine, artificial famine. The government began to purchase. The poli... That time, the war was going on. So Mr. Churchill's policy was that "Keep the people in scarcity, and they will, they'll voluntarily come and become soldiers." That was the policy. "You have no money. So..., and the another venue is opened. Yes, you become a soldier. You get so much money." People, out of poverty, would go there. That was the policy. So this policy was executed that government began to purchase rice and, I mean to say, commodities which are daily necessities. And... Any price, any price they can offer. Because the currency in their hand. They can print the so-called papers, hundred dollars, and pay you. And you becomes satisfied: "Oh, I have got hundred dollars." But it is a piece of paper. The cheating is from the government. Why the people will not learn how to cheat?

So this is going on. This is called demonic. Demon means for their own sense satisfaction, they are prepared to do anything wrong. Just like this Kaṁsa. Kaṁsa, the elder brother of Kṛṣṇa's mother, and as soon as he heard an omen from the sky that "You rascal Kaṁsa, you are taking your brother and sis..., brother-in-law and sister in your chariot to their home in their marriage ceremony, but you rascal do not know this sister's son will kill you." "Oh, my sister's son will kill me?" Immediately caught up sister: "Finish my sister." Vasudeva saw. "What nonsense you are doing? You are such a big king. And your sister, younger sister, and she is married in this auspicious moment. Why you are killing?" "No, she is the cause of my death." Then, "Your sister is not the cause of your death. Her son. That's all right. But I promise, all the sons will be delivered to you." Because it is the husband's duty to give protection. So someway or other, he saved the situation.

So this is the demon. He did not consider that "Here is my poor, younger sister. She's just now married. In jubilation she's going at her husband's home. How auspicious ceremony." And he was personally driving the chariot. But as soon as he heard that "Oh, there is danger from my sister," he did not care anything, no relationship, no ceremony, no auspicity, nothing. This is demon. Demon means for his self-interest, he can do anything nons..., nonsense. That is demon. And demigod means he'll consider thrice before doing anything. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna was insulted in so many ways by the other party, his cousin-brothers. His kingdom was taken. They were sent to forest for thirteen years. His wife was insulted. So many things. But still, he was considering, "Whether I shall kill my kinsmen? The other side, they're all my brothers, nephews, brother-in-law. Whether I shall fight and kill them? Kṛṣṇa, I don't wish to kill them. Let them enjoy." This is demigod, In spite of the other party, aggressor in so many ways, he was thinking. And here you see Kaṁsa, simply for the news that in future his sister's son will kill him, immediately he was prepared to kill his sister. And in the marriage ceremony. This is the distinction between demigod and demon. Just try to understand. A demon has no consideration.

So in this age, Kali-yuga especially, demoniac, everything, demons, godless. Demon means godless. Indrāri. Demons means Indra, or indrasya ari. Ari means enemy. Indra is demigod. And his enemy, that is demon. Indrāri. Just like you are, when you go to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you have got so many enemies. They do not act directly, but they are very much envious: "What these nonsense are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa?" You see? They want to disturb. Just like we have to close this door because the demons will disturb. You see? So demons means enemy of the demigods, enemy of the devotees. Those who are God conscious, those who are abiding by the orders of God, they're demigods. God. Demigods means they're also God, but subordinate to God. They don't say, "I am God. I am completely." No, a Vaiṣṇava will never say so. He knows that "I am eternal servant of God." Therefore demigod. Otherwise, their qualification is godly.

So indrāri-vyākulam... Indra. Indra is demigod. He's the king of the demigods. So indrāri-vyākulam. When people become very much disturbed by this demonic government and demons... So dharmasya glāniḥ. Dharmasya glāniḥ means discrepancies in the matter of executing religious principles. In Kaṁsa's time... Just like in Russia, you cannot chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. What to speak of chanting in the street, you cannot chant even in private. That is their law. So that law is coming gradually everywhere, godless. In China, I've heard, anyone teaching about God, next life, he'll be shot. Is it not? Somebody said me. Anyone teaching "Next life and God," he'll be shot down. So your country is still very nice because you are not shooting Kṛṣṇa conscious people, but there is possibility. Demons are increasing. Demons are increasing. But don't be afraid. Kṛṣṇa is there. Just like Kṛṣṇa's mother and father were so much, I mean to say, harassed by Kaṁsa. But at the end, Kaṁsa was killed by Kṛṣṇa.

So we may be harassed for the time being, but Kṛṣṇa will save. This is śaraṇāgati. Avaśya rakhibe kṛṣṇa viśvāsa pālana. The śaraṇāgati means, surrender means that "Kṛṣṇa will save me. I, I'll not do anything against the devotional service. Even there is torture..." Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. He was tortured by his father. He had... Kṛṣṇa's mother was tortured by his brother. Not outsider. So the demons are so rascal, they don't care for son, sister, mother. No. "As soon as it is against my personal sense gratification, I must finish this." But be sure that Kṛṣṇa will save. We have got so many instances. As Prahlāda Mahārāja was saved by Hiraṇyaka..., by Narasiṁhadeva from the hands of his father, Hiraṇyakaśipu; Devakī was saved, Vasudeva was saved from the hands of Kaṁsa; so you will be also saved. Because there is promise in the Bhagavad-gītā: kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. Kṛṣṇa says, "Make it a declaration throughout the whole world that anyone who is My devotee, he'll never be annihilated. He'll be protected. I'll give him protection." Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu. Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29]. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "I am equal to everyone. Nobody is My enemy, nobody is My friend." Ye tu bhajanti māṁ prītyā. "But those who are devotees, engaged twenty-four hours, I give them special protection. I give them special protection." So the demons will be there, and they will always give trouble to the demigods, or the devotees, but you don't stop your function, devotional service. Don't be afraid of the demons. Indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti. This mṛḍayanti means "giving protection" Yes. Give protection.

So this saṅkīrtana movement, Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, is also incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Nāma-rūpe avatāra. Kṛṣṇa can become incarnation in sound form also. Not even a physical form. Physical form also there; everything is there. But especially this age, Kṛṣṇa is incarnated in His name. The name of Kṛṣṇa is not different from Kṛṣṇa. So nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra. So Kṛṣṇa is already there. The whole world is now demonic, anti govern..., anti-God, anti-matter or anti-God now. So the incarnation has already come. Those who will take shelter of this incarnation of Kṛṣṇa's name, they will be never annihilated. Take it for granted. Yes. So incarnation. Kṛṣṇa's name and Kṛṣṇa, no difference. That is omnipotency. Omnipotency. Omnipotency means everything is Kṛṣṇa's energy. So the same potency in the energy and the energetic. This is omnipotency. God is omnipotent; He can give you protection when you take shelter of His name. Because His name is nondifferent from Him. Abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.133]. Nāma-kṛṣṇa. Nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaḥ, pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto 'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ. Don't think this Kṛṣṇa's name is less efficient than Kṛṣṇa. No. Pūrṇa. As Kṛṣṇa is perfect, similarly, this name is also perfect. Pūrṇaḥ śuddhaḥ. As Kṛṣṇa is pure, without any material contamination, apāpa-viddham, no, nothing sin, sinful can affect him... You have read it in the Īśopaniṣad. Just like sunshine. Infection cannot infect sunshine. Some disease can infect you, me, because we are less potential. But it cannot infect the sun. Rather, the sunshine will sterilize the infection. So anything infectious, anything sinful, cannot infect Kṛṣṇa. Rather sinful activities in touch with Kṛṣṇa will become purified. This is the process.

There are many instances. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, you can see. Prahlāda Mahārāja is standing, and his father is being killed before him. This is sinful. Can you tolerate? Suppose if somebody comes to kill me, and you will see and laugh? You'll do, will you do that? Why? That is sinful. So here Prahlāda Mahārāja is seeing. It is not protesting. Prahlāda Mahārāja is not protesting, "Why you are killing my father?" No. He's seeing. So why Prahlāda Mahārāja is worshiped? Why he has become a mahājana, authority? You can say, "Oh, he's a most sinful. He has seen in his presence, his father is being killed, and he did not protest." You can say so. But because it is in connection with Kṛṣṇa, Prahlāda Mahārāja is the most exalted devotee. He's not sinful. The gopīs. The gopīs, they were wives, householder's wife, sister, daughter. So they went at dead of night to dance with Kṛṣṇa. This is sinful according to Vedic injunction. No young girl can go to any young boy without being married. That is Vedic injunction. So practically it was sinful. And... But because it was with Kṛṣṇa, in connection with Kṛṣṇa, they went to dance with Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs are worshiped more than any devotee in the world. Caitanya Mahāprabhu... Gopīs, exalted. Ramyā kacid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā. So actually, they did sinful acts, action, by leaving their father, brother or husband and went to Kṛṣṇa at dead of night. They were all young girls. That is, according to Vedic injunction that is sinful. But they are worshiped.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu, such a big sannyāsī, who never allowed any woman to come near to offer respect... He was so strict. They would offer respect from distance. He says, ramyā kacid upāsanā. He says that the worship, the method of worship conceived by the gopīs, that is, there is no comparison. Ramyā kacid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā. Now, He was so much strict about women. Why He is praising the external sinful activities of the gopīs? Why? Because it is in connection with Kṛṣṇa. There are many instances. Just like Bali Mahārāja. Bali Mahārāja gave up the connection with his spiritual master. Why? His spiritual master said, "You don't give to Kṛṣṇa." He was thinking that "If this rascal, everything gives to Kṛṣṇa, then how I shall live? I am living at his maintenance." Just like you sometimes give me maintenance, I live. So you stop the maintenance, I shall die. So he thought like that, that "He's my disciple, and he's going to..., everything to Kṛṣṇa. Then I'll not get my maintenance. Then I shall die." He stopped him: "Don't give to Kṛṣṇa." But Bali Mahārāja said, "Oh, you are stopping me to give to Kṛṣṇa? I give up your relation. I don't want." He became a mahājana. Prahlāda Mahārāja became a mahājana. Gopīs became the most worshipable.

So Kṛṣṇa is so powerful that even in the ordinary ways it looks sinful, but if it is actually done for Kṛṣṇa's sake... The same thing, Arjuna. He was thinking that "Killing of my family members, it is sinful." He argued with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore this Bhagavad-gītā is there. He was simply arguing that "I'll not fight. I'll not kill my grandfather, my teacher, my brother, my nephews, my brother-in-laws. No, no, I am not going to... It is sinful." But at the end he did it, because he understood, "Oh, it is for Kṛṣṇa. All right. I shall all, take all the risk. That's all right." So as Kṛṣṇa..., the devotee takes all the risk of life, similarly, Kṛṣṇa gives all the protection to the devotee. Don't be afraid.

So indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti yuge yuge. He's always giving protection to the devotees. Don't be afraid. And another thing is that ete ca aṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ. Puṁsaḥ means the person, the Supreme Person. So the Māyāvādī rascals' theory is that the Absolute Truth is impersonal, and when He comes to be present before us as person, He accepts a material body. This is their theory, māyā, Māyāvāda, that Kṛṣṇa's body is also bone and skin. That is their theory. They accept, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is God, but He has accepted a body of flesh and bone." This is Māyāvāda theory. But the śāstra does not say. Kṛṣṇa Himself says, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] "These rascals, they also consider Me like one ordinary human being because I have come here just like human being." He, He has said, mūḍho nābhijānāti: "Deride at Me." This is their... To consider Kṛṣṇa's body as made of flesh and bone, that means minimizing the value of Kṛṣṇa. Dr. Radhakrishnan has done it. No. Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute is, Absolute Truth is always person. Puṁsaḥ, here it is said. Ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ [SB 1.3.28]. The incarnation... When some incarnation comes, He's expansion of the person, not that He accepts this material body. Ete ca aṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ. The, all the descriptions of the incarnations have been given before this verse. So therefore, it is concluding that "All these incarnations, they are expansion of the spiritual body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Not that the Absolute Truth is imperson, and He, He's accepting a form with material body. No. That is not. That is not. Just like here, Deity. He is also expansion, arcā-vigraha. Arcā-avatāra. Don't think that it is made of stone or metal. It is expansion of Kṛṣṇa. You want to worship. Kṛṣṇa has expanded Himself to come here to accept your service. Don't think it is made of stone. So ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28].

So bhagavān svayam, the Absolute Truth is Bhagavān. Bhagavān means person, with six opulences. And why He comes? Indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti yuge yuge. People are harassed by these demons. Therefore, He comes to give protection. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnām [Bg. 4.8]. He comes to give protection to the sādhu. They are very much anxious to be... When they are in danger, they pray for Kṛṣṇa. So just to satisfy them, Kṛṣṇa comes. Not even for killing the demons. But when He comes, He also executes this service also, to kill all these demons. Otherwise, for killing demons, He does not require to come. He, He has got many agents. So many demons can be killed within a second. For this purpose, killing purpose, Kṛṣṇa does not come. He comes especially for the devotee. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. For give darśana personally to Prahlāda Mahārāja-he has suffered in the hands of his father-He appeared. Otherwise, to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu, oh, it is not very big business. Indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ mṛḍayanti. When a devotee is very much harassed, so He comes in, as incarnation. So you stick to remain a pure devotee, and Kṛṣṇa will give you all protection.

Thank you very much. (end)



721004SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.29

-

Los Angeles, October 4, 1972



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



janma guhyaṁ bhagavato

ya etat prayato naraḥ

sāyaṁ prātar gṛṇan bhaktyā

duḥkha-grāmād vimucyate

[SB 1.3.29]



Translation: "Whoever carefully recites the mysterious appearances of the Lord with devotion in the morning and in the evening gets relief from all miseries of life."



Prabhupāda: This is called phala-śruti,(?) result. This chapter was describing different incarnations of God, and it is concluded that kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. There were many incarnations, and incarnations are coming incessantly just like there are waves in the ocean or in the river. You cannot sit down and count how many waves are flowing. As it is not possible, similarly, you cannot also count how many incarnations are there, how they are coming out. But the most important of them are described. And the conclusion is made that Kṛṣṇa is the origin, as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ. "I am the origin of everything, even the incarnations." Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. Everyone, all incarnations, all demigods, all living entities, all energies. The Vedānta-sūtra also confirms, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The Absolute Truth is that which is the original source of everything.



So sometimes we mistake that Kṛṣṇa is also incarnation. No. He is not incarnation. He is the source of incarnation. Therefore in the last verse it has been clearly, ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. They are from Kṛṣṇa, not Kṛṣṇa is from them. Sometimes they argue that Kṛṣṇa is the incarnation of Viṣṇu, but that is not the fact. Viṣṇu is incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Now, there is no use arguing, because there is no difference between incarnation and the source of incarnation. The example is given: just like dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya dīpāyate [Bs. 5.46]. Just like you have got one thousand candles here. So first you light on one candle, then the second, the third, the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh-you go on increasing. So each candle is equal to another candle. So far candlepower light is concerned, there is no difference. The first candle and the second candle, although second candle is lit up from the first candle, but the power of light is the same, either in the first candle or in the second candle. Similarly, do not think that because Kṛṣṇa is the original candle and the next candle is Balarāma, or Rāma, that does not mean Balarāma, or Rāma, is less powerful than Kṛṣṇa. They are equally powerful. Dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharmā [Bs. 5.46]. There is no difference.

So don't consider that incarnation means less important. No. But because Kṛṣṇa is the original source, therefore Bhāgavata is pointing out that "These incarnation, all these incarnation, they are expansion of the original Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, or expansion of the expansion," kalāḥ. Aṁśa and kalā. Aṁśa means direct expansion, and kalā means expansion of the expansion. Just like Kṛṣṇa's direct expansion is Balarāma. Then, from Balarāma, there is further expansion: Saṅkarṣaṇa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna, like that. Then Mahā-Viṣṇu, another expansion. Then from Mahā-Viṣṇu to Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Then Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu to Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. From Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Paramātmā, Īśvara. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. The all-pervading. So all of them are expansion and equally powerful. But still, for understanding, for pure knowledge, we should under stand that Kṛṣṇa is the origin. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. This is the...

So anyone who will recite these incarnations of God, Kṛṣṇa, regularly, in the morning and evening, that is the phala-śruti...(?) Janma guhyaṁ bhagavataḥ. Bhagavataḥ. He is the original source of everything, and He is taking birth. Therefore it is called guhyam. It is very mysterious. Just like Kuntī, when offered prayer to Kṛṣṇa, she said that "You are inside and You are outside. You are all-pervading. You are present everywhere. Still, people cannot see You." This is the mystery. God is everywhere, but we cannot see. How it is? That is explained by Kuntī. Just like somebody's father is playing on the stage dressed in a different way like a king or something. But the son cannot recognize him, although the father is playing just before him. The father is playing in his front, but he cannot understand. He's seeing some king is playing. Similarly, God is everywhere. God is everywhere. Simply you require to purify your eyes to see God. Otherwise God is everywhere. It is not that God has to be searched out some long, long... He's in... Of course, His real abode is long, long distant, but still, He is within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61].

So to purify the eyes we require... That is meditation, how to search out. He is within my heart. Anywhere you sit down, you can see God, provided you have got the eyes to see. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Those who are saintly persons, they are twenty-four hours seeing God. They have nothing, no other business than to see God. But they have got eyes to see. That is the difference. Ordinary persons, they have no eyes. Therefore they cannot see God. But those who have developed consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, purified eyes, they can see always, twenty-four hours. They don't see anything else except God. Because God is everything. Whatever we see, if we have two eyes to see, then we can see God in every second, every moment. How? Oh, that you can practice.

In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: [Bg. 7.8] "I am the taste of water." Now, you are drinking water hundreds times. So as soon as you taste water, how nice it is, you can immediately see God, Kṛṣṇa, "Oh, here is Kṛṣṇa. Here is Kṛṣṇa." So how do you say that "Can you show me Kṛṣṇa?" You can see. Here is the process. You adopt it. You taste water, and when you enjoy the taste, that taste is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am this taste." Then where is the difficulty to see Kṛṣṇa? There is no difficulty. The people say, "Can you show me God?" God is everywhere, in every moment, in every step. You do not like to see Him. That is the difficulty. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ. "I am the sunshine and moonshine." Who has not seen sunshine? Everyone has seen. From the very morning, we see sunshine, and at night also, when there is darkness, there is no sun, we see moonshine. So sunshine, moonshine-Kṛṣṇa says, prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ. So as soon as I see the sunshine and moonshine, I see God. What is the difficulty? Śabdaḥ khe. When there is some sound, rumbling sound in the sky, khe... Khe means sky. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the sound." So as soon as you hear even the sound of airplane, that is also God. Puṇyo gandhaḥ pṛthivyāṁ ca. When you smell a nice flower, that smell is Kṛṣṇa. So you can remember immediately Kṛṣṇa.

So to remember Kṛṣṇa, there are so many opportunities. But we don't want to remember Kṛṣṇa. That is the difficulty. Therefore it is said that janma guhyam bhagavataḥ. Janma, God's appearance. God is appearing every moment everywhere. Here is just in front, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Personally He is present. But others will see a stone, because he has not purified his eyes. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as soon as He sees, He fells down immediately, unconscious: "Oh, here is my Lord." So you have to purify to see God. God is present everywhere. You haven't to ask anybody, "Can you show me God? Have you seen God?" These questions sometimes made. And where is the difficulty to see God? You don't like to see God. That is the difficulty. Otherwise there is no difficulty.

So janma guhyam bhagavataḥ. And Bhagavad-gītā also Bhagavān says that janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. One has to learn. One has to learn the science, how to see God. That is bhakti-yoga. One who is not in bhakti-yoga, he cannot see God, even God is present before him. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. "I am not exposed to everyone. The yoga-māyā curtain is there." So first of all, before asking anybody, "Can you show me God?" you must be qualified to see God. That is required. That qualification is taught in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, how to see God, how to understand God. Otherwise it is mysterious. Dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186].

So seeing God is very mysterious, but it is very easy also, very easy, provided we know the method how to see God. So that is bhakti-yoga. And therefore Kṛṣṇa recommends in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ: [Bg. 18.55] "Only through devotional service one can understand Me as I am." Otherwise he will commit mistake. There are different processes undoubtedly: jñāna, yoga, karma, bhakti. But if you want to see God, then you have to accept this bhakti-yoga, no other yoga. Neither jñāna-yoga, nor karma-yoga, nor haṭha-yoga. You cannot see. You can see. Kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām [Bg. 12.5]. Those who are impersonalists... All of them are impersonalists. For them, it is very difficult, troublesome, to see God. They may try their process, but it will take long, long time to see God. But if one takes to bhakti-yoga, immediately... Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55].

So one may argue that "These bhaktas are not always very learned scholars. Mostly, they are mediocre. And there are so many big, big scholars. They cannot see God easily and only the bhaktas can do?" Yes. That is the process. Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ. In bhakti, one can immediately... Because real process is to surrender to God. That is the real process. But these jñānīs, yogis, and karmīs, they are not prepared to surrender to God. The karmīs will say, "Let us act nicely," I mean to say, "virtuously. We are karmīs. So God must give us the result." This is called karma-mimāṁsā. They say that... Just like the so-called scientists say that "God has created this universe. The laws are there. So we have to study the laws. What we shall do with the God?" Is it not? "God has created these... The physical laws are there. So let us study these physical laws. What is the use of studying God?" That is their view. The karma-mimāṁsā also, that, they say that "After all, if we act virtuously, then we shall get good result. So what is the use of worshiping God? Let us work virtuously." This is their view. Karmī. And jñānī. Jñānī also, they say. Jñānī, the scientists, they are jñānī, that "What is the use of worshiping God? Let us study the laws of God." So jñānī, karmī... And yogi, they are also of the same view.

So karmī, jñānī, yogi, and the last is bhakta. So bhakta can see God very quickly because Kṛṣṇa recommends, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. Tattvataḥ, in truth, one can understand what is God by following the process of bhakti-yoga. And so far the jñānīs, yogis are concerned, they will come to that point of bhakti-yoga after many, many births. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. At the end of millions of births, jñānī, jñānavān, those who are searching through knowledge... So what is the value of our knowledge? Teeny knowledge. Imperfect senses. We are gathering imperfect knowledge. But we don't neglect knowledge. We give credit to the philosophers, scientists, because... But we advise them that "Your research work should be for God, not for any temporary physical or chemical compound. No."

It is advised by Nārada Muni, kavibhir nirūpitaḥ.

idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

[SB 1.5.22]



If you are a jñānī, a philosopher, speculating what is the truth, so the truth is, ultimate truth is Kṛṣṇa. So if from the very beginning you try to search out by your philosophical knowledge or if you try to prove the supremacy of Kṛṣṇa by your philosophical speculation, that is perfection. That is your perfection. Otherwise it is simply laboring, waste of time. Śrama eva hi kevalam [SB 1.2.8]. If you cannot go forward up to Kṛṣṇa by your philosophical and scientific research, then all the labor you have taken, that is almost simply waste of time. The limit of knowledge, the limit of scientific research, will be confirmed when you have surrendered to God.



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



That mahātmā who knows Kṛṣṇa is the supreme cause... Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. So our conclusion is that, that He is the Supreme, Govinda. So we bow down. Yes. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. We give all respects to others, but so far our surrendering process is concerned, that is to Kṛṣṇa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Under the direction of Lord Brahmā.



So therefore here it is said that janma guhyaṁ bhagavato ya etat prayato naraḥ. Just like we are here, in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We don't claim that we have become perfect. That is not our... We cannot become perfect. Or at least, we have not become perfect. But prayataḥ, we are trying to be perfect. Prayataḥ. Prayataḥ means endeavoring, endeavoring for understanding God. So therefore here it is said, janma guhyaṁ bhagavato ya etat prayato naraḥ. Any person who endeavors for understanding Kṛṣṇa through the relative śāstras and devotional service, then what is the result? When? Sāyaṁ prātaḥ. Two times at least, in the evening and in the morning. So if we sleep in the morning, snoring, then how we can understand? It is recommended here, sāyaṁ prātaḥ. Tri-sandhyā. Tri-sandhyā means three times. We initiate... We... They promise that three times they will chant gāyatrī-mantra, but I do not know what they are doing.

So these are the recommendation in the śāstra. If we don't follow, then we must fall down. There is no doubt about it. But if we follow the regulative principles, as they are enjoined in the śāstra... Sādhu-guru-śāstra. Śāstra will say the same thing as guru advises. Sādhu-guru. A saintly person also will say the same thing. Just like here, Sūta Gosvāmī, he is saintly person. He is advising, sāyaṁ prātaḥ, "Morning and evening you should try to understand the science of God." Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, topics, chanting. So these are the process. Sāyaṁ prātar gṛṇan bhaktyā.

Now, this is the most important work, bhaktyā. Because without bhakti... The real process is bhakti. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55], Bhagavad-gītā says. Here also, it is said that "Don't read just like a academic scholar." No. That will not benefit you. It will benefit you, but it will take long, long time. Because without bhakti, God cannot be captured. Without bhakti, God cannot be captured. Everywhere you will find that. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Patram [Bg. 9.26], a little flower, little leaf. Suppose I am very poor man. I cannot arrange for puri and rasagullā for Kṛṣṇa. Then what my offering will be? No, there is no opportunity for offering Kṛṣṇa? No. Kṛṣṇa says, "You can offer Me a little flower, a little leaf, a little water." That's all. Who cannot secure it. Any part of the world, anywhere a person can offer to Kṛṣṇa, "Sir, I have no means. I have secured these things." Now, Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes, that's all right." Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. "This bhakta, one who offers Me in devotion and love." That is the main ingredient. And a nondevotee cannot offer anything Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is not poor. Kṛṣṇa has not come here, He is very hungry, He has come here to eat your puri and rasagullā. No. (laughter) (laughs) Don't think like that. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He has come before you to accept whatever you can offer with devotion. That is the point. Yo me bhaktyā prayacchati, tad aham aśnāmi. "I eat." Kṛṣṇa says. Kṛṣṇa is a liar? He's God, He says that "I eat." You cannot say that Kṛṣṇa does not eat. Kṛṣṇa says "I eat." Who are you to say that Kṛṣṇa does not eat? Sometimes this atheist class, the rascal class, they say that "You are offering food. Why? Kṛṣṇa is not eating. It is there." No. Kṛṣṇa eats. But His eating is not like your eating. That is the difference. Pūrṇam, pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣ... [Īśo Invocation]. He will eat everything and it will keep everything. If I give, I am given a plate, I eat everything, then remains nothing. But when Kṛṣṇa eats, He eats everything and remains everything. Therefore it is prasādam. Therefore it is prasādam.

So we do not know how to know Kṛṣṇa's activities. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā says, janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. These are all transcendental subject. Here also, it is said, janma guhyaṁ bhagavataḥ. Very confidential. These mysteries, confidence, are open to the confidential devotees. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. One who is devotee, He understands everything. Others cannot understand. Others, they will think, "Oh, they are worshiping an idol, and unnecessarily spending money for preparing prasādam." They will see like that. But a devotee knows how Kṛṣṇa is eating, how Kṛṣṇa's prasādam is being prepared. Everything He knows because He is bhakta.

Therefore one should try to become a devotee. Then everything will be disclosed to him. Svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. God will be revealed, and he will see everywhere God. Without any cessation twenty-four hours, he will see God. So as it is prescribed in the authorized śāstras and directed by spiritual master, if you follow the principles, it is not very difficult to see God, to understand God. It is very easy.

Thank you very much. (end)



721005SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.3.30

-

Los Angeles, October 5, 1972





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



etad rūpaṁ bhagavato

hy arūpasya cid-ātmanaḥ

māyā-guṇair viracitaṁ

mahadādibhir ātmani

[SB 1.3.30]



"The conception of the virāṭ, universal form of the Lord, as appearing in the material world, is imaginary. It is to enable the less intelligent and neophytes to adjust to the idea of the Lord's having form. But factually the Lord has no material form."



Prabhupāda: So this is very important verse. Form and formless. When we speak of formless, we speak that God or even living entity, all of us, we have no material form. Just like we have got this form, but this form is temporary and it will never come again. As soon as this form is finished, I will have to take another form. That form may not be exactly like this. So this is the formula for everyone. But for Kṛṣṇa, He has no material form. He has got spiritual form. Therefore His form is eternal. We do not remember our past lives, incidences, because the form has changed. But Kṛṣṇa remembers because His form does not change. The evidence is the Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa says... When He was questioned by Arjuna, "How can I believe that You spoke this philosophy of Bhagavad-gītā 400,000,000's of years ago to the sun-god?" So Kṛṣṇa says that "Yes, you were also present there, because you are My constant companion. But you have forgotten; I remember."



So we do not forget things so long the form continues. But when the form changes, we forget. Every night we have got this experience. Our form is lying on the bed, but I am dreaming in a different form. I am flying in the sky and forgetting that my real form is lying on the bed. You forget. We forget that "I am American" or "I am the son of such and such gentleman," or... Everything forgotten. Every night we have got this experience. So as soon as the form is forgotten, then everything is forgotten. With reference to the context.

So this universal form... The impersonalists, they are very much fond of this universal form. It is very favorable. But what is this universal form? This universal form is external expansion of the supreme form, Kṛṣṇa. You can understand it very easily, that we all living entities, we are a spiritual form, very minute. Materially we cannot understand. But there is a form. We get the information from the śāstra, although we cannot see it with our material eyes. Śāstra says that every living entity is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of the hair. Śāstra says. Everyone has seen the tip of the hair, but he has no idea how to divide it into ten thousand parts. Keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca [Cc. Madhya 19.140]. Keśāgra. Agra. Agra means tip, keśa means hair. So you just imagine only that you see the top, tip of the hair, and divide it into ten thousand parts. That one part is the form of the living entity. (aside:) Who is extending the...? This is not good.

keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya śatadhā kalpitasya ca

jīva-bhāgaḥ sa vijñeyaḥ sa cānantyāya kalpate

[Cc. Madhya 19.140]



That is the dimension of the living entity, and they are innumerable, ananta. There is no limit how many there are.



So that small particle, atomic spiritual energy, takes shelter by superior control. When a man dies... I am speaking of man. Every living entity is dying. So the spirit soul is taken to the court of judgment of Yamarāja. And according to his work, he is given a body, next life. How? By superior arrangement. That is stated in the Śrīmad... Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. Just like your... Ordinarily, suppose you are working somewhere. So your service record is there. Now, at the end of the year, or at the end of some period, the service record is checked, and you are given promotion or increase, increment. So many things are judged. Similarly, all our activities what we are doing now, that is being recorded. There is record. And after death, you are taken to the court of Yamarāja, the days of judgment, and the decision is made by the higher authority what kind of body I or you shall get. This is the way.

Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur deha upapattaye [SB 3.31.1]. Jantu means living entities. For giving him a body, it is decided by the higher authorities. You cannot say, "Now give me the body of a king." Now you are American. You cannot say, you cannot dictate, that "Give me again the American body as the son of Rockefeller." No. That will be judged, what you have done. Of course, you have got this opportunity for your pious activities. Because to take birth in rich family or rich nation, that is due to pious activity, past. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrībhiḥ [SB 1.8.26]. Janma, birth; aiśvarya, riches; śruta, education; and śrī, and beauty. These things are obtained according to past activities. Not that everyone becomes educated. No. There is no such chance. We were discussing this morning. There is no chance. Everything depends on some cause. Not that by chance anyone becomes very rich man. No. One has to work for it. Not that by chance one becomes very educated. These things are not chances. So as soon as there is no chance, there is cause, there must be judgment. There must be judgment. Otherwise why one man is born rich and other man is working so hard, but he is lying down on the street?

So there is judgment. So the small particle of the living entity, by the judgment, superior judgment, is transferred to the semina of a particular father. And the living entity is injected in the womb of the female, and both secretion combine, the living entity develops body. This is the science. If you use contraceptive, that means if you contaminate the emulsion, the poor living entity cannot take place. That is contra... You cannot kill the living soul, but you make the circumstances unfavorable for his staying, or... Then he has to be transferred to another womb.

So, so many subtle laws are going on. But the basic principle is that small particle of soul. Then the body develops. That we can see. Not that a pregnancy, on the day of pregnancy, immediately the body develops. No. It develops gradually, gradually. First it is just like a small pea, then gradually develops. As we see, the child born, he also develops. That is also not developed. That is transmigration from one body to another. Just like in a film, in cinema film, there are so many pictures, but when they are moved very swiftly, we see the picture is moving. But there are hundreds of picture. They are combined together. Similarly, the process of our change of body is so swift that we cannot perceive it. We think that it is growing. No. It is not growing. It is different bodies.

So our point is that the small spiritual spark develops this body, as we have developed this body. Similarly, this huge gigantic body of universal form is the development of Kṛṣṇa's external body. This is also body. Therefore as your bodily functions are going on nicely because that spiritual spark is within, similarly, you see all these material activities, they are going nicely because the Supreme Lord is there. The rascal scientists, they cannot understand it. But any sane man can understand that these bodily functions are going on very nicely so long the spirit soul is there. Similarly, all this material, big manifestation of material world is going on nicely because Kṛṣṇa is there. What is the difficulty? Because Kṛṣṇa is there. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, viṣṭabhyāham idam jagat, ekāṁśena sthito jagat [Bg. 10.42]. "My dear Arjuna..." Arjuna asked, "Kṛṣṇa, kindly explain how Your energies are acting." So He explained in the Twelfth Chapter. He explained how Kṛṣṇa's energies are working. Just like your energy is working on this body, similarly Kṛṣṇa's energy also working in this universal body. So He summarized how His energies are working. Athavā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna. "Arjuna, now I shall go on explaining how My energies are working, but you can summarize that I, in one of My plenary portion, enter into this material world, and therefore it is going on so nicely."

So as our this material body is not our real form... The real form is within this body, spiritual form. This body is explained as the dress. The dress is made when there is a real form. Just like you have got coat. Because you have got hands, the coat has got a hand. Your shirt: because you have got hand, the shirt has got a hand. But you are not the shirt or the coat. Similarly, because we are spiritual forms, maybe very minute, therefore we grow our hands and legs and heads and so many things. That is materially coated.

So here it is explained that people are very much fond of this universal form. They cannot imagine that a person-Kṛṣṇa is a person-He can work so wonderfully. Because he cannot do it. How he can do? He is very small. They do not understand that a small fire and big fire. Just like spark. Spark is also fire, so spark can also burn, but it can burn very small portion. Suppose a spark falls on your cloth. It will burn immediately. It will make immediately black. But it is very small. Similarly, the difference between Kṛṣṇa and me is that He is great, God is great, and I am small. Although qualitatively we are one. The same: big fire and small fire. Similarly, we have got also the same qualities, approximately, but very small quantity. We can play very wonderful by discovering some machine, say, the machine, what is called, which goes to the moon planet? Capsule. Or we float something in the sky, sputnik. But that is imitation of God. God is floating gigantic planets like sun, moon, in the space. You cannot do that. You can float a small sputnik.

So you have got the creative power, God has got the creative power. But God's creative power cannot be compared with your creative power. You have got the creative power, but not exactly like God. This is the conclusion. You cannot become God. You can imitate or you can do something very little. Just like little children, they play with little toys. Similarly, you can play with little toys and advertise yourself great scientist. That's all. But you are nothing. You are nothing. This is to be realized. This is called bhakti-yoga. The rascals are puffed up, "I am God." Foolishly. How you can be God? You may have some qualities, very minute quality of God, but you cannot claim that you are God. The same example. The small spark of fire is also fire. Nobody... There is no doubt. A small particle of gold is gold, but it cannot be compared with the gold mine. That is not possible.

So this gigantic... People, they are very much appreciative of the gigantic universal form. They do not like... "Oh! Kṛṣṇa. Why Kṛṣṇa I shall worship? We worship gigantic form." But this gigantic form is a product of Kṛṣṇa's energy. They do not know that. Here it is said, māyā-guṇair viracitam. By Kṛṣṇa's energy it is created. Māyā-guṇair viracitaṁ mahadādibhir ātmani. The material energy. The material energy also from Kṛṣṇa's body, as much as spiritual energy. Whatever we see, they are different energies of Kṛṣṇa. Just like in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is said,

eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner

jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis

tathedam akhilaṁ jagat



Akhilaṁ jagat. The vast universal form which you are seeing, it is nothing but parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ: it is the manifestation of the energy of the Supreme Person. How? The example is given, eka-deśa-sthitasyāgneḥ. Just like fire. Take the example of the sun, the biggest fire within this universe. It is situated in a place. The sun is not distributed. The sunshine is distributed. The sunshine may be covering the whole universe, but that is not very important. The sun globe is important. It is localized. Similarly, as the sun is distributing heat and light, remaining itself in one place, similarly Kṛṣṇa is playing with gopīs in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and His shine is creating the whole universe. Not that Kṛṣṇa is playing there, He is enjoying, therefore He is absent. No. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is Goloka Vṛndāvana, but He is present everywhere. That is Kṛṣṇa. I am sitting here, you are sitting here. You are not in your apartment. That is my position. But Kṛṣṇa's position is that although He is always in Goloka Vṛndāvana, He is present everywhere.



How? Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. He is within every universe; not only within every universe, He is within every atom. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa. Don't think that Kṛṣṇa, because He is playing as a cowherd boy or He is playing as a friend of the gopīs, therefore He is ordinary man. The rascals imitate Kṛṣṇa. They say, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa has enjoyed the gopīs? Oh, let me gather some young girls and enjoy." But you become universally represented everywhere. Then you enjoy. Rascal. He cannot do that. (laughs) He can simply imitate how to be in the midst of young girls and enjoy. That is the difference. Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.4: Lectures





680620SB.MON



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.4.25

-

Montreal, June 20, 1968



Prabhupāda:



oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur-unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śri-gurave namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano 'bhīṣṭaṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho

dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta

rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya [break]

[SB 1.4.25]



Today I shall speak before you about Mahārāja Parīkṣit. The hero of Śrīmad-Bhāgvatam is King Parīkṣit as the hero of Mahābhārata, the great history of India, Mahābhārata. Now, this Bhārata I have several times explained. Bhārata means this planet, and Mahābhārata means the complete history of the whole world. Nowadays, at the present moment, history means a chronological record, but previously, history means only the important incidences at different times, they were recorded. Therefore, in Mahābhārata or any other Purāṇa also... Purāṇas are also history. We don't find any chronological incidences one after another. But the most important selected incidences, especially in connection with God realization, they are recorded.



So this Mahābhārata is also history, and as history is liked by common man, so Mahābhārata was written by Vyāsadeva for understanding of the most common men. Strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnaṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā [SB 1.4.25]. The Vyāsadeva has given explanation why he compiled Mahābhārata, the great history of this Bhārata. Now it is called India, but the planet was called Bhārata, Bhārata-varṣa. So he has given explanation that "The Vedic principle, Vedic instructions, they are not directly understandable by commen men and women.'' Strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnaṁ. Who are common men? Women class, as a class, and śūdra, laborer class, working class, and Strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnaṁ. And dvija means twice-born, the higher caste. The higher caste means they must be twice-born. How is that? One birth is father and mother, real father and mother, and the next birth is spiritual master and the Vedas. That means when one is trained up in the matter of real knowledge-Veda means real knowledge-by the guidance of the spiritual master, he is supposed to be twice-born. So dvija-bandhu. Twice-born means cultural society. Those who have Vedic cultured, those who have followed the Vedic principles rigidly, it doesn't matter whether he is a householder or a brahmacārī or a sannyāsī. There are eight divisions of human society: four divisions social structure, and four divisions for spiritual enlightenment. So unless the eight divisions are properly managed, that is not human society. Human society is distinct from animal society by culture. What is that culture? Vedic culture, knowledge. Vedic means knowledge. One must be equipped with full knowledge. "So this Vedic culture,'' Vyāsadeva says, "or the Vedic principles, are not very easily understood by women class, by worker class, and dvija-bandhu.'' Dvija-bandhu means the boys who have taken birth in the family who are supposed to be very cultured, but their habit is different. They are called dvija-bandhu. In every country, that deterioration of social structure has already begun. They are called varṇa-saṅkara. Varṇa-saṅkara factually means that those who are illiterate. So for them it is very difficult to understand the Vedic principles. Therefore the same knowledge is described in stories just like Mahābhārata, Purāṇas, and for understanding of all men, all women. So Mahābhārata is especially written for such class of men and women. And the hero of Mahābhārata is Arjuna. Similarly, the hero of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is Arjuna's grandson, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, King Parīkṣit.



Now the history of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is like this, that Parīkṣit Mahārāja was a great king, emperor of the world, very pious devotee, all qualified. So sometimes he went to the forest for hunting. The hunting is allowed to the kṣatriyas, kings, royal kings. Why? Because a king has to look after administration of the society; therefore sometimes he has to order to kill some men, "Hang this man." Or sometimes he will take the sword in his own hand and kill the culprit, criminal, immediately. So therefore the killing practice was allowed to the kṣatriyas, royal family. Therefore sometimes the king would go into the forest and kill some animals to practice. Just like in the medical laboratory, physiological laboratory, some animals are tested to see the physiological condition of the body, similarly, always these experiments are made on the animals. So Mahārāja Parīkṣit went to the forest for hunting. So he was very tired. He was very tired, and he entered the cottage of one hermitage. He was at that time in meditation. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was very much thirsty and hungry, and because he was king, he can order anyone, royal order, so he entered the cottage and asked the hermitage, that muni, that "Please give me something to eat. I am very hungry," or "Give me some drinking water." But he was in meditation. By chance he could not hear Mahārāja Parīkṣit. He was silent. But because he was king, king, royal power, he little became agitated, although he was very nice king, "Oh, he is disordering, er, disobeying my orders?" then he became disgusted. And there was a dead serpent lying there. So he took that dead serpent and put it on the neck of the hermitage and went away.



Now, that hermitage had one boy, a ten years, twelve years old, and that boy had some playmates. They were playing, and some of the boys informed the son of that hermitage that "Your father has been insulted by the king. He is garlanded with a dead snake." So that boy, the son of that hermitage became very angry, and he cursed him. That one point is here to see, that a child of a brāhmaṇa, a son of a brāhmaṇa, was so powerful that he could curse a great king like Mahārāja Parīkṣit that "You have insulted my father. So that snake will bite you within seven days, and you will die." This was the version. Now the boy came back home and saw the father was garlanded with the dead snake, and he began to cry, began to cry. He felt so much that his father was insulted. His father was brāhmaṇa. He was brāhmaṇa. "Oh, brāhmaṇa has been insulted by the kṣatriya?" So he felt too much. He began to cry. So by his crying, that hermitage came to his senses and asked the boy, "Why you are crying?" "Oh, father, you do not know. You have been insulted by the king in this way, and I have cursed him." Oh, his father became astonished. "Oh, you have cursed Mahārāja Parīkṣit? Oh, you have done the greatest blunder. Oh, such a nice king. Depending on him, the subject, the citizens, are sleeping very peacefully. There is no danger. And you have cursed him?" Oh, he became very much sorry. And that description is there. Next day we shall explain how he was sorry. But after all, the cursing was already there.



So he sent information to the king that "My dear king, this accident is already done. So you prepare yourself for death." That information was given. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was also very sorry, that "I insulted a brāhmaṇa, which I should not have done," and he welcomed the cursing, that "It is good for me that I have been cursed, so that in future I shall not dare to act like that." He was such a nice king. Anyway, he was young man. He was not old man. He was within thirties. So immediately he entrusted the whole kingdom to his young boy, and he left home, left home and went to the Ganges side. The kingdom of Mahārāja Parīkṣit was supposed to be situated somewhere in New Delhi, and there is a river called Yamunā. So Yamunā, Ganges, practically it is coming out from the same source. And that is according to Jīva Gosvāmī. But Yamunā is supposed to be more sacred than the Ganges, because in the Yamunā Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoyed. So in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that Mahārāja Parīkṣit went to the bank of the Ganges. But near New Delhi side there is no Ganges; there is Yamunā. So it is to be taken that he went to the side of the Yamunā. Anyway, the news spread all over the world that "The great king has been cursed, and he is going to die within seven days."



So all great sages, saintly persons, scholars, kings, they went to see him at the Ganges side. There was great assembly. And Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired from everyone that "Now it is settled that I am going to die. The time is fixed already. Within a week, I shall be dying. Now what is my duty?" The thing is that before death we must prepare ourself. The present nonsense civilization, they don't prepare. They simply accept the flash life as all in all. The other day I was corresponding with one gentleman in London, Mr. Webb(?). He is little atheistic. He said that "There is no life, next. Just like a flower. A flower is bloomed and finished." So I have replied that "No, it is not finished. How it can be finished? The seed of the flower remains." Seed of the flower remains. So, so long the seed of the flower will remain, there will be many thousands and millions of manifestation of the flower. Similarly, this body may be finished, but the seed of the body, the soul, that is eternal. It will develop another body. That is a fact. Just like in this very life every one of us experiencing that because I, I am the seed of this body... Seed. Just try to understand this word seed. Just like you have got idea: a small seed of a banyan tree. It is smaller than even a mustard grain, but in that seed there is potency of a big tree, so high, hundred stories high. In your country I see so many big trees very high. There are many other big trees in other planets. So..., but that big tree means that seed. Within that seed, there is so much potency. That we do not understand. Actually, the materialist scientists, they cannot produce such seed. That if you want the tree, you have to sow one seed. If you have to produce a child, you have to sow. The man has to sow the seed in the womb of the woman. This is a practical.



So the seed is eternal. That we get information from Vedic literatures. Bījo 'haṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ [Bg 7.10]. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. That bīja, that seed, does not, I mean to say, annihilate because the body is annihilated. This is the basic principle of understanding for making progress in spiritual life. One who does not understand this basic principle, that the spirit soul, the seed, is eternal, and it is transmigrating different bodies... And factually we know that "My father gave the seed in the womb of my mother, that seed. And from that seed developed this body. But I am... When my body was just like, as small, just like a pea, I was there. And I have become so big. I am there. So many bodily changes have taken place, but I am there." Similarly, tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Similarly, when we change this body finally and take another body, so one who knows the fact or the science of birth and death, he is not disturbed. He is not disturbed. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. Dhīra means intelligent, cool-headed, not rascal. So this very word is used, dhīra. Dhīra means cool-headed, not disturbed. Na muhyati: "He is not bewildered." He's just changing this body. So now the business is that before changing this body, "What kind of other body I am going to get?" That is my business. That we can get according to as I deserve. Just like as you educate yourself in your childhood, so you get a particular type of post when you are businessman or working man. If you have got sufficient education, you could get good post, good salary. And if you are a nonsense, then you have to work like ordinary man, no good post. Just we have got, we get different types of post according to our culture or education, similarly this body, this human body, is the preparation ground for the next type of body. If you neglect that, then we are getting..., we are taking the risk.



So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he was not a fool. He was a learned king. So all the great sages and saintly persons assembled there. He asked them, "My dear sirs, you are so kind that you have come here at the time of my death. So kindly let me know what is my duty at the present moment." So there were different kinds of authorities. Different kinds of authorities means some were in favor of fruitive activities, karma-kāṇḍa, pious activities; some were in favor of yoga principles; some were in favor of philosophical speculation; and some were in favor of devotional service of bhakti. So fortunately, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, a boy of sixteen years old, but he was highly elevated in spiritual knowledge, the son of Vyāsadeva, he was wandering all over the world, naked and without any care for his body or social convention. Of course, he did not come into the cities, but he heard that Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going to die. "He is in need of some spiritual instruction." So he also came there in that meeting. And when he was coming, because he was a naked boy, sixteen-years-old boy, the street boys were throwing stone upon him. Somebody was fighting just like a madman. But when he entered the assembly, everyone stood up. Then the rascal creatures who were annoying him, they fled away: "Oh, he is important man, that so many sages and saintly person has stood up." Anyway, when he reached there, Parīkṣit Mahārāja received him that "It is my good fortune that at this time you have come, because it is very rarely you go to anyone's house, but Kṛṣṇa has sent you. Now what is my duty?" Parīkṣit Mahārāja was, from the very beginning... Because the whole family, Pāṇḍava family, they were devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa, so naturally he was devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. And when he was child, he was playing with the doll of Kṛṣṇa. These are described here. So he asked, "What is my duty? Shall I continue my talks on Kṛṣṇa, because naturally I am inclined to Kṛṣṇa? So what is your advice?"



So in answer to that, Śukadeva Gosvāmī... Now, one thing we should note in this connection, that Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he was a powerful king. He was equipped with all, everything, but he did not counteract the curse. He could counteract that curse. He was so powerful, but he accepted: "All right. I am cursed. I shall give up my life within seven days." That means he took it as an opportunity that "I am going to death within seven days. That is certain. And I must prepare myself fully so that my next life I can approach Kṛṣṇa." So this is a good opportunity, that "I have got seven days' time." We haven't got seven seconds' time. We do not know. Nobody has served me notice. We find by practical experience that we are walking on the street-all of a sudden there is some accident, and we die. There is possibility. So the important point is that Mahārāja Parīkṣit was fortunate enough to get seven days' time before his death. But we do not know how much time is there for our death. So how much serious we shall be. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that "If you want to make spiritual advancement, then you should always think that "Death is next moment. Death is next moment." Because there is no guarantee when death is coming. If I think that death is next moment, that is not any utopian. The next moment may be my death. And Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, "But if you want to be materially happy, you should always think that 'I shall never die,' " although it is false idea. Everyone will die. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he was preparing. How he was preparing? He did not take seven days even a drop of water. He sat down tight on the bank of the Ganges, and the Śukadeva Gosvāmī narrated this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and he heard, and at the end of seven days, at the particular time, he was bitten by a snake and he left this world.



Now, the beginning of the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the answer, śrī-śuka uvāca: "Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said." Because in the previous chapter the questions were put by Mahārāja Parīkṣit, that "What is my duty? What is my duty?" So he says... Because he wanted to know about Kṛṣṇa, so Śukadeva Gosvāmī is approving his very nice praśna, question:



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ

[SB 2.1.1]



"My dear King Parīkṣit, you have put very nice question. And to hear about Kṛṣṇa is the topmost subject of hearing." Śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ. Paraḥ means topmost, the highest. "So your question, whether to hear about Kṛṣṇa, is welcome." Varīyan eṣa te praśnah kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa: [SB 2.1.1] "This praśna, this question, is very much beneficial to the people in general," loka-hitaṁ. Because Parīkṣit Mahārāja was questioning, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī was answering, but there were many other persons. Although the questions and answers were only for Parīkṣit Mahārāja, not for others, but everyone expected that because Śukadeva Gosvāmī was speaking to the king, that speaking must be very important to everyone. So all the great sages... Even the father of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Vyāsadeva, who is the compiler of so many Vedic literatures, he also came there to hear his sixteen-years-old boy. He was so elevated. It does not matter whether a man is old or young; it is the question of knowledge. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī was so elevated that so many persons assembled there. And the Sūta Gosvāmī, who spoke the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for the second time amongst the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya, he was also present in that meeting, and he heard from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and he repeated to the sages of Naimiṣāraṇya. So śrī-kṛṣṇa-śravaṇādhi-prāyeṇa parama-praśna kṛta eṣa tu varīyan. Śukadeva Gosvāmī is congratulating Mahārāja Parīkṣit, that "You have raised the question of Kṛṣṇa, understanding Kṛṣṇa. It is very welcome." Yaḥ praśno 'pi śrotavyādiṣu paraṁ: "Such kind of question is the topmost question, topmost question. There is no more better question than this." In other words, when you become inquisitive to understand the Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then that very questions will elevate you to the highest perfectional stage.



So, śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ para, yasya praśna syapi śravāṇādau paramaḥ puruṣarthaḥ. Now, Śukadeva Gosvāmī says that "The question put by you and the answers which I shall give to you, even the general persons who are assembled here, they do not understand it rightly, but simply hearing that mantra, or the answers, will give him the highest quality benefit.'' In another place it is stated, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Now, this the classes which we hold here We invite everyone, but those who are fortunate, they come here. But even those who are coming here, they do not understand the philosophy, but simply by hearing the vibration of Hare Kṛṣṇa or the sound vibration, just like I am speaking to you, they will be benefited, even without understanding. It is such a nice thing. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ. That Kṛṣṇa, description of Kṛṣṇa, is itself a pious activity, puṇya-śravaṇa. Because it is pious, so anyone who is speaking or anyone who is hearing, both of them are benefited. How they are benefited?



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart. It is not that because I am a sannyāsī, Kṛṣṇa is sitting within my heart. No. Kṛṣṇa is sitting in everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. And He is sentient. He is perfect in knowledge. So this very act, that one is trying to understand Kṛṣṇa, that makes Kṛṣṇa very pleased. Because he has kindly come here, so Kṛṣṇa is within you, and because you are giving your patient hearing, He is already pleased. He is already pleased with you. And the effect will be that śṛṇvatām sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ, hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi. Abhadra means the nasty things which we have accumulated within our heart since time immemorial. The beginning is that "I am this body," this conception. This is animal conception, "I am this body." So due to this misconception of our life, we have accumulated many dirty and dusty things within our heart. So if we hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Bhagavad-gītā, even if we do not understand it, the action will be there. The action will be there. Just like if you touch fire, either you understand it or not understand it, that fire is fire. It will burn your finger. Just like if a child, he does not understand what is fire, but if he touches fire, his fingers or hand will be burned immediately. There is no mercy: "Oh, here is an innocent child. He does not know." No. the law of nature will act. Similarly, kṛṣṇa-kathā, puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtana, it is so pious and it is so spiritual that anyone who will hear it, either by understanding or without understanding, the action will be there like fire. So varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ [SB 2.1.1].



So it is now quarter past, ten past eight. Now, we shall discuss this meeting of Parīkṣit Mahārāja and Śukadeva Gosvāmī continually, so you please come, even if you do not understand. You can understand because we invite questions and answers. So any human being can understand. But even if you do not understand, the action of hearing will be there. [break] They are purified or attracted simply by this sound vibration. It is so nice. So if we simply give our aural reception to this transcendental sound, then there is immense profit, immense profit. So we invite everyone to come here and take this advantage. Thank you very much. Any question.





Devotee (1): Who is the author of Mahābhārata?



Prabhupāda: Mahābhārata author is Vyāsadeva. Author means it is not an imaginary story. It is historical fact. History anyone can write. So if you mean by author that something original, just like at the present moment there are so many authors of some fiction, novel, and fictitious, it is not like that. The historical incidences were there, and it was put forward by Vyāsadeva. In that sense he is author.



Guest (2): When was it written, the Bhagavad-gītā?



Prabhupāda: Five thousand years before. It was after the Battle of Kurukṣetra. The Battle of Kurukṣetra was fought about five thousand years ago, and the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was written after writing Mahābhārata. When Vyāsadeva was not satisfied in his heart even by writing Mahābhārata and Vedānta-sūtra, he was sitting morose, and he was thinking that "I have written so many nice literatures. Why I am not happy?" At that time his spiritual master Nārada came, and he instructed him that "You have written the history of Mahābhārata. It is very nice. But there is some idea of Kṛṣṇa, or God, but not absolute. You write some book in which simply, absolutely about Kṛṣṇa is there." So under his instruction he wrote the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



Pradyumna: Did some time lapse between the actual, Vyāsa's conception of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the actual writing down of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Was it passed orally, or was written down by Vyāsa Kṛṣṇa himself?



Prabhupāda: That doesn't matter. If you know something, if you write after some years, what is the difference? That is not very important thing. It was written for the persons... Formerly there was no written literatures. Simply by hearing from the spiritual master, their memory was so sharp that they would grasp. But in this age, the memory is not such sharp. Therefore written records are... So these written records were made by Vyāsadeva. All Vedic literatures. Formerly, before Vyāsadeva, there was no written literatures. Simply... This is called śruti. Śruti means simply by hearing. The student should learn simply by hearing. Their memory was so sharp. But at the present age so many things are reducing gradually. The memory is reducing, the duration of life is reducing, the strength is reducing, and the mercy is reducing. So many things are reducing. We are thinking that we are making progress, but actually we are reducing. This is called māyā. We are making progress on the wrong side. That means reducing. Everyone, you know that people are not so much merciful at the present moment. If a man is attacked by some rogue, nobody is going to help him. If a man's apartment is, there is a burglar, thief, nobody is going to help him. Or if a man is very poor, nobody is going to help him. It is dwindling. It is decreasing. Similarly, duration of life. Your grandfather, your forefathers, they were living up to hundred years or more than that. And nowadays hardly they are living sixty or seventy years. Similarly, memory. The memory is also reducing. Knowledge is also reducing. This is the symptom of this age. Things will be reduced. Therefore Lord Caitanya is the most magnanimous. He knows that "People will not be very much alert in accepting spiritual knowledge after undergoing so much austerities and penances. Let them chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and take everything.(?)" That is the special gift of Lord Caitanya. And Rūpa Gosvāmī therefore prayed Him, namo mahā-vadānyāya: "You are the greatest munificent incarnation." Kṛṣṇa prema-pradāya te: [Cc. Madhya 19.53] "You are the greatest munificent incarnation." Kṛṣṇa prema-pradāya te: "You are distributing love of Kṛṣṇa." So unfortunately, we are not ready to accept His benediction. Any other question?



Woman (3): The stories of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, are they found in the Vedas also?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Woman (3): All the Vedic literatures? Why would they be written down?



Prabhupāda: Written? Nothing was written. Vedas was also not written. They were heard from disciplic succession. The first writing business was done by Vyāsadeva. Before that, there was nothing in writing. All Vedic scriptures, they were learned by simply hearing. That's all. The brahmacārīs will live in the direction of the spiritual master and hear the class, and they will learn. That's all, no written book, neither there was notebook. Everything was heard by students. There was no need of writing. Therefore this whole Vedic literature is called śruti. Śruti means simply hearing. There was... Even in recent years there was a learned paṇḍita in Calcutta. There were some... In the British days there was some quarrel between two Britishers, and one of them complained to the magistrate, and the magistrate inquired, "Who is your witness?" Then one of them said that "Well, there was nobody else. But there was a paṇḍita. He was worshiping in that bank of the Ganges. So we had some quarrel. He has heard it." So he was called. So he stated that "I do not know what they talked because they were talking in English language, but I can produce what they talked." So he produced the whole thing verbatim, that "He talked like this. He talked like this. He talked like this. He talked like this." Just like record, tape record. Just see. Even some hundred years before, the memory was so sharp. Just like tape recorder, it is recorded. This is mechanical. But by nature we have got such nice brain. Just like we remember so many things of our past life. That is recorded. Actually it is recorded. Everything is recorded. How you are getting this television? Because it is recorded in the atmosphere. It is being simply transferred. Everything is recorded. But we have deteriorated in our even physical condition that we cannot produce the recorded version. So we are making ourself dull, duller, dullest. Just like Sir George Bernard Shaw, he also stated that "You are what you eat." So by eating process, we are making our brain dull. So there is need of nice eating, nice talking, nice thinking, nice behavior. The our brain is sharp. It requires training. It is not that you can do whatever you like and all nonsense, and your brain will be sharp. What is the difference between crazy and sane man? They keep nice behavior. Therefore they are sane man. And if you put to you nonsense behavior, then you become crazy. This is a fact. All right. Chant. (end)





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.5: Lectures





690522SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.1-4

-

New Vrindaban, May 22, 1969



Prabhupāda:



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



We shall speak something about the compilation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by Vyāsadeva. [break] ...known as Vedavyāsa. Vedavyāsa, because he has compiled all the Vedic literatures, wonderful education... There are millions of verses in the Purāṇas, Mahābhārata, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Only Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam contains 18,000 verses. Mahābhārata contains about more than 100,000's of verses. Similarly, there are other Purāṇas. Besides that, Upaniṣads. He is the editor and compiler of all these Vedic literatures.



But he was not satisfied even after his presentation of the Vedānta-sūtra. He summarized all the Vedic knowledge in sūtra-Sūtra means codes-so people may take advantage. Just like there are business codes, Bentley's codes, Henry's codes. So one or two words will give impression of volumes of knowledge. Businessmen, they need it to save the expenditure on wiring, on telegraphing. Just like CIF. "Accept your offering. CIF." CIF means "cost including freight." That means goods will be delivered at your door. So similarly, there are many codes in business matter. In military arts there are so many codes. So Vedānta-sūtra means codes of all Vedic knowledge. Sūtra. Sūtra means codes.

Just like athāto brahma jijñāsā. Atha, "now," ataḥ, "after this," brahma, "the Supreme Absolute Truth," jijñāsā, "one should inquire." Now you can explain in volumes of books athāto brahma jijñāsā. So there are different commentators, they have explained when brahma-jijñāsā should begin, when one should be prepared to inquire about the Supreme. Somebody says, "After karma-kāṇḍīya, after finishing all these sense gratificatory processes," or "After this, after this." Because the word is atha, "now, hereinafter." "Therefore." "Therefore," that's atha. This word is very significant, atha. Why "therefore"? Especially in your America-you are all American boys and girls-you should take note of this atha, "therefore." What is that "therefore"? "Therefore" means that "You have enjoyed your material life as luxuriantly as possible, but you are confused. You are not happy. You have produced hippies, frustration. Therefore." You can take this word, "therefore." Because we have failed, the Americans have failed to achieve the highest pleasure of life even by arranging all kinds of material facilities, therefore they should be eager to understand. At least, they should inquire what is the cause. (aside:) Don't bother about that. Here.

So brahma-jijñāsā. This brahma-jijñāsā is answered immediately in the Vedānta-sūtra. What is Brahman or what is the greatest? Say, greatest happiness. Now you have enjoyed material happiness, but you are not satisfied. You are confused. Then you should inquire what is greatest happiness. So these codes are so important thing, Vedānta-sūtra. You can explain "therefore" in so many ways according to your knowledge. But scientifically, this "therefore" means we are trying to find out the original source of everything. We are trying to find out what is the original source of this cosmic manifestation, why we are hankering after happiness, why we are confused. So many things.

What is the original source? The original source is replied immediately in the next sūtra, next code. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The original source, either of happiness or of distress, everything original source is that. Simply giving original... Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Wherefrom everything emanates. Distress also emanates and happiness also emanates. This cosmic manifestation also emanates. The supply also emanates. Everything emanates. The supreme source. Now you can explain. Everything emanates. How is that distress also emanates and happiness also emanates, knowledge also emanates, ignorance also emanates? Yes. That is fullness. That is fullness. This is the... How that original source is for everything, that is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, Bhāgavata also. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the source of everything. I am the source of happiness, I am the source of distress, I am the source of all this Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, everything." Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more supreme source than Me." Then why these two things, duality, distress and happiness?

That is also answered in the Bhagavad-gītā. You'll find, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: [Bg. 15.15] "I am sitting in everyone's heart and from Me there is memorization and forgetfulness." (bell sound) Why you are disturbing? Sit down. Hear. Try to hear. So mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. One forgets and also one remembers. Remembrance and forgetfulness. So why one remembers Kṛṣṇa consciousness and why one forgets Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Actually, my constitutional position is, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, that jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Actually, the constitutional position of the living entities are that he is eternally servant of God. That is his position. He's meant for that purpose, but he forgets. So that forgetfulness is also janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], the Supreme. Why? Because he wanted to forget.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



Just like sometimes we imitate. Somebody, I think he is very much enjoying, so I also think, "Why not I enjoy like him?" This is natural. We have got independence to think like that. Similarly, when the living entities, whose business is to serve Kṛṣṇa, when he wants to become Kṛṣṇa, when he wants to become God, although he is dog, still, when he wants to imitate, he is immediately put into the clutches of māyā. "All right. You enjoy. Try yourself. Try yourself to become God."



So this is material world means everyone is trying to become God. I am trying to become God, you are trying to become God. So there is competition between Gods. He has forgotten that he is dog, but he's trying to become God. Especially in these days, especially in our (chuckling) India, Bengal, there (are) so many Gods incarnation, rascal. You see? So many. As if God is so cheap thing that anyone can become God. So God has given us the chance, "All right. You try to become God." He's trying to become God, and more and more... This is asuric. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. As soon as his little child would say "Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa," he would immediately become angry: "Oh, who is this Nārāyaṇa?" "Oh, He is God." Just like this child is doing. "I am God. Who is God? You are trying to respect some other God?"

So this philosophy is there always, and now it is very prominent that everyone wants to become God. So many swamis, they come to your country and they, "Oh, you are God, I am God, this God, that God." So this is going on. And in the lower stage they are grossly under the impression that "I am this body," "I am this mind," or "I am this intelligence." And later on, "I am God," and so many things. So this Bhāgavata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, explains that Supreme from where everything is emanating. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. From the very beginning. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ svarāṭ. Very nicely. You have read our explanation, English explanation in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. What is that Supreme? That Supreme, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], that Supreme is abhijñaḥ. He knows everything. But the so-called cheap Gods, do they know everything? He does not know even what is going to happen in next moment. Just like I heard there was a "God," Meher Baba. He had came. And he did not know that he is going to meet with some motor accident, and still he claimed that he's God. You see?

So Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the right explanation of the philosophy. What is the original source of everything, that is the beginning. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Therefore it is called bhāṣyāyaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇām. Bhāṣya ayam. Ayam (grantha?) Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the right commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra. So how this Vedānta-sūtra commentary was originally written by the author himself is explained in the Fifth Chapter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto. You try to understand it. So the cause was that after compiling all these Vedic literatures up to the end, Vedānta-sūtra, Vyāsadeva was not satisfied. Vyāsadeva was still morose. So Nārada Muni, he is spiritual master, he could understand that Vyāsadeva is seeking something, that "Why I am morose? I have tried to give knowledge to the people as far as possible, as far I have known from reliable sources. So why I am not satisfied?"

At that time Nārada came to him, and Vyāsadeva received him, as it is the duty of the disciple to give good reception to the spiritual master. And when he was seated nicely, it is said,

atha taṁ sukham āsīna

upāsīnaṁ bṛhac-chravāḥ

devarṣiḥ prāha viprarṣiṁ

vīṇā-pāṇiḥ smayann iva



So Devarṣi, when he was comfortably seated, with his hand, in his hand that vīṇā, vīṇā-pāṇiḥ. Vīṇā-pāṇiḥ is called Sarasvatī. Vīṇā means that stringed instrument which is carried by Nārada and also Sarasvatī, the goddess of learning. Sarasvatī. Students, they worship Sarasvatī for getting learning, material knowledge. And we Vaiṣṇavas, we also... He is also Sarasvatī. Nārada is also Sarasvatī. My spiritual master was known as Sarasvatī, Siddhānta Sarasvatī. Sarasvatī is the knowledge.



So there are two kinds of knowledge, avidyā and vidyā. Real vidyā means brahma-vidyā. This brahma-jijñāsā, athāto brahma..., that is vidyā. That is real knowledge. And avidyā, karma-saṁjña. Another vidyā is how to learn technology, avidyā. Avidyā. That is avidyā. Avidyā-karma-saṁjñānyā tṛtīyā śaktir iṣyate. So now, at the present moment, the education is being given to the people how to work hard, karma-saṁjña. That is not now. That is the system everywhere, because everyone wants to enjoy senses as far as possible, so he has to work very hard. But in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you will find the instruction is by Ṛṣabhadeva, that this life is not meant for that simply hard labor for sense gratification. If you work hard, you try to work hard for attaining Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then your life will be successful. You have to work hard. If you want to enjoy senses, they are not very easily available. It is said that udyogināṁ praharṣaṁ praheti lakṣyam.(?) Unless you become industrious, laborious, you cannot enjoy even this material world.

So one has to work because his business is to become servant. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. So if he does not become servant of Kṛṣṇa, then he will have to become servant of māyā. Just like same thing we are doing in this New Vrindaban or anywhere. The same thing. We are also cooking, we are also cleansing. So this is for Kṛṣṇa. So even if we get tired by cleansing for Kṛṣṇa, but that is an asset. Yes. And if we work the same thing for sense gratification, that is simply spoiling time. This is the technology of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that we can achieve the highest perfection of life by doing the same thing. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate.

So Vyāsadeva, he also worked very hard, wrote so many books, unlimited. But he was not happy. So if you work for māyā, then you'll never be happy. You'll get tired and you'll simply be confused. But if you work for Kṛṣṇa, then you'll be happy. Just like... There are so many examples. Arjuna. Arjuna also, he remained a military man. He was in the beginning military man, and after hearing Bhagavad-gītā he remained a military man. But that military man was for Kṛṣṇa. And in the beginning he was a military man for acquiring some kingdom for sense gratification. So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is simply to change the consciousness, to change the account. The activities may be the same, but when the account is changed, then you'll get the highest profit.

So when Vyāsadeva was morose, his spiritual master is addressing Vyāsadeva as pārāśarya mahā-bhāga. Mahā-bhāga. Pārāśarya means Vyāsadeva is the son of Parāśara Muni, who was a great sage. His mother was Satyavatī. Actually Vyāsadeva was born... His mother was a fishergirl, fisherwoman. In Bengali we call māchaoyālī. So, but because the father was very great, Parāśara Muni, so there is no question of father and mother. Everyone comes in his own ability according to karma. Nobody is responsible for his birth. Everyone is responsible for his work. So Vyāsadeva became a great personality although he was son of a fisherwoman. Pārāśarya. He's addressing, "My dear son of Parāśara, mahā-bhāga." Mahā-bhāga means "You are very fortunate." Bhāga means fortune. Bhāgya. Mahā-bhāga. Pārāśarya mahā-bhāga bhavataḥ kaccid ātmanā parituṣyati. "Do you think that you'll be satisfied identifying yourself with this material body or mind? That is not possible." Parituṣyati śārīra ātmā mānasa eva vā. Śārīraḥ śarīrābhimāny ātmā, ātmanā tena śarīreṇa kaccit kiṁ parituṣyati(?). One who is... "You have compiled so many books on this concept of life, that the living entities are, some of them are considering that 'I am this body,' and some of them are considering 'I am this mind,' and some of them are considering 'I am this intelligence,' but he is none of them. He's above this. He's transcendental." Unless he comes to that position, there is no question of paritoṣa, or satisfaction.

So this is the first question, that "My dear Vyāsadeva, you are so great. You are born of a great father. You are so learned. Mahā-bhāga, you are so fortunate. But still, all your compilation of these books are based on the concept of this body and mind. Therefore you cannot get happiness." Then he says,

jijñāsitaṁ susampannam

api te mahad-adbhutam

kṛtavān bhārataṁ yas tvaṁ

sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam



"You have recently done..." Because Vyāsadeva, after the Battle of Kurukṣetra, he wrote Bhārata, this Mahābhārata, history, history of India or history of this planet, Mahābhārata. So he says that kṛtavān bhārataṁ yas tvaṁ sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam.



Sarvārtha. Artha means, what are the arthas? Artha means interest. Interest. So there are four kinds of interests. We are interested in four things. If we are actually human being, a civilized being, then we should be interested with four things. What are those four things? Dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. In human society, for at least peaceful living, the human society must have religion, dharma. And artha means economic development, good condition, economic con... That is also required. One, that the human society should be religious, they must have nice economic organization, and the kāma, they must have also nice arrangement for sense gratification. So sense gratification is not denied. Dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa. And after that, when one is satisfied, when he, when one is, by religious procedure, he is satisfied in his economic development, in his satisfaction of senses, the next need is mokṣa. Mokṣa means liberation from material bondage. These are four arthas. Catur-vargaḥ puruṣārthaḥ. Puruṣārtha means the interest of the living entity. But they are not final. They are not final.

So Nārada will give the hint what is the final puruṣārtha. That final puruṣārtha is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Not that even if we become liberated, if we merge into the existence of the Absolute, oh, that is also not final. Therefore in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you'll find in the beginning that dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo' tra [SB 1.1.2]. These four principles of our interest, means dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa, projjhita, they are thrown away from this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And the great commenter, commentator, I mean to say, Śrīdhara Svāmī, he says that dharmaḥ projjhita-dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa atra mokṣa-visandhir(?) api parityaktaḥ. One should not aspire even for liberation. That is the position of a devotee.

Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. These are dharma-artha. Anyone wants... Everyone wants money, everyone wants good wife, good family, good comfortable life. Caitanya Mahāprabhu denies, that "I don't want all these things." Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye. Then that is... [break]

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you should study very scrutinizingly, critically. And there is explanation of great, I mean, stalwart devotees. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there are eight kinds of commentary. In Bhagavad-gītā... They are authorized. They are not ordinary commentaries. Ordinary commentary, there may be many. Similarly, Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā there are nine kinds of commentary. So Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā or Bhāgavata, they are themselves illuminating. Just like sunlight-there is no need of a lamp to see the sunlight. Similarly, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Bhagavad-gītā, they are self-illuminating. Simply word to word if you try to understand, then you'll get enlightenment. Still, there are ācāryas who can help you.

So this Mahābhārata, which is referred now by Nārada Muni: kṛtavān bhārataṁ yas tvaṁ sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam He says that jijñāsitaṁ susampannam api te mahad-adbhutam. Jijñāsitam. Because Vyāsadeva inquired from Nārada. That is the duty of the disciple. Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī says that how we can develop... We are explaining these things in our Nectar of Devotion. Ādau gurvāśrayam. You must inquire, you must be inquisitive. Wherefrom inquiry? You have to inquire from a guru, a spiritual master, who can actually give you right knowledge. And spiritual master means he is able to answer your question. So one should be very much inquisitive. What sort of inquisitiveness? Asking his spiritual master, "What is the rate of this article?" Just like businessman? No. That is also explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that you should inquire. What is that inquiry? Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ [SB 11.3.21]. Jijñāsuḥ. Inquisitive. What is that? What is that inquiry? Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. One who is inquisitive to understand uttamam, beyond this darkness. Because anything you inquire about material things, that is darkness. Tamasi mā jyotir gama. Uttama. Tama, tama means darkness. Ut. Ut means udgatam.

So every word has volumes of meanings. Udga... Therefore sometimes right commentary required. So uttamam means udgataṁ tamam. Tama means this material world. When one is inquisitive to understand about the spiritual life, then he should accept a spiritual master. Otherwise there is no need. A spiritual master is not a fashion, that "Oh, I should have a spiritual master." People after fashion. No. One must be very much inquisitive to know. What about, inquisitive? Uttamam. Śreya uttamam, what is the highest perfection of life. If one is actually inquisitive to understand about the highest perfectional stage of our life, then he should search after a spiritual master. That is the direction.

So here Nārada says that "You, jijñāsitam, you have inquired. You have inquired. And after inquiry you have done also very nicely." Because Vyāsadeva has written so many books. Just like we are trying to write so many books. What is that book? That means whatever we have understood from our spiritual master. That's all. So one should be inquisitive, assimilate them, and susampannam, and... This is called śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. The inquiry means śravaṇam. Inquiry means to get the answer; that is hearing. And then assimilate. Then kīrtanam, then distribute the knowledge to the world. That is the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya janma yāra [Cc. Ādi 9.41]. Anyone who has taken birth in this holy land of India, Bhāratavarṣa... Just see how Caitanya Mahāprabhu gives power to every Indian. Every Indian has got this opportunity because his land of religion, the land of knowledge, spiritual knowledge. But these rascal men, they are being taught that "Throw away these books." You see. Such misfortunate condition is now in India. They are recommending wholesale cow slaughter in India, to make this business... Unfortunately, we have to be governed by such rascals. So the sooner the Indians give up their..., now, so long these nonsensical things are going on, it is better. It is better.

So jijñāsitam. Nārada says that "You inquired nicely and you have written very nice books also." Jijñāsitaṁ susampannam api te mahad-adbhutam. "And your knowledge is wonderful." Everything, all credit is being given to Vyāsadeva. Adbhutam. Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca brahma yat tat sanātanam. "Not only ordinary things, not only your material knowledge, but you have inquired about Brahman." Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Sanātanam. The Brahman means that is eternal. And what is not Brahman, that is temporary. So sanātana, "You have inquired about Brahman and you have understood, you have assimilated. You have compiled very wonderful books, adbhutam, and the history, bhāratam, Mahābhāratam." Sarvārtha. Sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam. "And in that Mahābhārata you have given all the information of these four principles of perfection, namely dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa. And this Bhagavad-gītā is there in the Mahābhārata. In the Bhīṣma-parva." So tathāpi śocasi. Tathāpi:. "Still you are morose. After doing all these things, you are still morose." Tathāpi śocasy ātmānam akṛtārtha iva prabho. Prabho.

Now, here you see. We are teaching our disciples to address amongst themselves "prabhu." This is not new thing. This is very old. Now Nārada is addressing Vyāsadeva, "prabhu," his disciple. His disciple, he's addressing prabhu. So we should give respect. Just like we address, "Kīrtanānanda Mahārāja." Although he's my disciple, but the respect should be given. Here, see, Nārada is addressing Vyāsadeva: "Prabhu." "My dear prabhu, still you are lamenting. You have done so nice, wonderful things and you are learned, you have asked about the transcendental subject matter, you have compiled so many nice books. Why? Why you are?" This question must be there just to apprehend that "What is the reason?"

So this is the question and answer of Vyāsadeva. It is very interesting. You have got already your book, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Fifth Chapter, First Canto. They are very interesting. So we shall discuss. What is time now? It is time now. We shall stop. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



690523SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.1-8

-

New Vrindaban, May 23, 1969



Prabhupāda:



...cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu nityānanda

śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda



[I offer my obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa and all others in the line of devotion.]



Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare



[My dear Lord, and the spiritual energy of the Lord, kindly engage me in Your service. I am now embarrassed with this material service. Please engage me in Your service.]



So sage Nārada is trying to enliven Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva was learned. Not ordinarily learned. He is the incarnation of God, Nārāyaṇa. He appeared for spreading Vedic knowledge. Therefore Nāradajī, it is stated here, smayann iva. Smayann iva means, smayan means smiling, that "Such a great personality also becomes morose." After giving so many contribution, literary contribution, still he was not happy. So it is wonderful... So therefore he was smiling. Smayann iva. Devarṣiḥ prāha viprarṣiṁ vīṇā-pāṇiḥ smayann iva. He said,

jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca

brahma yat tat sanātanam

tathāpi śocasy ātmānam

akṛtārtha iva prabho

[SB 1.5.4]



Jijñāsitam. This is very important thing, jijñāsitam. This is the beginning of life actually. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Inquisitiveness. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. One should search after a guru, jijñāsu, one who is inquisitive. That is actually life. Just like animals, they are not inquisitive. They are simply concerned with the four principles of bodily necessities. Eating... Udaram, dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. In this age, Kali-yuga, if one can eat sumptuously, he thinks that "All my interest is now fulfilled. I have eaten very nicely today." That's all. (chuckles) And dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. And if he can maintain a wife and three children, oh, he is Dakṣa Mahārāja. Dakṣa Mahārāja. This is the age of Kali. You see? If one can simply eat and if he's well-to-do, he can maintain...



And when I was in New York, one old lady, she used to come to my class. Not in Second Avenue. When I first started in 72nd Street. So she had a son. So I asked, "Why don't you get your son married?" "Oh, if he can maintain a wife, I have no objection." Just to maintain a wife is a great job in this age. Dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. And still we are very much proud that we are advancing. Even a bird maintains a wife, even a beast maintains wife. And human being hesitates to maintain a wife? You see? And they are advanced in civilization? Hm? It is a very horrible age.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that don't waste your time in any way. Simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva... [Cc. Ādi 17.21]. So people are not at all interested in spiritual life. No inquiry. No inquiry. But that is the life, that is human life. Jijñāsitam. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. One must find out a person, guru, a spiritual master, and inquire from him the problems of life. Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī. You'll find in the teachings of Lord Caitanya, he inquired. He was a great minister, and he thought himself that "I am a most third-class man because I do not know what is the aim of my life." Ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya: "Why I am put into this miserable condition of material existence? I don't want all these miserable conditions. Still, they are enforced upon me." So there should be inquiry. But the animal has no inquiry. Just like the goat is standing whole night. Just see. It has no power to inquire, "Oh, why you have put me into this condition?" That is animal life. "All right, suffering is there. All right, disease is there. That's all right. Death is there, all right. Old age is there, all right." This is animal life.

Therefore Nārada says, jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca. "You are not a fool. You have inquired sufficiently, and you have studied." Adhītaṁ ca. So it is not that without studying, without inquiry one becomes elevated. No. Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca brahma. What about, inquiry? Brahman. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Ordinary jijñāsā, "What is the news today?" this is not jijñāsā. Jijñāsā means brahma-jijñāsā. Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca brahma yat tat sanātanam. Sanātanam means eternal. We should inquire about our eternal life, eternal blissful life. That is our prerogative. So "You have done all these things." He had a spiritual master like Nārada, and he was himself Vyāsadeva. So everything was first class. But still, tathāpi, still, śocasi, "You are lamenting. You are morose. You are morose, you are unhappy just like you have akṛtārtha, you have done nothing." So we have to become kṛtārtha. Kṛtārtha means one who has finished his job, kṛtārtha. The Sanskrit words are very appropriate. People still have to learn so many things from this Vedic literature.

Then Vyāsadeva replies, asty eva me sarvam idaṁ tvayoktam. "My dear sir, my dear spiritual master, whatever you are saying, it is all right. I have studied sufficiently. I have inquired sufficiently. I know about Brahman, everything. I have written Vedānta-sūtra; still..." Asty eva. Asty eva me sarvam idaṁ tvayoktam. "Whatever you are saying, everything is there in me." Tathāpi nātmā parituṣyate me. "Still I don't find satisfaction." Tan-mūlam avyaktam. "And what is the cause? That is also I do not know." Tan-mūlam avyaktam agādha-bodhaṁ pṛcchāmahe tvātma-bhavātma-bhūtam. Bhavātmā. Ātma-bhūtaṁ bhava. "You are the son of Brahmā." Brahmā is called ātma-bhūtam. Brahmā is not born of ordinary father and mother. Brahmā is born of the Supreme Lord, Supreme ātmā, Nārāyaṇa, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Therefore he is called Svayambhū. Brahmā's another name is Svayambhū. Sa vai bhavān veda samasta-guhyam upāsito yat puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ. Now here Nārada's qualification is that "Because you are a great devotee of the original Personality of Godhead, puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ." Śāśvataṁ puruṣam ādyam. Just like Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa, śāśvataṁ puruṣam ādyam. Just like we are singing now, govindam ādi-puruṣam. So purāṇa-puruṣam. Purāṇa-puruṣam, the oldest puruṣa, oldest being. The oldest being is Kṛṣṇa. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣam [Bs. 5.33]. These references are all the same, either you take Vedānta-sūtra or you, say, take Brahma-sūtra or you take Brahma-saṁhitā or Bhāgavatam. There is no contradiction, because the same truth is explained in different Vedic literature.

So (Sanskrit commentary:) kiṁ ca yat sanātanaṁ nityaṁ paraṁ brahma ca tac ca tvayā jijñāsitaṁ vicaritam adhītam adhigataṁ prāptam cety arthaḥ. Ātma-bhavaḥ, avyaktam asphutam, he nārada. Tva tvaṁ pṛcchāmi. Ātma-bhavaḥ avyaktaṁ brahma tasya ātmano dehodbhutams tam.(?) "So because you are directly from Brahmā, therefore I am asking you, what is this?" Sa vai bhavān veda samasta-guhyam upāsito yat puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ. Puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ. Puruṣa, the puruṣa... God is puruṣa. God is never female. This is another rascaldom. There are many rascals who think that God is female. "Kālī, Goddess Kālī is God." Goddess Kālī, how can be God? She is śakti. Śakti. Every Vedic scripture it is said that parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ. Everything is energy. So how God can be... That is the impersonalist. He can think of God, imagine, imagine. It is imagination. The Māyāvādī theory is that God..., there is no God. The impersonal, there is voidness. You can imagine any form. That's all. Sādhakānāṁ hitārthāya brahmaṇo rūpaḥ kalpanaḥ.(?) Kalpanaḥ means imagination.

So except the sātvatas, nobody knows what is God. Sātvata means Vaiṣṇava. Nobody knows what is God. They sometimes accept "This is God, this is God, this is God, this is God." No. God is the original Supreme Person, male, enjoyer. Male is called enjoyer, predominator. Puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ. Parāvareśo manasaiva viśvaṁ sṛjaty avaty atti guṇair asaṅgaḥ. And para. Parāvaraḥ. Para means transcendental, and avara, avara means this material, inferior. Avara means inferior. And para means superior. That is explained in Bhagavad-gītā. Itas tu me... Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ buddhir mano eva ca, itas tu me... [Bg. 7.4]. Aparā. Apareyam. This material nature, consisting of earth, water, air, ether, mind, intelligence, ego: eight. This is avara. Avara means inferior. And there is another nature. Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find, there is another nature. That is para. Para. Tasmāt. Tasmāt means out of this avara, inferior nature, there is another, superior nature, para. The same thing is here also. Parāvareśaḥ. But Kṛṣṇa is īśa, the controller of both the energies, the spiritual energy and material energy. Parāvareśaḥ.

Parāvareśo manasaiva viśvaṁ sṛjaty avati. Manasaiva, "simply by thinking." Just like in the Bible it is said, "Let there be creation." Immediately there is creation. Manasaiva. We can compare just a very rich man, many assistants, many managers. Just like, take, in your country, Rockefeller or somebody like that. He thinks something to do, business. Simply he orders his secretary, "This should be done," it is done. Without his personal effort, immediately done. Because why? Because he has got superior energy or power. In the material world... Material world means this monetary strength he has got. So simply by his desire, the secretary arranges everything and everything is nicely done. But he is sitting in his room. If it is possible for a person who is little materially rich, just imagine how much it is possible by God, the Supreme. Simply by willing, everything will be done. He hasn't got to do anything. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. Veda also.

So He has nothing to do. So who is that God? That Kṛṣṇa. He has nothing to do. He is simply enjoying, playing His flute, and Rādhārāṇī is serving. Oh, He is not taking a sword and fighting. Why He should fight? He hasn't got to fight. Then one can say, "Then why He was in the battlefield?" Yes, battlefield He was. He was not to fight there. He was to see the fun, how the fight is going on. He was to give instruction. He was to give, deliver this Bhagavad-gītā. He was not fighting. That is God. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He's instructing Arjuna, His friend, that "You fight." By His simple will everything would have been done, fighting would have been finished. He says that nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savyasācin. "I have already planned it. If you don't fight, don't think that these persons who have assembled here, they will go back home. They are already finished. That plan is already made. Simply you take the credit, that you are Kṛṣṇa's friend, you have won the battle. That's all. I am giving you this chance of taking the credit." This is God. God hasn't got (chuckling) to labor and meditate and push nose, and he becomes God. No. God is God. Simply by His will, God. Everything is God. So this bluffing, that by meditation one can become, by silent, becoming silent, one become God, this condition... God is not under any condition. Why God should be under condition?

So therefore it is said, manasaiva viśvaṁ sṛjati. That is God. Simply by willing, "Let there be creation." Simply that word is sufficient. Immediately perfect. Pūrṇam idam. Pūrṇam idam [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. Everything full. Just like see, every planet is complete. Complete. Whatever is needed, there is complete arrangement. Take, for example, in our planet. We require water. The sufficient water is stocked, and the water is evaporated by the sun, and it is stocked again on the hill, reservoir, and from there supply, whole year is being supplied by river, and again it is going to the reservoir. How complete it is. Everything you will find complete. Pūrṇam idam,

pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ

pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya

pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

[Īśo Invocation]



So simply manasaiva viśvaṁ sṛjaty avaty atti. This creation, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19], the whole creation by the will of the purāṇaḥ puruṣaḥ, the Supreme Lord, is coming into existence, manifested, again becoming nonmanifest. Guṇair asaṅgaḥ. How it is becoming manifested and nonmanifested? By the interaction of the three material modes of nature. But He is apart from that. Guṇair asaṅgaḥ.



tvaṁ paryaṭann arka iva tri-lokīm

antaś-caro vāyur ivātma-sākṣī

parāvare brahmaṇi dharmato vrataiḥ

snātasya me nyūnam alaṁ vicakṣva

[SB 1.5.7]



"So you are a devotee of such Personality of Godhead. You are recognized devotee. Therefore I request you to find out what is the defect in me that after inquiring, after doing so many books and literatures, I am not happy. So you..." The same thing, as Arjuna surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, that "The disturbance which I am feeling in this battlefield, that can be solved by You only. Therefore I am surrendering unto You as my spiritual master. No more friendly talks. And You just teach me." So this is the, I mean to say, eternal process. Even Vyāsadeva is surrendering to Nārada. Such a great scholar. Even Arjuna is surrendering to Kṛṣṇa. So why? Either you have to surrender to Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa's representative. Then there is solution. Otherwise there is no solution.



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

[SB 11.3.21]



One who has taken shelter of the Supreme Lord, upaśama, finishing all, I mean to say, material desires... Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. "Vāsudeva is everything." Sa mahātmā. So we have to search out a mahātmā, a person who is simply a surrendered soul to Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, and we have to surrender unto him. This is called disciplic succession. Then our problems will be solved. Otherwise, even a personality like Vyāsadeva, he has problems. Even a personality like Arjuna, he has problems. So antaś-caro vāyur ivātma-sākṣī parāvare brahmaṇi dharmato vrataiḥ. Vrataiḥ. Dṛḍha-vrata. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Any person who has simply acted piety, janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇāṁ te, such person, bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ.



So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, or to become a devotee, is not ordinary thing. One has to finish the business of all sinful reaction. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. So long there will be pāpam, he'll be hesitating to surrender unto Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, that all pāpas will be finished. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. If one chants Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra offenselessly, just according to regulation, then he is anta-gataṁ pāpam. Anta-gatam. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. (pause)

So Kṛṣṇa says, yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. One who has finished all sinful reaction. This can be done. But we have our ten kinds of offenses. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. This Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra will finish all my sinful reaction, that is a fact. As soon as I chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, immediately my sinful reaction is finished. But that does not mean that "Because I chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, then let me, from morning to evening, let me do all kinds of sinful reaction and sinful activities, and I shall chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, everything will be finished." Just like in Christian religion there is a faith that confession, weekly confession. That is nice. When you confess your sinful activities before the higher authorities, before the representative of God, Lord Jesus Christ, or God, or Kṛṣṇa, your sinful activities are finished. That's all right. But that does not mean that you shall go again, and again commit sinful activities, and again come at the end of the week and finish your business. No. This is not meant. One should be conscious.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He accepted Jagāi-Mādhāi... They were very sinful. But He simply asked the condition that "From this day no more sinful activities. You accept this, then I accept you." They promised, "Yes. Whatever we have done, no more." That should be the... Confess, God can excuse, and that is not difficult job. God can excuse any amount of sinful activity, but after confessing, after being free, if I again commit sinful activities, oh, that is the greatest sin. That is the greatest sin. One should be ashamed of, that "I... God has excused me. Again I shall? So I am so shameless." But this business is going on. No. That should not be. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ.

So we should not think that because we are chanting we can act all kinds of sinful activities. No. The chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa will give you protection, but you should not take advantage of. But if by accident or by unintentionally if you commit some, by habit, that is also excused. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk, sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. That is accidental. Not that willful sinful activities should be done and it should be neutralized by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. No. Then you are spoiling your time. That should not be done. So yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam. So without being freed from sinful activities nobody can take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The method is easy. You can get out of sinful activities. But don't commit again. If you think that "I shall ignite fire and pour water again," then what is the use of? Simply waste of time. So that should not be done.

So, parāvare brahmaṇi dharmato vrataiḥ. So one should execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness, dharmataḥ, in right path, and vrataiḥ. Bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ. Just like today, ekādaśī-vrata. Vrataiḥ. This ekādaśī-vrata is required. Just see. Here it is that "You have performed all the vratas." The purpose of ekādaśī-vrata is that today we should not eat much usual food, grains. The actual prescription is fasting. Nirjala-ekādaśī. Nirjala means there are many devotees who does not take even water. Water, drinking water, according to śāstra, it is taking food... It is drinking of food or no food. We can take both ways. So sometimes drinking of water is excused as upavāsa also. But there are many devotees who even..., drink even a drop of water. Whole day and night they fast and observe ekādaśī-vrata. And the night is called harivāsara. Harivāsara means the whole night they would chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma... This is called vrata. Dṛḍha-vrata. Dṛḍha-vrata.

Dṛḍha means very firm, steady. Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He has given us so many concession. But we should be... Because there are some concession, better we should not take advantage of the concession, but we should be very steady and strong in our conviction and perform devotional service strictly. That is nice. Vrataiḥ. Dharmato vrataiḥ. Parāvare brahmaṇi dharmato vrataiḥ snātasya. Snātasya means taking bath. Just like if you... Of course, in your country there is no such thing. But in India they take bath in the Ganges. Completely dip. Just like you sometimes take bath in the ocean. So snātasya. Snātasya. Snātasya means completely taking bath in dharmato vrataiḥ. Fresh, refreshed.

So, me nyūnam alaṁ vicakṣva: "So you can find out what is the defect in me. Why I am morose?" Then Nārada is replying now.

bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ

yaśo bhagavato 'malam

yenaivāsau na tuṣyeta

manye tad darśanaṁ khilam

[SB 1.5.8]



He immediately replies that bhavatā anudita-prāyaṁ yaśo bhagavataḥ amalam. "You have compiled, or you have," I mean to say, "given so many literatures, but in each and every literature... Just like there are Purāṇas, eighteen Purāṇas, and Mahābhārata, and Vedas, and Brahma-sūtra. You have given so many literatures. But," bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ yaśo bhagavato 'malam, "there is no incessant glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead."



Just like Mahābhārata. That's a great epic. But there are politics. So many politics, sociology, fight, this, that, but in the middle there is a little glories of God, Bhagavad-gītā. So the book is not full of the glories of the... Kṛṣṇa is there, but that is a partial representation. Now Nārada Muni says that "Not as sidelight. Completely you have to write one book simply glorifying the Supreme Lord. Then you'll be satisfied." Not sidelight. Completely. Bhavatānudita-prāyam [SB 1.5.8]. Here it is said, parāvareśa... Anudita-prāyam, anukta-prāyam. A sidelight. People take... Just like, "All right, yes, we accept God. But we cannot devote our whole time for God. We shall go weekly once or fortnightly once, or one hour in a day, partial. Our business is another. We want to enjoy sense gratification, and we shall go to church or temple just to ask God to supply our ingredients of sense gratification: 'Oh God, give me this. Give me this. I am poor man. I am this. I am this. I am suffering. I have got some disease.' " But still Bhagavad-gītā says that they are sukṛtina. Because they go to temple or church asking God something, because they are accepting that "There is God who can satisfy our needs," therefore they are sukṛtina. But those who are duṣkṛtina, miscreants, they don't believe in God. Then where is the chance of asking God, "Please give me this, give me that"? Because they don't believe in God. Therefore they are duṣkṛtina, atheist. In comparison to such person, those who go to the temple or church, ask something from God, they are better. Because they are accepting. They have at least come to God. Now, gradually, they will be purified, and at a time they will say, svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42], "No. No more. I have no demand." What demand? If one gets Kṛṣṇa, then what is the question of demand? He gets everything. Everything. There is no question of demand. So that stage is perfect. So, (reads commentary) Anudita-prāyam anukta-prāyaṁ vimalaṁ bhagavad-yaśo vinā yenaiva dharmādi jñānenāsau bhagavān na tuṣyati(?) Śrīdhara Svāmī gives note that if you become a rigid religious person, that does not mean (chuckling) God will be satisfied with you. That is preliminary stage. Dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41]. If one religious man... But that is not the qualification. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was talking with Rāmānanda Rāya, He, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, inquired what is the aim of life and what is the procedure of achieving that aim. He prescribed this varṇāśrama-dharma. Because that is the beginning of actual human life, accepting four varṇas and four āśramas. Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately rejected, eho bāhya āge kaha āra. These are not very important things. Just see. The whole Vedic civilization is resting on the varṇāśrama-dharma.

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



That is the statement, that one who is rigidly performing the rules and regulation of these four varṇas and āśramas... Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān viṣṇur ārādhyate. Simply by following the rules and regulation, varṇāśrama system, one can worship Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur ārādhya... Nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam. There is no alternative to satisfy Him. That... This is an authorized statement. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, eho bāhya āge kaha āra, "This is external. This is not very important thing. If you know something more, that you can say." Eho bāhya āge kaha āra. Āge kaha āra.



So to become a religious person, to become economically very well-to-do, or to become a salvationist, desiring to merge into the existence, to become one with God, these things are not, I mean to say, very satisfactory to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktas tu toṣa-bhagavān gaja-yuta pāya.(?) If you want to satisfy the Supreme Lord, then you have to accept this path of devotional service. There is no second path. There is no second path. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said that bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If one wants to know the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in truth, not fictitiously, then bhaktyā. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti means through devotional service. So here also it is said that bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ yaśo bhagavato 'malam [SB 1.5.8], "You have not stated very nicely, in devotion, in love, about the transcendental glories of the Lord." Yenaivāsau na tuṣyeta manye tad... And if Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is not satisfied... Yena eva asau na tuṣyeta. Asau bhagavān na tuṣyeta, is not pleased, manye tad darśanaṁ khilam. That is insignificant. That means he hinted that "You are very much proud that you have written Vedānta-sūtra. You don't think by writing your Vedānta-sūtra God is pleased. Don't think so. It is clearly said manye tad-darśanam. "You have done wonderful work in writing Vedānta-sūtra, but I think," tad darśanaṁ khilam, "it is insignificant. It is no..." Because by philosophical speculation, by argument, this or that, it is all...

God is not satisfied because you are very erudite scholar. God is satisfied by the love of gopīs. They are not philosophers, they are not even brāhmaṇas, they are not even man. Ordinary village girls, but their devotion for Kṛṣṇa, oh, there is no comparison. There is no comparison. Therefore Lord Caitanya says, ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-varge... And Caitanya Mahāprabhu's life was to love Kṛṣṇa: gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau. This is the Gosvāmīs. Simply they were trying to come to that stage on which gopīs loved Kṛṣṇa. Gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhuḥ.

So that is the highest stage, how to love Kṛṣṇa without any motive, without any material profit, without any personal consideration. That, if we can reach that, then yayātmā suprasīdati, then we'll be satisfied. Otherwise there is no satisfaction. It is simply useless, waste of time. That's all.

Thank you very much. (end)



680110SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.2

-

Los Angeles, January 10, 1968



Prabhupāda:



pārāśarya mahā-bhāga

bhavataḥ kaccid ātmanā

parituṣyati śārīra

ātmā mānasa eva vā

[SB 1.5.2]



I am just quoting Sanskrit mantras before you. You may not understand the language, but the vibration of the sound, the Sanskrit mantra, hymns, it has got special value. Mantra, sound vibration. Śabdād anāvṛttiḥ.



Now, the whole material world is produced from sound. That is scientific fact. Scientists are researching the importance of sound, physical science. Sound, light, and transmission of sound and light. There are so many things, electronics. So this sound vibration, this is material sound. They have got so much wonderful power. And just try to understand what is the power of the spiritual sound. Real sound is coming from the spiritual world. It is simply just like gramophone. The sound is coming originally from the person; the gramophone is reproducing. That is not the original source of the sound. Similarly, whatever sound is there in this material world, the original sound is produced by God. Just like in your Bible it is said, "Let there be creation." It is, simply it was sound and there was creation. So spiritual sound is so powerful. And we are trying to catch you directly from that sound vibration, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and I am sure it is acting. Simply, śabdād anāvṛttiḥ.

Our question by Nārada Muni to Vyāsadeva, asking that "My dear Vyāsadeva, the author of all Vedic literature, you are such a learned scholar. You have produced such vastly, scholarly, and philosophical theses, books, and still you are not happy. So did you try to find out what is the cause?" The similar position is of the present world. There is so much advancement of scientific research, result, economic. Of course, in India there may be poverty-stricken, but in your country, you have got ample, everything ample. But still, a section is confused and frustrated. Why? The same position as Vyāsadeva, who was not satisfied even after producing so many variety of literatures in material science and philosophy and religion and... Everything was complete. So therefore Nārada Muni is asking, "My dear Vyāsadeva, you are great personality, but do you think as long as one is situated in the bodily plane or in the mental plane, does he derive any pleasure?" This is the question.

We should try to understand how we are constituted. The Bhagavad-gītā explains our constitutional position very nicely. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhuḥ. Indriyāṇi. Indriyāṇi means senses. Just like, what is my material existence? I am in this world. What for? For my sense gratification. That's all. This is the first constitutional position. Every animal, every living entity, is busy for eating, sleeping and defending and mating. That means the bodily necessities, senses. First of all, the prominent factor of our existence is the senses. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā says, indriyāṇi parāṇy āhuḥ. My material existence means the sense enjoyment. That's all. And therefore in the material civilization the highest pleasure is being derived by eschewing sex life, because that is the last word. That is the last word of material enjoyment. One who has no knowledge of spiritual life, they cannot go further than sex life. One who goes still further than the platform of sense enjoyment, he comes to the mental speculation, as there are many philosophers, speculating. The meditation is also another type of mental speculation. So indriyāṇi parāṇy āhuḥ.

Bhagavad-gītā says the first prominent factor are the senses, and the next stage is the mind, mental speculation, because the senses are controlled by the mind. Mind is the central point of sensual activities. If my mind is not in order, in spite of my eyes, I cannot see; in spite of my hand, I cannot touch. Therefore next important stage is mind. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ [Bg. 3.42]. Manaḥ means mind. Manasas tu parā buddhiḥ. And mind is also controlled by intelligence. Manasas tu parā buddhiḥ. And the factor which is controlling intelligence, that is soul. Therefore behind all manifestations, all activities, the soul is there. That is in dormant stage. Not dormant stage. Actually, the soul is agitating the intelligence, the intelligence is agitating the mind, and the mind is controlling the senses, and the sense enjoyment is our material life. But we want happiness. Therefore Vyāsadeva's question to Nārada..., uh, Nārada's question to Vyāsadeva is very intelligent, that "My dear Vyāsadeva, you are, you appear to be very, not very jolly even after producing so much literatures. But may I ask you, do you think that on the mental plane or on the bodily plane, if you think there is satisfaction, is it possible?" This is the question.

The people of the modern age should think over this question of Nārada to Vyāsadeva very seriously, whether on the bodily platform or on the mental platform we can be happy. No. That is not possible. That is not possible. We should clearly understand that people are busy only on the bodily platform and mental platform. They have no spiritual understanding. That is the defect of the modern civilization. Unless... Just like you belong to certain atmosphere. Just like we are Indians. I am speaking from bodily consideration, that I am, in here, in your country, I am very comfortably situated. The boys are taking care of me very seriously. But still, sometimes I think that I am, I was happy in Vṛndāvana. Similarly, if you are transferred to some other foreign country, however comfortably you may be situated, you'll think of your own country. This is natural. Therefore we are seeking after spiritual happiness actually. Just like the child. Child is crying. The child is crying, and the mother is trying to pacify the child in so many ways, but the child is still crying because it wants something else. The child wants mother's milk. So unless the mother is supplying that thing, it is not satisfied. Similarly, our demand is spiritual happiness. Our demand is spiritual happiness.

Just this morning or yesterday morning I was walking on the street. So many books were thrown in the street. Very nice book. Gaurasundara, you remember. Because the fact is all these nonsense books could not give him solace. He has thrown it on the street. Very nice book. Not nice book, very binding nice. It must have been very costly book. Big, big book thrown away. Why? There was no peace. There was no peace. Therefore... Just like in your country I see bunch of newspaper. Just after one second, turning this page, that page, thrown away. Why? There is no pleasure. There is no pleasure. Simply the old story. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Chewing the chewed. In your country we don't find such things. In our country, India, the sugar cane is chewed, the juice is sucked, and it is thrown in the street. Now, if somebody goes and chews the chewed sugar cane, what relish, what taste he will get? Similarly, because we have no information of spiritual life, we are simply chewing the chewed. That's all. In a different way. This way or that way, this way or that way. And that is sex life. That's all.

So that will not give us happiness. This is the purport of the question of Nārada Muni. Pārāśarya mahā-bhāga bhavataḥ kaccid ātmanā. "Do you think that the soul can be pacified, the soul can be in peace by identifying himself with the body and the mind?" No. That cannot be. "And you are the first-class example." Why?

jijñāsitaṁ susampannam

api te mahad-adbhutam

kṛtavān bhārataṁ yas tvaṁ

sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam



"You are not ordinary scholar. You have produced Mahābhārata. Mahābhārata." The other day I explained what is Mahābhārata. Mahābhārata is the... The real meaning of Mahābhārata is "History of India." History of... Mahā, mahā means great, and great history of India. Bhārata means India. India's real name is Bhāratavarṣa. Perhaps you know. Bhāratavarṣa. This whole planet was known in the beginning as Ilāvṛtavarṣa. Then there was a king, Mahārāja Bharata. So according to his name the whole planet became Bhāratavarṣa. This whole planet is called Bhāratavarṣa according to Vedic literature. But now it is now divided. There is a long history, how the human society was distributed all over this planet. So far Mahābhārata is concerned, you Americans or Europeans, you also originally belonged to India, according to Mahābhārata. Turkish civilization and Greece civilization was originally from India. Two sons of Mahārāja Yayāti, they were given kingdom of Turkey and Greece, and from Turkey and Greece the European civilization or population has increased and from Europe, the Americans, they have come here. Of course, that is historical point.



So here it is said, "My dear Vyāsadeva, you have compiled a great literature, Mahābhārata. And in that Mahābhārata you have introduced everything that is knowable for understanding." Mahābhārata was originally written for the women class and strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnām [SB 1.4.25]. Because the Vedic literature is very stiff. Not only because it is written in old Sanskrit language, but the meaning is very deep. Vedic literature... Because at that time people were very intelligent, so simple one hint gives them lots of meaning. Just like Vedānta-sūtra. Vedānta-sūtra, you'll find simply some clues. Janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] "The source of all emanation." Now we can think over, "the source of all emanation." So Vedic literature requires explanation, authoritative explanation. So the original Vedas, they, it was not possible for understanding for ordinary class of men. And who are ordinary class of men? Now, strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhu. Strī, woman class, are taken as less intelligent. It is not partiality; it is stated in the śāstra and practically it is so. So woman class, strī, and śūdra. Śūdra means laborer class. Strī, śūdra, and dvija-bandhu. Dvija-bandhu means born of a high family... The brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and the vaiśyas, they are considered as in the higher status of social life, and the śūdras... It is everywhere. It is not that...

The other day in the television somebody was questioning me that "Why there is caste system in India?" So I answered, "The caste system is everywhere. Why in India?" And what is that caste system? The caste system is that there is a class of men who are intelligent, very intelligent, educationist, philosopher, scientist. They are called brāhmaṇas. That's all. The intelligent class of the society... Just like my head is the most important part of my body. Why? Because from the head all intelligence is coming. If you cut my hand, I will exist. If you cut my leg, I will exist. But if you cut my head, oh, there is no existence. Therefore, as there is the important part of this body, the head, similarly, those who are giving intelligence to the society, they are called brāhmaṇas. That's all. Brāhmaṇa is not a thing which is born by, I mean to say, familywise. No. That is not... In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. There is no question of birthright. Anyone, anyone. Just like in our ordinary life, anyone can become your president. It is not that a particular family has to become. One who is intelligent enough, if people like, he will be voted, he'll be elected. Similarly, according to the quality and work, the section of the society is imagined. Not imagined, practically designated.

So this Mahābhārata... Just try to understand that Mahābhārata was originally designed for the less-intelligent class of men. Less intelligent, who are less-intelligent class of men? The woman class, or the laborer class, and those who are born in high family, but their qualities are not so improved. Suppose a boy is born in a brāhmaṇa family, but his quality just like śūdra or laborer class. The people will not accept. Just like if I am born of a brāhmaṇa family, so they will ask my qualification, how I am qualified. So those who are born in high family but not qualified according to the family tradition, they are called dvija-bandhu. Dvija. Dvija means twice-born. Dvi means two, and ja means birth. The śūdras have one birth, one birth by the father and mother. But those who are higher caste... Just like a man may be born in a low family or poor family, but by his intelligence he gets another birth. He becomes very rich man or very learned man, very intelligent man, very philosophic... That life is from the university. Similarly, dvija means first birth is from the father-mother, and the next birth is accepting a spiritual master. The next birth is... Father is the spiritual master, and the Vedas are the mother. So those who accept the spiritual master as father and the Vedic knowledge as mother, they are called dvija, twice-born. Twice-born. That means cultured. Cultured family. So those who are born in cultured family, but... A son is born in a cultured family, but his cultural knowledge is very poor, he is called dvija-bandhu. So woman class, laborer class, and those who are born in higher family, but intelligence is very poor, they are called dvija-bandhu. And for these classes of men the Mahābhārata was compiled. That means Vedic knowledge explained in simple historical facts.

The Mahābhārata, the basic principle of Mahābhārata is the fighting between the two groups of royal family and on that politics, sociology, religion... But those who have read Mahābhārata, they will be surprised how elevated knowledge are there in Mahābhārata. But they were meant for śūdras and, I mean to say, less-intelligent class of men. So you can imagine how intelligent at that time people were that Mahābhārata was... Mahābhārata is even at the present moment they can(not) understand rightly Mahābhārata. Say, for Bhagavad-gītā. Bhagavad-gītā is part of Mahābhārata. But the philosophy is not understood properly even by the greatest philosophers. They commit mistake. So that means as the days are going, we are becoming less, less intelligent. Less, less intelligent.

Therefore in this age of less-intelligence class of men, this, the yoga system as it is... Not bluff yoga, real yoga. Yoga indriya saṁyama. Oh, that is not possible, real yoga system. Controlling the senses, sit in a solitary place, and alone, with celibatic life, no sense enjoyment. There are so many rules and regulations. Not that... If I say that "Whatever you like you can do. You just meditate," what meditation you'll do? That is not possible in this age. Next stage of elevation is sacrifice. These are statement of the Vedic literature. [break]

...kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇum. Meditation means meditating on Viṣṇu, on the Supreme Lord, this Viṣṇu form, as you have got in my front. Meditation. That is called yoga. By meditating on Viṣṇu, one realizes everything and gets some power, wonderful power. So Bhāgavata says that kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇum. The perfection of life (is) attained in the Satya-yuga, or golden age, by meditating on Viṣṇu. That is meditation.

Tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ. The next stage, Tretā-yuga, by offering sacrifice. That is in the second age. And dvāpare paricaryāyām. In the next age, Dvāpara age, by temple worship, church worship. So Lord Caitanya says that kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva. Three times. Three times "no." That means meditation is not possible, sacrifice not possible, temple worship or church worship not possible. Then what is possible? Kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt. In this age, simply by chanting the glories of the Lord, Hare Kṛṣṇa. These are prescribed. Therefore Lord Caitanya, you see, He is preaching this cult, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa... There is no distinction whether you are in church or temple or mosque. You simply vibrate Hare Kṛṣṇa wherever you are, at home or in temple or anywhere. Or in the street or in bed, or in hospital or in office, you can chant. Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. So kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ, dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ kalau... [SB 12.3.52]. Kalau means this age, in the age of Kali. Hari-kīrtanāt, simply by chanting. Hari means God.

So here Nārada is asking Vyāsadeva, jijñāsitam. "You are a very perfect scholar." Now the first word is used here, jijñāsitam. A scholar is he who has perfectly inquired from his spiritual master. Inquiry. Just like in the Vedānta-sūtra, the first aphorism is athāto brahma jijñāsā. One must be very inquisitive. That... I have explained already several times, that first inquisitiveness should be "What I am? Am I this body? Oh, the bodily comforts are so many. I have got my car, I have got good apartment, I have got good wife, and... Why I am not happy? Why I am not happy? Everything is there. So am I this body?" No. Vyāsadeva here is asked this question, jijñāsitam. So jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca. Jijñāsitaṁ susampannam api: "And after inquiry, you have very nicely written all kinds of literature, authoritative literature."

If one is perfect in his inquiry from the authorized spiritual master, he can write things. Otherwise, what is the use of writing nonsense? Those books will be thrown away. After reading..., just like the newspaper thrown away and the other books are thrown away. But Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you cannot throw away. You cannot throw away. I'll give you one practical example in my life. In Calcutta... My birthplace is in Calcutta. So my friend, he had one European gentleman tenant. I am speaking of, say, about thirty years before story. So that gentleman, he was a very respectable man, manager of a big firm, and he was tenant of my friend. So he was going to take possession of the house. He was vacating. So I also went with him. That European gentleman... I forgot his name now. It is... There was a Bhagavad-gītā in his almirah. So my friend, Mr. Mullik, he, out of inquisitiveness, he was touching that book. He thought that "He is European Christian. Why he has kept this Bhagavad-gītā?" So he was seeing that Bhagavad-gītā. And that European gentleman, he thought that "I'm going, and this landlord may ask this book, because the Bhagavad-gītā belongs to the Hindus." He immediately said, "Dear Mr. Mullik, I can give any book you like, but I cannot give that Bhagavad-gītā. This is my life." Just see. I heard it in my own ear. So he replied, "No, Mr. such and such, I don't want your book. I was just seeing that how, why you have kept Bhagavad-gītā in your almirah?" "Oh, Bhagavad-gītā is my life."

So it is the... Śāstra means that you cannot throw it away. Nobody has thrown Bhagavad-gītā at any time, anywhere, because it is perfect. Nobody has thrown Bible-because they are perfect in knowledge. Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca. Jijñāsitaṁ susampannam api te mahad-adbhutam: "You have done wonderful work." And kṛtavān bhārataṁ yas tvaṁ sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam: "And you have created the great literature Mahābhārata, in which everything is there." Eh? Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca. "And not only simply you have inquired, but you have studied fully." There are many inquisitive persons, inquire so many things, but do not study. Reciprocation, there must be study and inquiry. Just like a nice scholar in the college, he inquires from the professor, at the same time studies. So the process of acquiring knowledge is to study and to inquire.

So here it is said jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca brahma. Brahma means the Supreme Absolute Truth. "You have inquired sufficiently..." Because he was spiritual master, Nārada, he knows how he was inquisitive. So, "You have inquired about the Supreme Absolute Truth." Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca yat tat sanātanam. Absolute Truth, sanātana means eternal. Absolute Truth is not relative. Here in this world everything we see relative. This world, material world, is called relative world. And therefore it is not sanātanam. Sanātanam means eternal. As soon as we are in the relative world, there is no eternal life. Relative world means that one thing has to be understood by another thing. Just like what is the meaning of "son"? The son is the son of a father. So unless there is father, there is no question of son. Unless there is husband, there is no question of wife. Unless there is black, there is no question of white. Similarly, whatever you try to understand, there must be the opposite number. That is called duality, or dvaita-jagat, or the duality. But in the absolute world there is no such distinction. One. The same father and the same son. Therefore, if I do not mistake, sometimes Jesus Christ is accepted as the father and sometimes as son. Because in the material world there is such distinction, master and servant, father and son, lower or higher. But in the spiritual world, although there are varieties, but there is no distinction. There is no distinction.

The Māyāvādī philosophers, they cannot understand the spiritual varieties. As soon as they think of varieties they think of material things. But actually, that is not. There is variety in the spiritual... Unless there is variety... Because Vedānta-sūtra says, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Unless there are varieties, how in the shadow the varieties are there? Just like in a cinematographic picture, unless in the original photograph or the subject matter from which photograph is taken, unless there were varieties, how the picture can be variety? So in the material world the varieties are reflection of the spiritual world. Here is also father, but this is imitation father. But there is also father, but that is not father, that is real father. It is imitation father. A friend is imitation friend. Real friend is Kṛṣṇa. Real father is Kṛṣṇa. Here husband, imitation husband. Real husband is Kṛṣṇa. Master, imitation master. Real master is Kṛṣṇa. So in this way, if we establish our relationship with Kṛṣṇa as..., either as husband or lover or master or friend or son or father, it is perfect. It is perfect. We have to go to that stage.

We have to give up this imitation, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. Śaṅkarācārya placed this theory before all the world, but that is not explained properly because people at that time could not understand more than that. Brahma satyam: "The Absolute is truth." And jagan mithyā, "And this world, the manifested world, is false." How it is false? That is not explained by Śaṅkarācārya. That is explained by Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that reality, real father... If you accept Kṛṣṇa as your father, oh, He'll give you all protection. If you accept Kṛṣṇa as your husband, oh, there is no question of divorce. If you accept Kṛṣṇa as your friend, oh, Kṛṣṇa will give you everything.

So so many relationships. All these relationships in the relative world, they are all shadow or temporary. But the same thing is there in the spiritual world. And if we come to that platform, then there will be happiness.

Thank you very much. Any questions? No questions. All right. You have question? No. Of course, I am trying to explain as far as possible understandable by you. But still, if there is any doubt, you can question. You can put. Mukunda, you can... No, you... (end)



680112SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.4

-

Los Angeles, January 12, 1968



Prabhupāda: ...akṛtārtha iva prabho [SB 1.5.4]. The question of Nārada to Vyāsadeva his disciple, that "My dear disciple Vyāsadeva, you have thoroughly inquired," jijñāsā, adhītam. Adhītam means, "You have studied thoroughly." What about? Brahman. Brahman means the Absolute Truth. Jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca brahma, and the Absolute Truth, yat tat brahma sanātanam. Sanātanam means eternal. The conception of Brahman, Absolute Truth, is eternal. Brahman, the definition of Brahman is "that which is the greatest." Just like we say God is great. Greatest. And increasing also. Brahman is not limited. Just like we have got some idea, say, the sky, the greatest. But this is also increasing. According to astronomical calculation, the planets and the universe, they can increase. So the Absolute Truth, that is eternally increasing. There is no comparison of Brahman's increasement and magnitude. Sanātana, and that is also eternal.



So for spiritual realization this is very important thing, jijñāsā. Jijñāsā means inquiry. One who is not inquisitive, for him there is no progress, either spiritually or materially. In ordinary school also, the boy who inquires from the teacher always, he is considered to be very intelligent boy. Similarly, in our householder life, sometimes, generally, the children, they inquire from the parents: "Father, what is this? Father, what is that?" That boy, that child, is supposed to be very intelligent. This is experienced. So for spiritual life also, one should be very seriously inquisitive and studious.

It is a great science. It is not a bluff, that anybody can manufacture something spiritual. No. It is a great science. One has to study the science from bona fide spiritual master. Study means... It does not mean that one has to be very highly qualified in academic education. Spiritual science does not depend on one's academic education. You'll be surprised to know that my grand-spiritual master, my spiritual master's spiritual master, he was illiterate. And my spiritual master was the learned, greatest learned scholar of his age. Now, how he became the disciple of an illiterate man? So, but that Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja... His name was Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, my spiritual master's spiritual master, my grand-spiritual master. So he was illiterate, but when you asked him some question, some intricate question of spiritual significance, he'll answer you immediately very nicely. That is realization.

Now, how this realization takes place? Not by academic education, but by sincerity. If one is very sincere, that he wants to know what is spiritual science, what is God, what is self, what is Superself, what is this world, what is spiritual world-there are so many questions. Unfortunately, we are not inquisitive. And one who is not inquisitive, for him there is no need of accepting a spiritual master. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is directed, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta: [SB 11.3.21] "One should surrender to a spiritual master." Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ. Who will surrender? Who has become very inquisitive, "What is God?" Take for example, "What is God? What I am?" Now, unless one is very seriously inquisitive about this subject matter, there is no need of spiritual master. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ. Jijñāsuḥ means very inquisitive. And what sort of jijñāsuḥ, inquisitive? There must be some subject matter of inquiry. Just in the market place the businessmen, their inquiry, "What is the rate? What is the price of this thing?" He's interested in purchasing and selling. The Bhāgavata says, "Not that kind of inquisitiveness. Not for any material inquiry." There is no need of asking about any material things which are hackneyed. Jijñāsuḥ śreya. "What is my ultimate goal of life?" That inquiry. Now, everyone knows that "My ultimate goal of life is to accumulate a big bank balance." Generally, we think like that. Or somebody thinks that "If I possess a big skyscraper house and several motorcars, that is ultimate goal of my life." But Bhāgavata says, "Not that kind of inquiries. You do not require to enquire about how to achieve a skyscraper house or several motorcars or very good apartment." Just materialists, as they want. That you may enquire or not enquire. What is destined to you, it will come. It will come. The Bhāgavata says that "Either you enquire..." You go to astrologer, "What is in my fate? Whether I am getting such and such things or not?" You enquire or not enquire, if you are destined to achieve that thing, it will come automatically. Everyone is bound up by the reaction of his past work.

Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. There is another verse in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Kovidaḥ. Kovidaḥ means very intelligent person. He should work for that purpose. What is that? Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Now we have invented so many instruments for flying in the space. Upary adhaḥ means very upward, fifty thousand miles up, and again down, you can travel. But the real goal of your life is not to be achieved in that way. Bhramatām upary adhaḥ. Suppose if you reach the moon planet or sun planet... There are so many planets higher and higher, bigger and bigger. That is not your goal of life. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [SB 1.5.18]. Your goal of life is that which you cannot achieve even by traveling the whole space. What is that? That goal of life is to search out God and your relationship with God. Because you are part and parcel of God, and somehow or other, you have been entrapped by this material atmosphere, and you are not happy. Nobody is happy. If one says that "I am happy," he must be a crazy man or he must be speaking lie. Nobody is happy. How you can be happy? Because we are always full of anxiety. That is our condition. Even if you are sitting here in the classroom of Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, still, I am thinking, "What will happen tomorrow? This business I have got to do." Some anxiety.

So, so long we have got anxiety, there is no question of happiness. And other things... Just like threefold miseries. Miseries means we have got three kinds of miseries: miseries pertaining to the body, pertaining to the mind, and pertaining to other people with whom we have got connection, and pertaining to the nature's disturbance. So there are so many miseries, threefold miseries. Adhyātmika adhibhautika adhidaivika. And besides that, we have got birth, death, old age and disease. So in this... So long we have got this body, there is no question of happiness. If somebody is satisfied that "I am happy," he is cheating himself. Happiness has to be found out. The Bhagavad-gītā says that sukham ātyantikaṁ yat [Bg. 6.21]. If you want supreme happiness, then you have to search out beyond the sense happiness. We are entrapped here in this material world in sense happiness. If our senses are satisfied, we think we are happy. But Bhagavad-gītā says that real happiness is to be searched out beyond the senses, transcendental.

So Bhāgavata also says like that, that you should be inquisitive for the goal of your life. That goal of life-everyone is searching after happiness, but where I can get uninterrupted happiness, eternal happiness, blissful happiness? That you have to search out. That is the direction of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Intelligent persons who search out that kind of happiness, na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ, which cannot be achieved even by traveling or covering the whole space... Then one may question that "If I am engaged in searching out the goal of my life, accepting that spiritual realization is the goal of my life, then what about my living condition? I have to work." So Bhāgavata answers that "You be engaged in your whatever engagement God has ordained to you, and do it honestly. But the gain out of your engagement will automatically come. Don't be very much anxious. You should be anxious to realize yourself." And how it will be achieved, my material needs? The answer is, "As you achieve all these miseries." The miseries are enforced upon us. Nobody desires that such-and-such misery may come upon him. Nobody expects. Just like there is fire brigade always running. Nobody expects that "There may be fire in my apartment or house," but sometimes it takes place, and the fire brigade has to be called for. Similarly, as we do not expect fire but it takes place, similarly, even I do not try for my material happiness, whatever ordained, whatever I am destined to achieve, that will come. That is the answer of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Therefore we should not be wasting our valuable time of human life simply for economic development. We should be inquisitive about "What I am." This is the first inquiry. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This is called brahma-jijñāsā. So Nārada Muni is instructing Vyāsadeva that "You have already inquired..." Because he's the spiritual master, he knows how Vyāsadeva inquired and how learned he was, how he studied very seriously. Everything known. Therefore he's asking, jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca brahma: "You have inquired very elaborately about Brahman, and you have studied about the subject matter Brahman, sanātanam, eternal, athāpi śocasi, but still, I see that you are morose. You are not happy." Śocasy ātmānam akṛtārtha iva prabho. Akṛtārtha means "Of this you have done nothing." Just like a foolish man sometimes, in very grave thought that "What is the ultimate goal of my life? I do not know what to do," so "You are thinking like that."

So answer, vyāsa uvāca. Now, Vyāsa's answer is asty eva me sarvam idaṁ tvayoktaṁ tathāpi nātmā parituṣyate me. "Yes, sir. You are right. I have studied about Brahman, I have inquired about Brahman, and I know what is Brahman." He says, "I know what is Brahman." Asty eva me sarvam idaṁ tvayoktaṁ tathāpi nātmā parituṣyate me. "But I do not know why I am not satisfied. I'm not satisfied." Tan-mūlam avyaktam agādha-bodhaṁ pṛcchāmahe tvātma-bhavātma-bhūtam: "Therefore you are my spiritual master. I am asking you to find out what is the defect in me. What is the defect in me that, in spite of my so advancement of knowledge in spiritual science by studying..., by inquiring, and by writing so many books, the..." You'll be glad to know that this Vyāsadeva is the original writer of Vedānta-sūtra. You have heard about Vedānta-sūtra. There are many, I mean to say, classes in here in your Los Angeles. There is a Vedānta Church. This Vedānta philosophy was written by this Vyāsadeva. But after even writing this Vedānta philosophy, he was not satisfied. That is the conversation is going on. Sa vai bhavān veda samasta-guhyam upāsito yat puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ. "Now I am asking you what is the defect in me because you know the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

Now, in other words, Vyāsadeva agrees or accepts that he knows Brahman, the Absolute Truth, but he does not know the Absolute Truth's ultimate feature, the Personality of Godhead. That he admits. Absolute Truth in the beginning is impersonal. Just like the example, the sun. The sun, the first experience of sun is the sunshine. Every one of us has got the experience how sunshine is overcast all over the universe. It comes within your room, in your apartment, or when you come out you see sunshine, everything. So just like in the night there is no sunshine, but in the morning, as soon as there is sunshine, you experience what is sunshine. Similarly, at a certain stage of our life we may understand what is Brahman. Brahman is compared with the sunshine, light. Sunshine is light, and Brahman is light. How? Light, what is the difference between light and darkness? Light, the difference of light and darkness is... Just like at the present moment it is darkness. We cannot see things rightly. Although we have got very lightening arrangement, artificial electricity, still, we do not see things as they are. Suppose you go up to your roof, and if you want to see, find out some friend's house, you cannot see. This is darkness. Darkness means you do not understand things as it is. But in the sunlight you can see everything.

Similarly, Brahman's light... As soon as you realize Brahman realization, Brahman, then you can see things as they are-what you are, what is this world, why you are unhappy, how you can be happy. So many things are there, the light. Therefore the Vedic sūtras, mantras, advises that tamasi mā jyotir gama. Don't keep yourself in darkness. Try to come out of the darkness and see the light. See the light. So... Now, here Vyāsadeva says that "I have seen the light, but still I am not happy." So that means even one who has realized Brahman but has not ultimately realized what is the ultimate end of Brahman, still there is no happiness. Still there is (no) happiness.

Just like you are seeing the sunlight, but suppose if you are able to go to the sun planet, that will be still more extensive knowledge. But not only going to the sun planet, if you can meet the president of the sun globe... Everywhere there is a presiding deity. Just like you have got your president in your country, or in my country we have got a president. Similarly, in every planet there is one presiding deity. They are called demigods, and they have got their different names. We get all this information from... Take, for example, the sun planet. The sun planet is presided over by one gentleman whose name is Vivasvān. Vivasvān, Vaivasvata. And his son is Manu. These things are described. In Bhagavad-gītā also you'll find. We read Bhagavad-gītā, but we do not take information. In the fourth chapter of Bhagavad-gītā these things are stated there. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam: [Bg. 4.1] "First of all, I recited this bhakti-yoga or Bhagavad-gītā yoga system to Vivasvān." You can ask me that "Swamiji, where do you get the name of the presiding deity of sun-god, sun planet, as Vivasvān?" I say, "I get it from Bhagavad-gītā. It is mentioned there." Just like in our country who has not seen America, if he has studied the Constitution of America, he knows the presiding gentleman is Mr. Johnson. There is no need of seeing. Simply from authoritative scripture, authoritative book, one can understand who is the presiding deity, who is ruling there, what is the condition. Everything is there in the scriptures and authorized books of Vedic literature.

So here Vyāsadeva says that sa vai bhavān veda samasta-guhyam. "My dear Nārada, my dear spiritual master, you can answer why I am unhappy because you know the presiding Deity of the whole creation, purāṇa-puruṣaḥ." Purāṇa means old, and puruṣa means the Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the oldest. He must be oldest because He is the father of everything. So nobody can be older than Kṛṣṇa. Here it is said purāṇa-puruṣaḥ. In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is also described how is that purāṇa-puruṣaḥ the oldest man, Kṛṣṇa. So it is described there, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca [Bs. 5.33]. That Purāṇa-puruṣa, that oldest man, Kṛṣṇa-not man, God-He is oldest. Advaitam acyutam, and He is infallible, and He is without any second. Nobody is greater than Him, nobody is equal than Him. Advaitam acyutam anādim. And he has no origin. These are the description of God. He has no origin. Just like I have got my origin. I am generated by my father, you are generated by your father, your father is generated by his father, his father... You go on. But the Supreme Lord, Purāṇa-puruṣaḥ, He has no father. But in His pastimes, as you see Nanda Mahārāja is His father or Vasudeva is His father... They are His devotees. When God comes, appears on this planet, He appears just like ordinary man. He's born, and He accepts His devotee as father. These are the intricate questions there.

So Vyāsadeva says that "You know that oldest Supreme Personality, Purāṇa-puruṣaḥ. Therefore you can answer." Indirectly, one who goes deeper and deeper into his spiritual understanding... The first understanding is the impersonal Brahman. The next spiritual understanding is Paramātmā, or the Supersoul. The Paramātmā, or Supersoul, means God is staying, He's situated with you, within your heart, He is Paramātmā. That is another feature. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing, is sitting with you. This is confirmed by the Upaniṣads and other Vedic literatures. But the...

Just like the same example. The sunshine and the sun planet and the presiding deity, the sun-god Vivasvān. Similarly, Absolute Truth is understood in three phases. The first understanding is impersonal Brahman, light. The second understanding is to know Him by meditation within your heart. Those who are meditators, they are expected to see the Supersoul within himself. Unless he can see the Supersoul within himself, his meditation or samādhi is imperfect or it is not finished. So the yogis, they find out, they try to find out. Not find out-try to find out the localized aspect of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within himself. And the devotees, they want to go directly to the planet where Kṛṣṇa is there and associate with Him. And the jñānīs, those who have simply come to the light... Just like the sunlight. So to experience sunlight, as it is not perfection of understanding of the sun, similarly, to experience Brahman is not all. One has to understand the Paramātmā feature and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ultimately Kṛṣṇa.

The Vedic information says, kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. If one can understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then everything becomes automatically known to him. Everything becomes automatically known to him. And Nārada is expected to know Kṛṣṇa, and therefore Vyāsadeva is asking him that "Because you know Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you can understand what is the defect in me."

sa vai bhavān veda samasta-guhyam

upāsito yat puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ

parāvareśo manasaiva viśvaṁ

sṛjaty avaty atti guṇair asaṅgaḥ



What kind of Personality of Godhead? Parāvara. (end)





690524SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.8-9

-

New Vrindaban, May 24, 1969



Prabhupāda: ...you have no tilaka.



Devotee: Oh. Sorry, Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda:



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave-namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi praṇamāmi hari-priye



[I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.]



So, Vyāsadeva is submitting himself to his spiritual master Nārada Muni, that "Yes, what you say is right, that I have tried to understand the Absolute Truth through your grace, and I have tried to explain also the Absolute Truth in so many books, Vedas, Purāṇas, Upaniṣads, Vedānta-sūtra, but still I am not happy. So what is the defect in me?" So Nārada uvāca, Nārada replied,



bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ

yaśo bhagavato 'malam

yenaivāsau na tuṣyeta

manye tad darśanaṁ khilam

[SB 1.5.8]



The whole scheme should be to satisfy the Lord. This is the secret of success. Tasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭam. If God, or Kṛṣṇa, is satisfied, then whole world is satisfied. The modern civilization is lacking this knowledge. Asuric civilization, demonic civilization, what to speak of satisfying God, they are denying the existence of God. And they want peace and happiness.



I remember there was a speech by Archbishop of Canterbury. He said that "You people, you want kingdom of God without God." That is our policy-Rāvaṇa's policy. Rāvaṇa's policy was kingdom of God without God. Kingdom of God means everyone is prosperous, happy in every respect. That is considered as kingdom of God so far materially considered. So Rāvaṇa wanted. He was materialistic. His capital was almost gold. Every house was, I mean to say, wrapped with gold. Svarṇa-laṅkā. Svarṇa-laṅkā means at that time Rāvaṇa's kingdom, the Ceylon, modern Ceylon, was covered with gold everywhere. Very rich. Very, very rich. It is said that in Rāvaṇa's room, moon was rising. That means there was electricity at that time also, or similar lights. So the descriptions are very nice. It was very prosperous and rich country. And the policy was without God. Material civilization means like that, without God.

So the result was... What was the result? That everything became vanquished. Whole Rāvaṇa's kingdom with his family, with his everything, finished. Māre kṛṣṇa rākhe ke rākhe kṛṣṇa māre ke. If Kṛṣṇa protects, nobody can kill him, and if Kṛṣṇa kills, nobody can protect him. So Rāmacandra, Lord Rāmacandra, killed him. He was a great devotee of Lord Śiva, Rāvaṇa. Generally, the demons are devotees of Brahmā, Śiva, generally. They don't like Viṣṇu because there is restriction. Viṣṇu worship does not mean unrestricted sense gratification. No. In other worship there is allowed. "All right. You... Whatever you do..." Therefore, generally, people do not take to Viṣṇu worship. Vaiṣṇava, you'll find very small number of men, they are really pure Vaiṣṇava. So Rāvaṇa was a great devotee of Lord Śiva, but when Rāmacandra, Lord Viṣṇu-Rāmacandra is also Viṣṇu-He wanted to kill him, Lord Śiva could not save him.

There are many stories about it, that when Rāvaṇa was on the actual battlefield, he was praying Lord Śiva. Generally, one who worships some demigod or somebody, he remembers. And Pārvatī, the wife of Lord Śiva, was insisting that "Your devotee is in so great danger, and he is repeatedly calling you to help him. And why you are not going? You are sitting?" The Lord Śiva said, "Now he is destined to die. Lord Rāmacandra has come to kill him. Nobody can save him." That is the fact. Rākhe kṛṣṇa māre ke māre kṛṣṇa rākhe ke. If Kṛṣṇa gives protection to somebody, nobody can kill him. And if Kṛṣṇa kills somebody, nobody can give him protection, whatever he may be.

So we are... Our business should be, the whole business should be how to please the Supreme Lord. And in the Bhagavad-gītā there is a very simple formula how to please the Supreme Lord. Kṛṣṇa says,

ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

[Bg 18.68]



na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

[Bg. 18.69]



Kṛṣṇa said that "A person who is taking the risk and trouble of preaching this confidential philosophy, Bhagavad-gītā as it is..." Paramaṁ guhyam, very confidential. Confidential means that the last instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, simply to surrender unto the Supreme, Kṛṣṇa, is not understandable by ordinary men. Even great scholars like Dr. Radhakrishnan, he denies. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. One who has taken the attitude of becoming a demonic, however learned he may be, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. His learning, his knowledge, has been taken away by māyā. And āsuraṁ bhāvam, na māṁ prapadyante. They will never surrender. This is the sign of demon. They will never surrender. They will be killed, they will go to hell, they will accept all the thing, but still, if you ask him that "You surrender to..." "No." That is demonic.



Therefore one who surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, or God, is very fortunate. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. One who surrenders, he's not ordinary man. He is greater than all scholars, all philosophers, all yogis, all karmīs. Topmost man, one who surrenders. Therefore it is very confidential. So our teaching, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, to present Bhagavad-gītā as it is, is a process of teaching people how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, or God. That's all. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says this is a confidential... Nobody will accept. But one who takes the risk, "Please, surrender..." So when you go to preach, you know the preachers are sometimes attacked. Just like Nityānanda Prabhu was attacked by Jagāi-Mādhāi. And when Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, killed... So a preacher has the risk. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "These field workers who are engaged in preaching this Bhagavad-gītā as it is, they are very, very dear to Me. Very, very dear to Me." Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. "There is nobody dearer to Me than that person who preaches this confidential truth to the people."

Therefore if we want to please Kṛṣṇa, we have to take this risk. Kṛṣṇa, guru. My spiritual master took this risk, preaching work, and he inspired us also to do that preaching work. And we are also imploring you to take this preaching work. So this preaching work, however, I mean to say, I mean to say, poorly we do... Poorly-it is not poor, but suppose I am not very much educated. Just like this boy. If I send him for preaching work, he is not very educated now. He's not a philosopher. He's not a scholar. But he can also preach. He can also preach. Because our preaching is not very difficult thing. If we go from door to door and simply request people, "My dear sir, you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." And if he's little advanced, "Please try to read Teachings of Lord Caitanya. It is very nice. You'll be benefited." These three four words will make you a preacher. Is it very difficult task? (chuckles) You may not be very learned, very good scholar, very good philosopher. You simply say... Go and door to door: "My dear sir, you are very learned man. For the time being, you stop your learning. Simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa."

Just like Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī did. He said, dante nidhāya tṛṇakaṁ padayor nipatya. The preaching method he is teaching. Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, he was a great devotee of Lord Caitanya. He wrote one book, Caitanya-candrāmṛta, "The Moonlight of Lord Caitanya," in Sanskrit. He belonged to southern India. And his nephew became one of the Gosvāmīs. When Lord Caitanya was staying at his home, he was at that time householder. Later on he took sannyāsa and became Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī. At that time Gopāla Bhaṭṭa... Actually, their family title was Bhaṭṭa, Bhaṭṭācārya. Bhaṭṭācārya is given title to the very learned brāhmaṇa. Cakravartī, Bhaṭṭācārya-these are brāhmaṇa's title who are very learned, very influential. So Bhaṭṭācārya. So at that time Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī was little boy. So Lord Caitanya stayed with this Veṅkaṭa, Veṅkaṭanātha. His name was Veṅkaṭa. Later on he became Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī.

So that boy became influenced and he wanted to go with Lord Caitanya. He was sannyāsī. He was traveling. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised him, that "Your father and mother are still living. So you can come to me later on." He was boy, only sixteen years old. So this boy, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, he, after the death of his father and mother, he went to Lord Caitanya, and He accepted him. And He handed over in charge of Rūpa Gosvāmī, that "You treat this boy as your younger brother." And he also became one of the six Gosvāmīs. The six Gosvāmīs... Rūpa Gosvāmī is the, is the head actually. But Sanātana Gosvāmī being his elder brother, he was treating him as his spiritual master. So Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and Jīva Gosvāmī. These six Gosvāmīs, they have given immense literature. And all of them established one temple in Vṛndāvana. You have seen, Kīrtanānanda Mahārāja, the Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple. Rādhā-Ramaṇa temple, that is Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī's.

So that Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī (is) teaching us how to preach. In this age, simply by fighting, argument, it is very difficult to preach. Better to become humble and meek. Just like Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī is teaching us: dante nidhāya tṛṇakam. In India there is a system to become humble. If you take one blade of grass in your, between your lips and approach somebody, it is to be understood that you are approaching with great humbleness. Therefore he said, dante nidhāya tṛṇakam. Tṛṇakam means blade of grass. Dante means teeth. Padayor nipatya: "And falling down on your feet." Kāku-śataṁ kṛtvā: "And flattering you hundred times, 'My dear sir, you are so great. You are so big. You are so learned. You are so rich. You are so beautiful,' and everything," although he may be not. So dante nidhāya tṛṇakaṁ padayor nipatya kāku-śataṁ kṛtvā ca. Śatam. Śatam means "Hundred times flattering, I have come to you to say something." "Why you are so humble? What is the... What do you want to talk? " "No, I am..." He sādhavaḥ. "You are very religious man. You are very upright man, sādhavaḥ. Very honest man, saintly man. Yes. But I request you that whatever you learned, please forget. That is my request." [break]

Sakalam eva vihāya dūrād caitanya-candra-caraṇe kurutānurāgam. You just try to submit yourself on the lotus feet of Lord Caitanya. By His mercy you'll find that, kaivalyaṁ narakāyate, you'll find that to become one with the Supreme, it will appear to you just like hell. To merge into the Supreme, that is the highest ambition of the impersonalists. But if you submit yourself to the lotus feet of Caitanyacandra, then you'll find that this conception is just like hell. Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. Naraka means hell. You'll find kaivalyam, to become one. And tridaśa-pūrākāśa-puṣpāyate. Tri-daśa-pūra means the planets, higher planets where demigods live. Thirty-three million demigods, there are at least thirty-three million planets. Tri-daśa-pūrākāśa-puṣpāyate. They are just like phantasmagoria.

The exact analogy of phantasma..., equivalent word in Sanskrit of phantasmagoria, which has no actual existence, is called ākāśa-puṣpa, "flower of the sky." There is no flower in the sky, but you can say. Or in common Bengali words, "eggs of the horse." Now, horse never gives eggs, but there are words like that. (chuckles) Just like Vivekananda has manufactured: daridra-nārāyaṇa. How Nārāyaṇa can be daridra? So it is something like horse eggs. You see? So these words are very... Tri-daśa-pūrākāśa-puṣpāyate. By the grace of Lord Caitanya you'll find to merge into the effulgence, to become one with the Supreme will be considered as hell, actually. If you ask any pure devotee, "Do you want to merge into the existence, impersonal Brahman?" he'll deny. If he has got little Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he'll deny, that "What is this merging? This is hellish. We want to dance with Kṛṣṇa. Why shall I merge and lose my existence, individuality?" And karmīs, they are trying to be elevated in the higher planets. Just like they are trying to go to the higher planets by sputniks, similarly, there are ritualistic ceremonies. Yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25]. By performing all the ritualistic ceremonies, sacrifices, you can elevate yourself to the higher planets: yānti deva-vratā devān. That is another method. And this method also, another method, they want to go direct by machine. But that tendency is there everywhere, that "We may go to this sun planet, moon planet, this planet."

But Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, he says, (chuckling) "Oh, you are trying to go to other higher planets by your karma, by his work? Oh, this is just like horse egg. Huh? Why should you bother yourself?" Horse egg means it has no substance. As, like there is no existence of horse egg, similarly, even if you attain that higher planetary system, what do you gain by that? You don't gain anything, because the four principles of material existence will continue there also. Birth, death, old age, and disease, you cannot stop. You may live for a greater period-that is possible in higher planets. But if you are simply satisfied only by living a bigger span of life, is that very success? Just stop death. That is success. To become very strong in body, that is not success. But either you become strong and weak, you have to die. There is no, I mean to say, excuse, because you are a strong man you will not die. Or because you are rich man you will not die. Because you are... No. Therefore Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says, it is just like ākāśa-puṣpa, phantasmagoria.

So this is karmī, jñānī. Jñānī wants to merge, and karmī wants higher level, higher standard of life. That is karmī's business. Karmīs give in charity just to acquire pious result out of it so that after death he can be elevated to the Svargaloka, heavenly planets. So Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says, "But by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, this ambition to be elevated in higher planetary system will appear to be as phantasmagoria." Ākāśa-puṣpāyate. And this is karmīs' ambition, the jñānīs' ambition. Then yogis. The yogis' ambition is siddhi, or eight kinds of success. A yogi can become lighter than the cotton swab. He can become smaller than the atom. Aṇimā, laghimā, prāpti, siddhi, īśitā, vaśitā. There are so many yogic perfections. And that is, of course, perfection. Nobody... It is not very easily gone to that perfectional stage. Generally, people try by practicing yoga to control the senses and the mind. That is general practice.

So Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that durdānta indriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate. Why you should be afraid of your senses? Why you are so much busy to try to control the senses? The senses become... How? Why not controlled? He says that senses are just like serpents. Durdānta indriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī. These senses are just like snakes. Snakes are always dangerous because as soon as he touches like this, immediately death. Poisonous snake. You cannot distinguish who is not poisonous. Therefore snake is always horrible. Just like the other day you found out one snake in the brahmacārī's house. So Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says, "Yes, snake is very fierce and horrible. But if you know that the snake has no poison, his poison teeth has been broken..." Snake has also use for human being. There are expert snake charmer who take the snake and take out the poisonous teeth, and that poison is used for so many medicinal purpose. So poison is also used for human benefit if one knows.

So Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, he said, these indriyas, the senses, are just like snakes. Our senses are acting just like snakes. It is, as soon as it touches, there is some danger. Sense gratification means you are creating some danger, some future danger. That's all. We should always remember. All our troubles and miseries are due to sense gratification. They are always troublesome. The yoga system means yoga indriya-saṁyama. Yoga means controlling the senses. That is the first principle. Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī said that "Yes, it is admitted that the senses are just like snakes. But if you break the poisonous teeth, then there is no danger. There is no... They have no more fears." A snake without poison, a child may be afraid of, "There is a snake." But if a man knows that this snake is here but there is no poisonous teeth, it is broken, then there is no question of fearfulness. Otherwise, it is ordinary, insignificant... Just like reptile, something, or worm, or microbes. So he said... So that means he answers to the jñānīs, to the yogis, to the karmīs: durdānta indriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta. Protkhāta, extracted. The teeth is extracted. Protkhāta. Protkhāta. Daṁṣṭrāyate. Daṁṣṭra means teeth. Taken away. So there is no cause of... Durdānta indriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate.

Everyone is facing the problem of material world, so many problems. But if you take shelter of Lord Caitanya, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness... Lord Caitanya means Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam [SB 11.5.32]. Lord Caitanya means Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then viśvaṁ pūrṇa, you'll find there is no problem. The world is very happy place. A devotee finds a very nice place. Just like here in New Vrindaban, those who are karmīs, oh, they'll find, "Oh, it is a nonsense place. There is no amenities, modern amenities. There is so much trouble. There is no nice bathroom. There is no water supply." But devotees, they are finding, "Oh, it is very nice place." So just you... Similarly, widely you take, all the karmīs, they are faced with so many problems. But a devotee, those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they have no problem. Viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate. And vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate. And for them, all these big, big men, may be very big to others, but for the devotees they're just like worms and germs and ordinary flies.

Just like we sometimes criticize big men. Hm? So on what strength? That strength is because we have taken shelter of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Otherwise, any ordinary man can criticize. Just like the Consulate General in San Francisco, he was speaking to me that "Swamiji, you have called Maharishi a rascal?" "Yes. Yes. I may have called. What is that?" So the people, a man who is worshiped by so many people we call rascal? On what strength? The strength is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We can prove that he is rascal. I am not speaking; Kṛṣṇa is speaking. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Mūḍha means rascal. So I am repeating Kṛṣṇa's word. Anyone who does not surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, he is rascal. So we can quote from Bhagavad-gītā. If somebody brings case against us, so we can freely say that "I am not speaking. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā. You just bring libel case against Bhagavad-gītā. Why you are troubling me?" (laughter) Bhagavad-gītā says anyone who does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa... Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ mām... Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. He's not only rascal, he's the lowest of the mankind. And if you say, "Oh, he is very learned scholar." Oh, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. His knowledge has been taken away by māyā. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Simply he's defying God. Kṛṣṇa means God. "I am God," that is asuric.

So for a devotee, there is no need of controlling senses. It automatically becomes controlled. Just like we have taken the vow we are not going to eat anything except kṛṣṇa-prasāda. Oh, the sense is already controlled. There is no question of asking a devotee, "You don't drink, don't this, don't this, don't this." So many don'ts. Simply by accepting kṛṣṇa-prasādam, all don'ts there, already there. And it becomes very easier. Others, if one is requested that "You don't smoke," it will be very difficult job for him. For a devotee, he can give up at any moment. He has no problem. Therefore the same example, that these senses are very strong undoubtedly, as strong as the snake. But if you break the poison teeth, the poison teeth, then it is no more fierceful. Similarly, if you engage your senses in Kṛṣṇa, no more controlling. It is already controlled. Protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate.

And the whole world is problem for ordinary persons, but to us it is not problem. Because we see everything Kṛṣṇa's. If there is problem, it is Kṛṣṇa's problem. Why my problem? Kṛṣṇa can know how to solve problem. So we have no problem practically. Kṛṣṇa's problem. Kṛṣṇa will see to it. Just like Arjuna was encouraged that nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savyasācin. "You don't worry about your victory. I have already arranged." So we should have such faith and conviction and let us try. Let us do very sincerely and seriously. Then everything Kṛṣṇa will do. I haven't got to do anything.

Just like our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, it is improving. Kṛṣṇa giving us all facilities. We have no power. But we are trying to discharge the duty sincerely. Then it is everything. There is no problem. Viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate. And vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate. And when a person is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, he knows what is what. He knows what this learned scholar is. He knows what is this. Vidhi-mahendra. What to speak of ordinary scholars and big men. Vidhi, vidhi means Lord Brahmā, and mahendra means the king of heaven. So they are also treated as ordinary human being or ordinary living entities. They are not given any importance. "Well, as..." Ābrahma-bhuvana-stham. Ābrahma. For a devotee, as Brahmā is also living entity, a small ant is also living entity, all Kṛṣṇa's parts and parcels. They have no quarrel with anybody. As Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel, we offer respect to everyone. So not that they are amazed with the greatness of a living entity. He thinks that his greatness is due to Kṛṣṇa's favor. Because Kṛṣṇa said in the Bhagavad-gītā, yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ tat tad eva mama tejo 'ṁśa-sambhavam. Nobody can become great unless... Just like the sunshine. The sunshine, what is the sunshine? It is simply a partial reflection of Kṛṣṇa's brahmajyoti. Similarly anyone who is great in the estimation of this material world, there is some Kṛṣṇa's favor. That's all. Yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ tat tad eva mama tejo 'ṁśa-sambhavam.

Just like in the Brahma-saṁhitā, we are giving respect to all the demigods. We are giving respect to Lord Śiva, we are giving respect to Durgā, we are giving respect to Gaṇeśa, we are giving respect to the sun-god. They are very big demigods. Lord Śiva, or Durgā, Gaṇeśa, and Brahmā, and... We don't disrespect. We give respect even to the ant. Why not to Lord Śiva or Lord Brahmā? They should have their due respect, but that does not mean we consider them as the Supreme Lord. That is the mistake of the karmīs and the impersonalists. No. We know that nobody can be greater than or equal to Kṛṣṇa or viṣṇu-tattva, Nārāyaṇa.

yas tu nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ

samatvenaiva vīkṣeta

sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam

[Cc. Madhya 18.116]



It is said in the Vaiṣṇava Tantra, that anyone who, I mean to say, considers on the equal level Nārāyaṇa with such great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva, brahma-rudrādi-daivataiḥ, such big demigods, sa pāṣaṇḍī bhaved dhruvam. He becomes pāṣaṇḍī. Pāṣaṇḍī means atheist. Atheist will compare that the Supreme Lord and other demigods are on the equal footing. No. They are never. Nobody can be greater or equal with the Supreme Lord. Therefore vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate.



viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate

yat kāruṇya-katākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ

(Caitanya-candrāmṛta 5)



These things happen simply by little merciful glance by Lord Caitanya upon us. Simply if Lord Caitanya approves our activity, "Well, this man is doing nice," oh, then you get all the success. Simply if He approves. Yat kāruṇya-katākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ.



Therefore our point was how to please the Supreme Lord. This is the way. If you want to please Kṛṣṇa, you spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the point Nārada is pointing out to Vyāsadeva. Yathā dharmādayaś cārthā muni-varyānukīrtitāḥ. Muni-varya. Muni-varya means he was the greatest of all thoughtful men. Muni. Muni means those who are thoughtful, and varya means the greatest. So he says, yathā dharmādayaś cārthā muni-varyānukīrtitāḥ. "As you have described in all the Vedas and Upaniṣads about religiosity or economic development or the procedure of sense gratification or merging into the Supreme, in that way you have not described the glories of the Lord. You have given more importance to the material activities."

Just like in the Vedas there are ritualistic ceremony of performing great sacrifices. What is the meaning of that sacrifice? That means you get a very opulent position in your next life or in this life. So people are attached to such thing. Veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha nānyad astīti vādinaḥ. Bhagavad-gītā, you'll find. People are very much attracted by these ritualistic ceremonies. Not only the followers of the Vedas; in every religion, if you perform some ritualistic ceremony, oh, they are very much attracted. And if you simply say, "Let us chant Hare Kṛṣṇa," they will not be very much attracted. So veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha nānyad astīti vādinaḥ. So we should not be like that. Our business is how to glorify the Supreme Lord, how to glorify Kṛṣṇa. Then all success is there. That will be instructed by Nārada Muni to Vyāsadeva.

yathā dharmādayaś cārthā

muni-varyānukīrtitaḥ

na tathā vāsudevasya

mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ



Tathā vāsudevasya mahimā na hy anuvarṇitaḥ. Na tathā. Na tathā vāsudevasya mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ. "You have taken much trouble about these ritualistic performances in the Vedas and other literatures, but you have not taken much trouble to describe the glories of Vāsudeva." Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. "Although in the Bhagavad-gītā you have seen that everything is Vāsudeva..., vāsudeva-parā makhāḥ vāsudeva-paraṁ jñānam, but still you have not described about, much about Vāsudeva." Na tathā vāsudevasya mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ. "You have not described very nicely about the glories of Vāsudeva."



All right. (end)



690606SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.9-11

-

New Vrindaban, June 6, 1969





Prabhupāda:



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave-namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi praṇamāmi hari-priye



[I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.]



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



yathā dharmādayaś cārthā

muni-varyānukīrtitaḥ

na tathā vāsudevasya

mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ

[SB 1.5.9]



The defect in Vyāsadeva was being pointed out by his spiritual master, Nārada, that "If... You have labored very hard in presenting dharmādayaḥ." Dharmādayaḥ means religiosity, economic development. Dharma-ādayaḥ. Ādayaḥ means beginning. That means human civilization should begin from religious principle. Otherwise, it is not human civilization. Dharmādayaḥ. Therefore in civilized nation there is religion. Maybe in different forms, but religion must be there. The same thing is explained by Nārada Muni, that dharmādayaḥ. First religion, then economic development. Not economic development first. And then sense gratification. And then liberation.



The whole plan should be that people should understand that he is not animal. First thing. This is education. In the animal society there is no religion, but as soon as you claim to be in human society or civilized society, then there must be religion. Economic development secondary, next. Of course, according to medical consciousness they say ātmānam ātmānam, means they say "body." But ātmā means this body, this mind, and the soul. Real meaning of ātmā is soul. So there is a verse, ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet: "First of all try to save your soul." I think Lord Jesus Christ has also spoken something like that. "If, after gaining everything, one loses his spirit soul, then what does he gain?" Is it not?

Devotee: Um hm.



Prabhupāda: So this is the principle. Ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet. One should give first protection to the ātmā. What is that protection? Protection from the onslaught of māyā, or material nature. That is protection. At the present moment, I am under the influence of māyā, under the influence of the three qualities of māyā. So when I get the opportunity of this human form of life, my first business is how to protect this ātmā, soul. The soul is transmigrating from one body to another. How foolish they have become! We are enjoying this nice body, human body or American body or very beautiful body. But next moment I do not know what body I am going to get. But those who are in the knowledge how transmigration takes place, they can say what kind of body you are going to take next by your activities. We are preparing our body in our present life. Just like we have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Our attempt is to prepare for having a spiritual body. That is the whole attempt. And those who are not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, in material consciousness, they'll have also a body, but this material body means full of miseries. Any body you take, either you take the body of king or you take the body of a dog, the body is miserable. It does not mean that when there is disease, only the dog's body suffers, not the king's body. Everyone has to suffer.



So, ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet means..., real meaning is you should give protection to the ātmā, means trying to save this soul, your soul, or yourself, from this transmigration of the body. And the plain truth, very simply truth, is given in Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Simply by understanding what is Kṛṣṇa... That is also not very difficult to understand if you follow the scriptural injunctions. What is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa, sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. He is not ordinary man. His body is sac-cid-ānanda, full of bliss, eternal, and full of knowledge. So is it very difficult to understand? He has given proof that Kṛṣṇa is always enjoying bliss. And Kṛṣṇa's instruction, knowledge, there is no comparison. Bhagavad-gītā and so many other instructions. And He is eternal. Just like the sun-sun is eternal, day and night. It is our adjustment of this planet. So Kṛṣṇa is there. Just like the sun is there always in the sky, but we think, "This is night, this is day." That is adjustment of this planet. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is always there. When He is visible we say that Kṛṣṇa is living, and when He's not visible we say, "Kṛṣṇa is dead."

So simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, janma karma me divyaṁ tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9], in truth, not whimsically. Not by your fertile brain, speculation: "Like this," "like that," "maybe," "perhaps..." Not this nonsense. Just try to understand Kṛṣṇa. So simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ tyaktvā deham, that person, after leaving this body, mām eti, he goes to Kṛṣṇa. And who can go to Kṛṣṇa unless he has got a spiritual body, the same sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]? Unless one has the same vigrahaḥ... Just like we can understand that when we take birth in a particular place, say in Greenland, which is always full with ice, or some other place. So you have got a particular type of body, you get. There the animals, there the man, they have got a particular type of body. They can bear the severe cold. We cannot. Similarly, when you go to Kṛṣṇaloka you'll have a particular type of body. What is that particular type of body? Sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Any planet you go, you must have particular body. So tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. And as soon as you get eternal body, then you don't have to come back again to this material world. And that body, sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ body, means one who is completely conversant with the service, devotional service of... Because you cannot enter into the abode of Kṛṣṇa with your predominating propensity.

In this material world, our propensity is predominating. We want to predominate over you; you want to predominate over me. That is the competition here. So when we give up this predominating, false predominating spirit, "I am Kṛṣṇa. I am the Lord of all I survey." This nonsensical understanding when we give up, surrender, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19], understand "Kṛṣṇa is everything, I am simply part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa." So if we remain part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, then our freedom is attained actually. Otherwise there is no freedom. It is false. Mano-dharma. I am thinking, "I am God," "I am Kṛṣṇa," "I am this, I am that." Nothing. This will simply put me under the clutches of māyā.

Therefore ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet means to put oneself in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Then your ātmā, your self, is protected. Ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet. Tato dharma. Tato dharma. After you understand. People do not understand what is his business. He thinks that my business is to eat, sleep, mate, and die. That's all. This is animalism. Simply they are misled by animalistic civilization-eating, sleeping. That's all. Have good house for sleeping. Why? Now, these boys and girls, they are sleeping on the floor, sleeping on the open air. Where is the difficulty? The animals also can sleep. It is a practice only. We don't require any gorgeous arrangement for sleeping or living. We should simply try to elevate our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Other things, all subordinate. That is ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet.

Ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet tato dharmaḥ. Dharma. This dharma. Dharma means religion. Actually, "religion" is not exact equivalent of the word dharma. Dharma, as I have explained several times, you know... Dharma dhṛ-dhātu. Dharma means you exist by some natural symptom. That is called dharma. Everyone has got some natural symptom. That is dharma. According to Sanskrit meaning, that is dharma. Just like this light is a substance. What is his dharma, religion? To give light, to illuminate. So without illumination, there is no meaning of light. Similarly, your dharma, what is your religion? Your religion is to serve Kṛṣṇa. That is your religion. Now you serve in a different way according to time, circumstances, country. That is a different thing. But your religion is to serve God. That is your religion. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately gives you the definition of religion, or your occupation, natural duty, natural function. Always mind that. Just like the light's natural function is to give illumination. Prakāśa. Similarly, your natural function is to serve Kṛṣṇa. That's all. You have no other business. That is dharma. No other business. When we understand this convincingly, then we are situated in our religion. Just like Kṛṣṇa said. In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā He says, dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya. Just to reestablish religion. Dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya. People forget. Nature's, material nature's function is that, to put you into illusion always. So our forgetfulness is also another illusion. We forget our relationship with God, or Kṛṣṇa. Then adharma. That is... Instead of becoming servant of Kṛṣṇa, I become servant of so many things. I become servant of my family, servant of my country, society, humanity, cats, dogs, so many things. Servant I remain, but I become servant of so many things.

So I have to convert from this servitorship to Kṛṣṇa's servitorship. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said, dharma-saṁsthāpana. This is dharma. Saṁsthāpana. What dharma, what kind of religion Kṛṣṇa established? He said that "I incarnate to establish religion." He never came to establish Hindu religion or Christian religion or Muhammadan religion or Buddha religion. He established real religion. What is that real religion? Sarva-dharmān parityajya: [Bg. 18.66] "You give up all these nonsense, so-called religion and faith. You simply surrender unto Me." That is religion. That is real religion. All other, any other religion which does not teach how to surrender unto God, that is pretension. That is not religion. According to Vedic understanding, this is religion. This is natural function.

So, ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet tato dharmaṁ tato dhanam.(?) First of all you try to protect yourself, then take to real religion, natural function of the ātmā. Then try to... Because we are in this material condition, we require economic development also. So that is very easy also. Kṛṣṇa has given you enough land-you just little work. The animals are there. The cows will give you milk. If you till a little land, you get some grains. That is sufficient. Economic development. You don't require big factories, big workshop, and whole day and night with motorcar going this way and that way. No. There is no necessity for economic development. This is māyā. Simply at the end he will eat some grains or some this or that, little. And by whole day... Therefore they are called mūḍha. According to Bhagavad-gītā, they are rascals, mūḍha, ass. Just like ass, the beast of burden. He takes washerman's load, three tons, four tons. Whole day working, but eating a morsel of grass, that's all. He has no knowledge that "I take a morsel of grass only, I live. And why whole day I bear these so much tons of clothing of the washerman?" You have no experience of the ass, ass's business. In India the washerman loads the ass three tons and he goes to the waterside and the washerman washes all these clothings in some bank of river or reservoir of water. Again evening, the ass brings back the clothing.

So the karmīs, they have been described in the Bhagavad-gītā: mūḍha, ass, simply unnecessarily working day and night, whole day and night. You see. Without taking care of the ātmā, without taking care of the religion. Economic development. What is this nonsense? You are losing yourself. You do not know what life you are going to get next life. You don't care for this. "Never mind whatever life I get. This life I have got. Let me work hard and accumulate money." And where the money will be? "Oh, in the bank. My sons and my daughters will enjoy." This is conception. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Bodily, all bodily conception. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. This is illusion. This is illusion. Simply working like ass without knowing what is the end of life, what is the destination of life-all asses, all these karmīs. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very nice. You can understand what is what. Yes. That is knowledge.

So tato dharmaṁ tato dhanam ātmany vikṛte sati kuto dharmaḥ kuto dhanam.(?) But if you do not understand yourself, what you are, then what is the meaning of your religion and your economic development? You do not know what you are. First of all you must know what you are and what is your business, what is your destination, what is your aim of life. Then begin work, begin religious, become economic developer and so on, so on, so many things. But if you are in darkness to understand yourself, then what is the meaning of this accumulation of wealth or so-called religion, and so-called economic devel... No.

So here Nārada Muni advises that "You have explained..." Dharmādayaś ca artha. "In different literature you have divided the whole Vedas in understandable language, Purāṇas." Purāṇas means supplementary to the Vedas, to explain the Vedic knowledge according to the quality. Every human being is under some quality of the material nature. Some of them are in darkness, or ignorance. Some of them are in passion. And some of them are mixed ignorance and passion. And some of them are in light, or goodness. Not all in the same level. There are different classes of men. Just like in our Hayagrīva's library we find so many philosophical books. But if you go to ordinary man you'll find some nonsensical literature, fiction, and sex psychology, this, that. According to taste. According to taste, different taste. Because there are different classes of men. That will be explained in the next verse. He says, Nārada Muni,

na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo

jagat-pavitraṁ pragṛṇīta karhicit

tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham uśanti mānasā

na yatra haṁsā niramanty uśik-kṣayāḥ

[SB 1.5.10]



So he is comparing all the books written by Vyāsadeva, including the Vedānta philosophy. He says that this is vāyasaṁ tīrtham. Vāyasaṁ tīrtham. Vāyasam means crows. And the crows, and their place of pleasure. Have you seen crows? In India we have got many crows. In your country crows are not very... But in India the crows, they take pleasure in all nasty things. The crows. You'll find they will take pleasure in a place where all nasty things are thrown, garbage. They'll pick out the garbage, find out where there is mucus, where there is pus. Just like flies. They'll sit down on the stool. Mākṣikaṁ bhramarā icchanti. And the bees, they will try to take honey. Even in the animals you'll see. The honey... The bees will never come to the stool. And the ordinary flies, they never go to collect honey. Similarly, there are divisions in the birds, divisions in the beasts, divisions in human society. So you cannot expect that ordinary person will come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You see? Because they have been trained to become flies, they will taste stool. You see? The modern education is to teach people to become flies, only stool. Not here, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But you make it a honeycomb. Those who are after, seeking after honey, they will find, "Here is something." You see? Don't make it a stool society. You see? Make it a honey society. At least, give chance, those who are seeking after honey. Don't cheat people. So they'll come.



So here Nārada Muni said that "You have compiled so many books, that's all right. What is the idea? The idea is dharmādayaḥ. You are teaching religious principle." There are twenty viṁśati dharma-śāstrāḥ. This Manu-saṁhitā, Parāśara Muni's law, and social custom, this, that. So many there are. These are originally by different sages, but Vyāsadeva made it, compiled it just for proper use. People can understand them. So he has explained all these books for use of the human society undoubtedly. How to become religious, how to develop economic position, how to understand what is liberation, how to satisfy restrictedly sense gratification. Just like in books, in Vyāsadeva's books, you will find these different kinds of... Just like those who are eating flesh. That is also given direction by Vyāsadeva, in the tāmasika-purāṇa, Purāṇa for the persons who are in ignorance.

So he does not deny anybody. He has made books in such a way that any person reading books... Just like in a school there are different classes and different books are recommended for different classes. Similarly, Vyāsadeva has given the whole Vedic literature in such a nice way in the form of Purāṇas that any man can be elevated to the highest position, reading books like this. Take for example that one who is addicted to take intoxication, eating flesh, and sex life-because these are natural instincts. Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā. Nobody is required to give lesson, to teach. Nobody required to be taught how he has to make sexual intercourse. Nobody has to be taken, I mean, given lesson how he can become intoxicated. Don't you see that the intoxicants, intoxicated person, they have become automatically? There is no university. There is no educational system that "You become... Take LSD like this." No. That is a natural tendency. To become intoxicated, to take liquor, LSD, gāñjā, pān, oh, very easily you can learn. To use sex life...

Loke vyavāya... These, they are natural instincts. They can be... Automatically they will be done. There is no question of... Then what is the use of book? Book is for restricting. That they do not know. When Vyāsadeva recommends that you must have sex life by marriage, that means restriction. That means restriction. You cannot have sex life here and there unrestrictedly. You have got one wife or one husband, and that is also restricted: only for begetting child you can have sex life. So many things. The whole idea is restriction. Not that "Because I have got a wife it is a machine for sex life." No, no. A marriage mean, that does not mean. Marriage does not mean like that. It is restriction. The whole Vedic civilization is to bring men to the transcendental platform by restricting all his nonsense habits to nil. But not all of a sudden. Gradually, according to the quality. Similarly, those who are addicted to flesh eating, meat-eating: "All right." Vedic literature says, "All right. You can eat meat. But sacrifice an animal before the Deity, goddess Kālī, and you can eat." So that the man who is eating meat, he'll not revolt. If I say... Just like if I say... Just like many men revolts already. That girl? What is called?

Devotee: Mādhavī-latā.



Prabhupāda: Mādhavī-latā, she revolted. She revolted. She was always trying to plead, "Why this restriction? Why this restriction?" So I had to tell, "If you don't like the restriction, then go away. You don't associate with us." What can be done? So they do not want restriction. That is natural tendency. But these śāstras are meant for restriction. Just like marriage is restriction of sex life. And offering sacrifice before goddess Kālī, that is also a restriction of meat-eating. You cannot eat meat by purchasing from the slaughterhouse. Oh, that is not recommended. If you want to eat meat, then you just sacrifice one goat. Not, I mean to say, cows. No. Goat. Any useless animal. "All right. You take." Goat is recommended to be sacrificed. So you can take. And in India the meat-eating or flesh eating is not restricted. But not the useful animal, cow, the most useful animal, the cow.



So these books, these literatures, I mean to say, Vedic literatures, are meant for restricting our life and elevating ourself. So Nārada says that "You have explained all these religious principles, or sense gratification, economic development, very nicely. But as much labor you have taken for describing..." [break] ...na tathā vāsudevasya mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ. So therefore our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is simply for glorifying the Lord. That is the only business. Not... Other things are secondary. That is being taught. So if you want to write books, you write books by glorifying the Lord. Na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśaḥ [SB 1.5.10].

Nārada says, citra-padam api... Vāsudeva-vyatiriktānya-viṣaya-jñānavād evānya-viṣayaṁ vāk-cāturyam.(?) Śrīdhara Svāmī, he comments (chuckles) that except describing the glories of the Lord, any literature, any science, any contribution, is simply a jugglery of vocabulary. That's all. Jugglery. Vāk-cāturyam. Vāk means vocabulary and cāturya means jugglery. Simply setting some words in a jugglery way just to draw people's attention to waste time, that's all. Vāk-cāturyam. Vāsudeva-vyatiriktānya-viṣaya-jñānavād evānya-viṣayaṁ vāk-cāturyaṁ (ca) khilam, khilam eva ity aha, khilam.(?) It is insignificant. Citra-padam api yad vaco harer yaśo na pragṛṇīta. You can write nice books using your literary career, metaphor, and, what is called, so many things. They are producing nice literature. But if there is no glorification of the Lord, then, harer yaśo pragṛṇīta tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham. Then it is just like the place where the crows take pleasure. That's all.

Because such kind of literature will be accepted by men who are like crows. Tad vāyasaṁ tīrthaṁ kāka-tulyānāṁ kāmināṁ yati-sthānam uśanti manyante.(?) Just like kāminām, those who are very lustful, what is their pleasure spot? That vagina, that's all. That urinal. That is their pleasure. Is urinal, is very nice place? But he's sophisticated. He finds, "Oh, this is very nice place." This analytical study, (chuckling) how Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is revolting, but... (laughter) But we must talk the real thing, (laughing) that this commentator Śrīdhara Svāmī, he has given very nice example: kāmināṁ rati-sthānam. As the lusty man finds pleasure in the vagina, similarly, this sort of literature, nonsense literature, are enjoyed by persons who are just like crows. Not, what is called, swan. Swan will not go to that place. They will search out some place where there is nice transparent water and lotus flower, lilies, and nice trees and good birds. They are taking enjoyment. So even if you see among the animal society, in the bird society there is discrimination, and if in the human society there is no such discrimination, what kind of civilization that is? A crows' civilization. Black crows' civilization. Simply trying to take pleasure in nonsensical clubs, in liquor shop, in so-called cinema. They are trying to take pleasure there. They'll not...

Nārada is comparing that "Your so-called books describing about this dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90] is just like the kāka's, or the crow's, pleasure-hunting." Na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo jagat-pavitram [SB 1.5.10]. But if you produce a single literature wherein simply there is glorification of God, anyone who will read, he'll derive some immediately transcendental benefit. Produce a page only, Back to Godhead. Oh, that will bring revolution to the human society about understanding of spiritual life. Don't produce nonsense literature. Try for one page. Mānasa. Mānasa sattva-pradhāne mānasi vartamāna haṁsa.(?) Haṁsa means the swans. Therefore called paramahaṁsa. A highly elevated spiritual person is called paramahaṁsa.

Paramahaṁsa, in the sannyāsa stage there are four stages of development. Kuṭīcaka, bahūdaka, parivrājakācārya, and paramahaṁsa. Kuṭīcaka. When a person takes sannyāsa he lives in a cottage outside the village, but does not go home. But he's not accustomed to travel or to beg from door to door; so whole day and night he keeps himself in that cottage and from his relative and home something is supplied for his fooding. That is the stage of kuṭīcaka, to take supply from home. Then next stage is bahūdaka. When he comes to the understanding that "I have given up my home. Why shall I take help from my home? I am considering that home is my place. Why not everyone my friends? Vasudhaiva kuṭumbhakaḥ.(?) Everyone is my family, everyone," that is next stage. So he can go to everyone, "Will you kindly give me one cāpāṭi?" Who will not give a sannyāsī? Anyone will give. They are trained also like that, that any gṛhastha, householder, if a sannyāsī comes, immediately he should be received and respected. That is also Vedic culture. A sannyāsī should be treated as the children of the society. Everyone. Still there is. If in a village a sannyāsī goes, he will get hundreds of invitation: "Swamiji, please come. Take your bhikṣā at my place." So he has no question of eating and living. So many people will give him shelter. He'll not be in the wilderness. If actually a sannyāsī, he travels all over the country, he has no problem. Village to village, everyone will receive him. It is called bahūdaka. And then parivrājakācārya. Then, when he still further elevated, then he gives instruction. Why he should eat only without giving something to them? He'll feel like that. "Why for nothing I shall except food from others? I must give something. So whatever knowledge I have got I must distribute." This is parivrājakācārya.

And when one is experienced in everything and he is above all material affection, that is called paramahaṁsa. Haṁsa. Why...? Haṁsa means swan. Why he's compared with haṁsa? The haṁsa has got a qualification to take the essence. If you give a swan milk mixed with water, he'll, he has got some tactics, he'll simply take the milk case in and the water will be there, remain there. Similarly, haṁsa means one who has taken the essence of this cosmic manifestation. What is that essence? Kṛṣṇa. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. Everything, all manifestation, all activities, they're all Kṛṣṇa's energy. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the center. Just like the same way: what is this material cosmic manifestation? It is the sun. That's all. Similarly, there are millions of suns. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate. Kṛṣṇa-sūrya. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1], cause of all cause. So one who takes Kṛṣṇa, he's paramahaṁsa.

So every Vaiṣṇava, every devotee of Kṛṣṇa, pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, is a paramahaṁsa. So you, we are teaching people to become immediately paramahaṁsa, highest stage of sannyāsa. And the method is simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. You see? The post is paramahaṁsa. Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava means paramahaṁsa. He's above brāhmaṇa, above sannyāsa. But we must be real Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava means ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. There is no other desire, material desire. Desire means material desire, this contaminated desire. It does not mean that we shall not desire to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That desire is real desire. And any other desire, anyābhilāṣitā, for some material benefit, that is not required. But if we can keep ourself without any material desire, without any propensity for enjoying fruitive result... "I am doing something, I must enjoy this result. I must be enjoyer." This is called jñāna-karma. "Oh, I must try to understand Kṛṣṇa by my speculative method." Why? Kṛṣṇa is explaining Himself. Why don't you try to understand Him in that way? Nonsense. (chuckling) What speculative power you have got? Simply you'll commit blunder. Why? Kṛṣṇa says, "I am this, I am this, I am that, I am that." In the Bhagavad-gītā, explains. God says. Why don't you understand Him as He says? If I say that "I am from India. My birthplace is in Calcutta. I have got five children. I was formerly a businessman," then why do you understand to speculate about me? What is the use of this speculation? If you actually want to know what Swamiji is, Swamiji says that "I was householder, and I was doing medical business. I have got five children. And this and that." So that is sufficient. Why do you want to know Swamiji by speculation? Similarly, these rascals will try to understand Kṛṣṇa by speculation. No. There is no need. Paramahaṁsa. That is paramahaṁsa stage.

So Śrīdhara Svāmī says, haṁsa jatayo.(?) Jatayo means great sages, saintly persons. Haṁsa jatayo yatra na niramanti karhicid api na nitaram ramante.(?) Just like our students, Kṛṣṇa conscious person, if he is invited, "Come on, there is a nice picture in the cinema," no. He'll never go. He'll never go. (chuckles) Because he has become haṁsa. He is not a crow, that he'll go such places. Why? What is there? So haṁsa, here it is said, tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham uśanti mānasāḥ. They reject, reject. Uśanti mānasā na yatra haṁsā niramanty uśik-kṣayāḥ [SB 1.5.10]. There was an incidence in my life. I was, of course, at that time householder. So one my friend, he was going to cinema with his family, and he saw me. I was in the street, and he immediately stopped his car and he asked me that "You come. We are going to cinema." So I refused, that "If you give me one thousand dollars, still I shall not go to cinema." So he dragged me. He took me to the cinema house, but I never entered. I came back. You see? Because it was detestful.

So when one becomes completely separated from all these material desires, even if you offer him some profit, he'll not accept. It is the test. Na yatra haṁsā niramanty uśik-kṣayāḥ [SB 1.5.10]. Because his mind is absorbed in greater things. Uśik-kṣayāḥ. Brahman. Uśik-kṣayāḥ means Brahman. Uśika kamanīyam brahman kṣayo nivaso yeṣāṁ te, tathā prasiddha haṁsa mānasi sarasi carantaḥ.(?) Śrīdhara Svāmī explains, just like swans, they take pleasure in the mānasa-sarovara, in a place where transparent water, lily and very nice garden. They take pleasure. Yathā prasiddha haṁsa mānasi sarasi carantaḥ kamanīya-padma-khanda-nivāsaḥ.(?) You'll find swans, they will gather near the lotus flower and dive there and entangle them with the stem. That is their pleasure, to remain surrounding the lotus flower.

kamanīya-padma-khanda-nivāsa tyakta-vicitrannadi

yukto 'py ucchista-garte kāka-krīḍa-sthāne na niramanti(?)



They are not like the crows, who are simply trying to take some pleasure from the garbage place. That's all. What is there in the garbage? They are all rejected, thrown away. But the crows will go there. They'll pull on something, "If there is something there, something?" So, as there is a natural distinction between the crows and the swans, similarly, there is distinction between a Kṛṣṇa conscious person and ordinary person. The ordinary persons are compared like the crows, and a fully Kṛṣṇa conscious person is just like swans and ducks.



Then he says,

tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

[SB 1.5.11]



On the contrary, this is a kind of literature very nicely written, metaphorical, and poetry, everything. But there is no question of glorifying the Lord. That is compared with, just like the same place, where the crows will take pleasure. On the other hand, other kind of literature, what is that? Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api [SB 1.5.11]. A literature presented to the people, to the public for reading, which are even grammatically incorrect, but because there is glorification of the Lord, it can produce revolution. It can purify the whole human society. My Guru Mahārāja, when he was selecting articles to be published in The Harmonist, if he sees simply that there is, several times the writer has written "Kṛṣṇa," "Lord Caitanya," like that, he passes immediately: "All right. It's all right. (laughter) It is all right." That so many times he has uttered "Kṛṣṇa" and "Caitanya," so it is all right. (chuckles)



So similarly, even if we present our Back to Godhead or any other literature in broken languages, it does not matter because the glorification of the Lord is there. That is recommended by Nārada. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. Janatā agha. Agha means sinful activities. If one reads one line of this literature, although it is presented in broken language, but if he simply hears there is Kṛṣṇa, then his sinful activities immediately vanquish. Janatāgha viplavaḥ. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api nāmāny anantasya [SB 1.5.11]. Ananta means the unlimited. His name, His fame, His glory, His qualities are described. Nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni. If glorification is there, even they are presented in broken language, then śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ. Just like my Guru Mahārāja, sādhu, a saintly person, immediately passes: "Yes. It is all right." It is all right. Because there is glorification of the Lord. Of course, general public will not understand... But this is the standard, standard version, spoken by Nārada. You write something; the aim should be simply to glorify the Supreme. Then your literature is pavitra, purified. And however nicely, either literally or metaphorically or poetically, you write some literature which has nothing to do with God, or Kṛṣṇa, that is vāyasaṁ tīrtham. That is pleasure spot for the crows.

This is the version of Nārada Muni. We should be taking note of this. And for the Vaiṣṇava there is one qualification: poetic. You should... Everyone should be poetic. So... But that poetry, that poetry language, should be simply to glorify the Lord. Then it is... Just like Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Locana dāsa Ṭhākura, they are poets. They have produced so many songs. But about whom? About Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, under the instruction of Nārada, now Vyāsadeva will produce a literature like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is simply glorification of the Lord and His devotees. Bhāgavata. Bhāgavata means the Lord, and Bhāgavata means pertaining to the Lord. So pertaining to the Lord, everything. Vāstava-vastu vedyam atra. In the beginning of Bhāgavata it is said vāstava-vastu. Vastu means substance, the summum bonum. And vāstava, in relation to the summum bonum.

So if we try to understand everything in relationship with Kṛṣṇa, then we understand vāstava reality. That is reality. If we study something minus Kṛṣṇa, that is not real knowledge. Actually, Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of all. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]. So unless we come to the point of Kṛṣṇa, any understanding, any knowledge is imperfect.

So we shall discuss later on. Thank you. (end)



690610SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.11

-

New Vrindaban, June 10, 1969





Prabhupāda:



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave-namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi praṇamāmi hari-priye



[I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.]



vāñchā-kalpatarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇava devotees of the Lord. They can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees, and they are full of compassion for the fallen souls.]



tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

[SB 1.5.11]



The other day we discussed about literature which is very nicely composed from literary point of view, or poetic, or rhetoric. Maybe very nicely... But if there is no description of the Absolute Truth or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that sort of literature is enjoyed by a class of men who are compared with the crows. That we have discussed. It is simply wasting time, valuable time in the human life, to divert our attention to such ordinary literature. They are called grāmya-kathā. In Sanskrit language it is called grāmya-kathā. Grāmya-kathā means any book, any poetry, or any novel, or any drama... There is some hero and heroine, a man or woman, about their loving affairs, tragedy, comic, like that. Actually, it is grāmya-kathā. The same thing as we are experiencing daily, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunam, this eating, sleeping, mating, that's all. What is the value of such literature? What do you gain by that? No. Simply mental agitation. And if it is sex literature, then it is very appealing. So that means it is something like haviṣya kṛta(?)... Just like if you offer fuel on the fire, the fire will go on and it will, I mean to say, consume as much as you go on giving fuel. But there is no śānti. The fire will never be extinguished. Actually, what we want? What is the mission of our life? What is the aim of our life? We are hankering after śānti, or peace. So that sort of literature will not give us any peace. It will simply agitate the mind.



Therefore those who are paramahaṁsas, those who have understood the essence of this cosmic manifestation, they are not interested in such literature. On the other hand it is said that tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. (commentary) Vināpi pada-cāturyaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ-pradhānaṁ vacaḥ.(?) Śrīdhara Svāmī gives note that there may not be any poetic, metaphorical, or analogical, ornamental language, but vināpi pada-cāturyam. Pada-cāturyam. Pada means composition. In every language there are rules and regulations for composing poetry or prose, grammatical, rhetorical. So even such knowledge, even without such knowledge, pada-cāturyaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ-pradhānam. Just like we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. So we are not training our students any way about musical science, that "We have to chant in this way or that way, we have to dance in this way or that way." Without any musical knowledge, without any poetic understanding, even a child can take part in it, and he becomes immediately absorbed in ecstasy. Why? This is because we are chanting the glories of the Lord.

So it does not require any artificial musical knowledge or dancing knowledge. Out of your own ecstasy, you will dance, you'll chant. You don't require to study. Just like our playing of mṛdaṅga. Nobody has gone to an expert mṛdaṅga player to learn it. Whatever I play, I sing, I never studied under some expert teacher. But by practice, chanting, it may be melodious, it may be very nice or not. That doesn't matter. We are not concerned about that, whether it is appealing to the people or not. It will appeal; there is no doubt about it. But we don't require to divert our attention on these things. Simply because there is glorification of the Lord, it will be palatable. Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja said, bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt ka uttama-śloka-guṇānuvādāt virajyeta vinā paśughnāt [SB 10.1.4].

Parīkṣit Mahārāja, when he was hearing about Bhāgavata from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he expressed his experience. Oh, what is that? Now, nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. This chanting or understanding of the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, Uttama-śloka... Uttama-śloka-guṇānuvādāt. Whatever we are reading in the Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or we are chanting, the subject matter is glorifying the Lord, who is called Uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloka. Śloka means verse, and uttama means transcendental or very nice. So whenever we offer some prayer, read some literature, Bhāgavata, the verses are composed in very nice words and systematically. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you'll find every śloka, the topmost literary composition. Topmost, full of meaning, full of philosophy. In every line you'll find. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja says that this transcendental vibration, uttama-śloka-guṇānuvādāt... Guṇānuvādāt means glorifying the transcendental quality. When we say that Kṛṣṇa, or God, is nirguṇa... Nirguṇa means quality. So when we say... That is explained in Bhagavad-gītā. Nirguṇa guṇa-bhoktṛ ca.(?) He's nirguṇa, but He is also enjoyer of qualities. What does it mean? That Kṛṣṇa is not within the material qualities of goodness, passion, or ignorance. All His qualities are transcendental, nondifferent from Him. Therefore His glorification of the transcendental qualities can be chanted who are already in the transcendental platform. Others cannot.

Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja says, nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ. Nivṛtta means already finished, completely finished. What is that finished? Tṛṣṇa. Tṛṣṇa means hankering. One who has finished his material hankering, they can chant this transcendental glorification of the Lord. Others cannot. Just like in our saṅkīrtana movement, you are taking so much ecstasy, pleasure. So others will say, "What these people are doing? Crazy fellow, they're trancing, dancing and beating some drum." They'll feel like that because their hankering for material enjoyment is not finished. Therefore nivṛtta.

Actually, this transcendental name of Kṛṣṇa, or God, can be chanted in liberated stage. Therefore we prescribe, while chanting, there are three stages. The offensive stage, liberated stage, and actually on the platform of love of Godhead stage. That is the perfectional stage by chanting. In the beginning we chant in offensive stage-the ten kinds of offenses. But that does not mean that we shall not chant. Even there are offenses, we shall go on chanting. That chanting will help me to get out of all offenses. Of course, we must take care that we may not commit offenses. Therefore this list of ten kinds of offenses are given. We should try to avoid. And as soon as it is offenseless chanting, then it is liberated stage. That is liberated stage. And after liberated stage, the chanting will be so pleasing because that is on the transcendental platform that actual love of Kṛṣṇa and God will be relished. But the same thing... The chanting... In the offensive stage, the chanting, and the liberated stage is chanting... But in the mature stage... Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, he used to say that "What shall I chant with one tongue and what shall I hear with two ears? If millions of ears I had, if millions of tongue I had, then I could chant and hear." Because they are in liberated stage.

But we should not be dejected for that purpose. We should continue with perseverance. Utsāhād dhairyāt. Utsāhāt means with enthusiasm, and dhairyāt, dhairyāt means perseverance, patience. Utsāhāt. Niścayāt. Niścayāt means with firm determination: "Yes, I have begun chanting. Maybe there are offenses, but if I continue, Kṛṣṇa will be pleased to place me on the transcendental platform when I shall relish what is this chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." Just like Viśvanātha Cakravartī has given that the mango in the ripe stage and unripe stage. Unripe stage, it is bitter, but the same mango, when it is fully ripe, it is sweet, the sweetness. We shall have to wait for this stage, and we shall have to be careful that we may not commit offenses. Then we, surely, we shall come. Just like a diseased patient, if he follows the regulations given by the physician and takes the medicine, then surely he'll be cured.

Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja said that the chanting is for the persons who are liberated. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. Actually, chanting can be perfectly done by persons who are already liberated. But those who are not liberated? Then he says, bhavauṣadhi. But it is the medicine of this material entanglement for becoming liberated. That is also, it is also medicine. When we are liberated, we'll chant and relish what is actually love of God. That is liberated. But even if we are not liberated, this will act as medicine to become liberated. So any stage, nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāc [SB 10.1.4]. Those who are chanting, they'll be liberated. And another thing is: for the common men who are not serious, śrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt. They will hear and they will enjoy: "Oh, it is very nice."

Just like Jagāi-Mādhāi. Jagāi-Mādhāi, they were rogues. Rogues. And Nityānanda Mahā... Nityānanda Prabhu delivered them. But when they were rogues... The Vaiṣṇavas were chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, and these two brothers, one of them were appreciating, "Oh, these rascals chant very nicely." (chuckles) They were copying, these rascals, but appreciating. So we get some appreciation from the common man. They also give some contribution and they call us, they invite us. Because there is appreciation also. The three stages. Actually, chanting is possible in the liberated stage. But even if we are not liberated stage, it will act as medicine to bring us to the liberated platform. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt [SB 10.1.4]. And for the common man it is very pleasant, pleasing also. "Oh, Hare Kṛṣṇa." They also sometimes imitate, sometimes join because it is nice also. Just like sometimes on the street, some boys greet us, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." They have no interest, but still, they are taking interest. It is so nice. You see? So three stages, liberated stages, and offensive stages, and beginning stages.

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja said there are three stages. Bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano... In three ways it is so nice, palatable. So why one should be aloof from this chanting? Ka uttama-śloka-guṇānu... Who can be aloof from this chanting or hearing about the activities, pastimes of the uttama-śloka, Supreme Personality of Godhead? Vinā paśughnāt [SB 10.1.4]. The only person: who is paśughnāt. Paśughnāt means animal-killer. A person who is animal-killer, he'll not be interested. The animal-killer, you can, I mean to say, analyze the meaning in two ways. Animal killer means not exactly those who are butchers, or ordinary man who kills animal and eat. But even a person who does not take care of his self-realization, he is also animal-killer. He is killing himself. He is also animal-killer. Because this life is meant for self-realization, but he's not taking interest in self-realization. He is taking pleasure only just like animal. So I am also an animal. I am killing myself. If I don't take interest in self-realization and if I glide down again into the cycle of birth and death, then I am killing myself. Suiciding. That is our willing, killing ourself willingly. If I know that "If I do this, I will be punished like this," and if I still do this, then I am killing myself.

So the laws of nature is working. I am under, completely under the laws of nature. I may declare independence falsely. That doesn't matter. Nature's work will go on. And what is that nature's work? Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14]. Nature is also Kṛṣṇa's nature. This material nature is Kṛṣṇa's nature. So material nature is not bad itself. She is also engaged in service of Kṛṣṇa. Just like the police force. Police force, as the department of government, is not bad. It is doing faithfully service to the government. It is bad to me because I am criminal. Otherwise police force as it is, department, is not bad. Do you think that government is maintaining a nonsense bad department? No. It is serving the government. But it is bad for the criminals. Similarly, this māyā, the external energy, the māyā, it is bad for those who are godless, who are rascals. For them, māyā is there. Otherwise, for devotee, there is no influence of māyā.

Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find that māyā is strong only, it is very difficult to surpass the laws of nature, for whom? Who is not surrendered soul to Kṛṣṇa. Māyā. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etām... If you are not criminal, what business you have got with the police department? Nothing. Let the police department remain. You have nothing to do. Neither police department has any jurisdiction to come and disturb you. No. You live peacefully, lawfully. There is no... Similarly, if we do not become Kṛṣṇa conscious while we have got this opportunity, this human form of life, we can understand what is Kṛṣṇa, and if we willfully do not take to this consciousness, then the māyā will act. Therefore... Just like a person knows that "I am committing these sinful activities. I'll be arrested by the police and maybe I'll be hanged. I'll have to give my life." He knows it, but he does it. That means willfully he's killing. He is making suicide. Similarly, if we know that "So long we do not become Kṛṣṇa conscious, the māyā will punish me in so many ways," knowing, if I do not take care, that means I am committing suicide.

So Caitanya... Here... Parīkṣit Mahārāja said,

nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt

ka uttama-śloka-guṇānuvādāt...

[SB 10.1.4]



Who will not take interest in the matter of understanding Kṛṣṇa consciousness, vinā paśughnāt, except persons who are animal killer, or committing suicide? Therefore this verse said that even though there is no any poetic, I mean to say, rhetorical arrangement or grammatical arrangement, or nice words arrangement, if simply there is glorification of the Lord, Hare Kṛṣṇa... So Hare Kṛṣṇa, these two words or sixteen words or three words, it will be appealed. It will appeal to the devotees, to the great souls. But if you organize a great political meeting, they'll not go there. Just like in our country we have seen the Mahatma Gandhi was given the title mahātmā. You can give your, any title. Nobody objects. Just like in Bengali we say kānā-locana nyāya padma-locana(?). Padma-locana means very beautiful, lotus-eyed. But one mother has got a child who is born blind. Out of her love she has given the name Padma-locana, "lotus-eyed." You see? So that she can give because she loves the child. Even he is blind, that's her whim. "My boy, my child is padma-locana." Similarly, this "mahātmā," this title you can give to any person you like, but it has a meaning, "mahātmā."



So that meaning, "mahātmā," is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ [Bg. 9.13]. Mahātmā means who is not under the material energy, but he is under the spiritual energy. And what is the symptom that one is under the spiritual energy? That he has no other business except executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That's all. That is the symptom.

mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam

[Bg. 9.13]



He has no other business except Kṛṣṇa. That is mahātmā. That is explained in the Bhagavad... So we, the people gave a title, this Gandhi, a politician. His business was how to get independence politically. He was given the title mahātmā. So this mahātmā, when there was meeting, hundreds of thousand people gathered. But no... Actually, there are persons in India who are called sādhus, sādhu-samāja. A great number. Not, I mean to say, a small number. They are three million in India still. There is statistics. Three millions persons who are in renounced order of... Sādhu, they are called sādhu. They do not come. So these three millions mahātmās, those who are engaged, they may be, some of them may be impersonalists, some of them may be yogis, some of them are devotees. That doesn't matter, because they are also engaged in understanding the Absolute Truth. The impersonalist, they're in the beginning stage, but they are not materialists. They are not materialists. They are trying to understand the Absolute Truth. They cannot accommodate the Absolute Truth, the Supreme, can be a person. That is their less intelligence. But they are engaged in searching out. Similarly, yogis... Real yogis, not these fat-reducing yogis. I mean to say... (laughter) Real yogis. They are concerned with understanding the Supersoul, Paramātmā. And devotees, they are engaged in serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



So all of them are searching about the... Devotees, they have finished their searching. They have found out the real truth. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1], the Supreme. So it is a question of degrees of spiritual understanding. So there are three million serious sādhus in India. None of them ever attended such Mahatma Gandhi's meeting, neither they invited Mahatma Gandhi. No. They never never recognized, recognized. Because what they have got to do with these political affairs? Just like... They know, this is the business of the crows. The crows will take interest in such meeting. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. What these politicians will do? They'll simply make plan. That's all. Hitler will make one plan, Mussolini will make one plan, Churchill will make another plan. Your Roosevelt will make another plan, Gandhi will make another. Simply planmaking business. They will never be able to bring any peace and prosperity in the world. That is not possible. Because it is under the grip of māyā. They do not know. The peace and prosperity means surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Then you become out of the clutches of māyā. That secret they do not know. They're simply making plans. That's all. So planmaking, will always be frustrated. So simply agitation; it has no meaning. Therefore those who are transcendentalists, they know, this is crow's meeting. Sometimes, you have not seen, crows meeting. Kaw kaw kaw kaw kaw kaw kaw. They are passing resolution. You see? (laughter) You have seen crow's meeting?

Kīrtanānanda: Yes.



Prabhupāda: They have also meeting, crow's meeting. If you kill one crow, you'll see thousands of crows will come and hold their meeting: "Oh, one crow is dead by the human being. We shall..." And if the man is detected, this man has killed, these crows will, I mean to say, hurt the head of that man. They'll come in flocks. Yes. I have seen in India. Yes. They sometimes attack. So they have got also their own defensive measure. The crow's meeting.



So they are not interested (in) all these political affairs or so-called social affairs and resolution because they know this is not the method of becoming peaceful or prosperous. This is not the method. Without... Hariṁ vinā na mṛtiṁ taranti. Without God consciousness, nobody can be happy. Therefore if we write something, if a devotee writes something about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, God consciousness... Here Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says that tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. Such kind of creative energy which is trying to put something for understanding of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, janatāgha-viplavaḥ, that brings a revolution to the people for killing their effect of sinful activities. Janatā agha. Janatā means people in general, and agha, agha means sins. And that will... That can be... By such literature, spreading such literature, Kṛṣṇa consciousness literature, there will be a revolution in the sinful activities of the people in general. Janatāgha-viplavaḥ.

(commentary) Vināpi pada-cāturyaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ-pradhānāṁ vacaḥ pavitram ity aha tad vāg pavitra iti.(?) It is so pure. What is called? Disinfectant. The whole world is infected with the māyā's influence, and this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, is disinfectant. It is sure. Disinfectant. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. (commentary) Bhagavad-yaśaḥ-pradhānāṁ vacaḥ pavitram ity aha tad vāg iti, tad vāg-visarga sa cāsau vāg-visargo vacaḥ prayogaḥ. Janānāṁ samuho janatā, tasya aghaṁ viplavati naśayati.(?) Viplava means it kills. Because disinfectant. For example, we can give, now how this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is disinfectant, that those who have seriously taken to it, they immediately stop the sinful infections, the four principles, regulative principles, illicit sex life, intoxication, gambling and meat-eating. How disinfectant it is. These four principles increases sinful activities. All other sinful activities will come one after another, one after another. Stealing, then cheating, then... So many other things will come if we follow these four principles. And if we stop these four principles, then the switch is off of committing further sinful activities. You must know that. It is... And how it can be maintained? By this disinfectant method, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, it will not, simply by theoretical knowledge will not do.

So it is disinfectant, actually. Janatāgha-viplavaḥ. It stops further sinful activities of that person. And if we continue, that "Well, I have got a disinfectant method, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Therefore I can go on committing these four principles of sin, and I'll be (dis)infected." Just like in the Christian church they go, confess. That's all right. Confessing is disinfectant. But how is that you again do it? What is the meaning? You go to church, confess. That's very nice. Now your sinful activities is neutralized. That's all right. But why you are committing again? What is the answer? Hm? What will be the possible answer if I ask any Christian gentleman that "You are committing sinful activities, all right, confessing in the church before Lord Jesus Christ, he's representative, or his representative, or God. Your sinful activities all neutralized, excused. That's all right. But why you are committing again?" What will be the answer?

Nara-nārāyaṇa: They will confess again.



Prabhupāda: They will confess again. That means it has become a business. You see? That "I commit..." That is not the idea. Our, this offensive list you have noted, the offensive list, that prohibits that... Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. Anyone who thinks like that, that "Because I have got this disinfectant method, so I shall commit sinful activities and I'll chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and it will be neutralized," so that is the greatest sin. Similarly... [break]



So my manager supplied morphine preparation to an unlicensed doctor, medical practitioner. In India there are many so-called medical practitioners. They are compounders, and after... Because there is scarcity of medical man. So there was one compounder. Some way or other, he took supply of morphine preparation from my manager. But the license was in my name. I am the proprietor. So I was called by the magistrate. So he asked my explanation: "Why you have done this?" So I gave my explanation, that "I am, of course, I am proprietor. The license is my name. But actually the business is done by my assistants, manager. So they have done it. In future I shall be strict. There will be no such mistake." So I was excused. But that does not mean that I shall again do that and again ask excuse. Because I confess, that does not mean... I'll never be excused. It is a common sense.

So persons who are trying to commit sinful activities on the strength of some spiritual activity, they're the greatest sinners. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. That is not allowed. You can neutralize your sinful activities by some spiritual a... But that does not mean... This is called hasti-snāna. That is also explained. Hasti-snāna. Hasti-snāna means bathing of the elephant. The elephant goes into the reservoir of water, takes bath very nicely, and, as soon as come on the land, again takes some dust and throws over the body. Immediately. You see? So, that sort of purification is not required. Once purified, don't commit again. The harer nāma [Cc. Ādi 17.21], Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra has got power to purify, but that does not mean that we shall commit again and purify it. That process is not this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

Seven... You have got that list? You have now... Ten kinds offenses? In this, is it written there that you cannot commit offense on the strength of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra? Yes, that's... So tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavaḥ. Viplavati. It vanquishes, it nullifies, it neutralizes. That's a fact. Nāśayati. Yasmin vāg-visarge, vāg-visarge abaddha, abaddhavaty api apaśabdādi-yukto 'pi prati ślokam anantasya yaśasaḥ aṅkitāni nāmāni bhavanti.(?) So such kind of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, or sometime... Just like you are chanting, you are, the mantras, because it is not your language. So sometime it appears broken. Just like guru. Sometimes you say "goru." "Goru" means cow, and "guru" means spiritual master. So the difference of meaning is vast. (chuckling) The spiritual master is not a cow. Or a bull. (laughs) But sometimes they... Because it is not your language... But that doesn't matter. Because bhāvagrāhi janārdana. Kṛṣṇa is within you. He knows what you want to chant. Therefore He takes the meaning of guru and not goru, even it is spoken as goru. That doesn't matter. Bhāvagrāhi janārdana. He, Kṛṣṇa, knows that what you are actually... Just like I know that although you are speaking guru as goru, I, I, I, don't take offense because I know that your desire is something else. I do not protest. (laughter) That "You are addressing me goru. I am not goru." (laughter) So that is not a fault. Similarly, it is said that yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavati. If somebody does not know how to spell, how to say, but his idea is there, abaddhavaty api, because he wants to chant the holy name of the Supreme Lord, nāmāny anantasya, ananta... Ananta means the unlimited. His name is being chanted. Nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni. And His glorification is being done. The effect is śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādha... Those who are actually advanced transcendentalists, they'll appreciate: "Oh, how nicely they are doing. How nicely." Although there is broken language of goru instead of guru, that will be appreciated.

But, on the other hand, where there is no such intention, very, I mean to say, nice composition, but there is no... Just like there are so many poets; they'll give you nice ideas, hallucination. You'll be in the poetic idea. As soon as... Just like our Ginsberg. Ginsberg gives so many poetic ideas. People throng: "Oh, Ginsberg is speaking." But there is... Now he's chanting, of course, Hare Kṛṣṇa. But in his poetry there is very rarely we can find about here. So anyway these things are not appealing to the persons who are really transcendentalists. But a, a composition which is even in broken language, if it is meant for glorifying the Supreme Lord, that is appreciated... Śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti. Śṛṇvanti means they very attentively hear. Śṛṇvanti. Śṛṇvanti means hearing. Śṛṇvanti gāyanti. Also repeats the chanting. Repeats. Gāyanti and gṛṇanti. Gṛṇanti means they take also. "It is very nice. It is very nice composition." Śṛṇvanti gāyanti. This is the distinction. One side, however nice it may be, poetically, rhetorically, but if there is no glorification of the unlimited Supreme Lord, it is rejected by the haṁsas. The... Just like the play, pleasure hunting place for the crows is never accepted by the swans, similarly these kinds of literature...

Now you try to understand how Nārada Muni is chastising his disciple like Vyāsadeva, that "You have created some literature which will be enjoyed by the crow class men." You see. Just see. He compiled Vedānta-sūtra. Still, Nārada Muni chastised him that "Your composition will be liked by the crow class men, not the swan class men." You see. Yes. Actually, you will find... So many so-called Vedānta philosophers. The Māyāvādīs, they are called Vedantists. The Ramakrishna Mission here, they are also preaching Vedānta philosophy. They are called... Vedānta Church there is in Los Angeles. And in New York there is a Vedānta... What is that?

Disciple: Vedānta Society.



Prabhupāda: Vedānta Society. But we, actually we find they are enjoyed by a crow class men. Because they do not know what was the intention of writing Vedānta philosophy. That Vedānta philosophy explanation is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Vyāsadeva actually did it. Bhāṣyaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇām **. This is... Therefore Bhāgavata, it begins with the first aphorism of Vedānta-sūtra: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The author himself explains because he knew under, after the instruction of Nārada Muni he could understand that "What fault I have done by writing this Vedānta-sūtra because that will (be) misinterpreted by the crow class men. Therefore I must write my own commentary of the Vedānta-sūtra so that swan class men will enjoy it." That is the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



Yasmin, yaśasaṁ gṛṇanti atre tu yad yāni nāmāni sādhavo mahanto vaktari sati śṛṇvanti śrotari sati gṛṇanti, anyathā tu svayam eva gāyanti kīrtayanti.(?) So indirectly he hinted that: "You should compile one first-class literature which the swan class men will hear, will chant and enjoy. So far, what you have done, that will be enjoyed by the crow class men. But you do something which will be enjoyed by the... Then you will be satisfied. Otherwise, you'll not be satisfied." That was his indirect hint. "You are not satisfied by, even after compiling Vedānta-sūtra. That means, that indicates that these literatures will not be satisfactory for the swan class of men, or paramahaṁsa." Paramahaṁsa means the topmost transcendentalists. They'll never...

Actually, you'll find that our Kīrtanānanda Swami was in Vṛndāvana. There are many devotees. There are many devotees; they're illiterate practically. They do not know what is Vedānta-sūtra. But still, by their sincere devotional service they're very much elevated. What to speak of others, Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, he was illiterate. He could not sign even his name. But he was so spiritually elevated that my spiritual master, who was the topmost scholar of his time, he accepted him as spiritual master. What is the reason? The reason is that this transcendental science does not depend on academic qualification. It is, it is not that because one is very, academically very qualified, he'll become a devotee. No. The secret is... That is given in the Vedic literatures: [SB 5.18.12] yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā No:

yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



The transcendental knowledge becomes revealed. To whom it becomes revealed? It becomes revealed to such person who has got unflinching love for Kṛṣṇa and for the spiritual master. Caitanya-caritāmṛta also says: guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. One can come to the spiritual perfectional stage, or come to the spiritual platform, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master. The, this is Vedic version: yasya deve parā bhaktiḥ. One who has got unflinching faith... Deve. Deve means the Supreme Lord. Parā bhakti: transcendental devotional service to the Supreme Lord. Yathā deve tathā gurau. And as he has got unflinching faith in Kṛṣṇa, similarly he has got unflinching faith to the spiritual master. Tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ: all these Vedic literatures and their purport and their meaning will be revealed to him. Tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ prakāśante. It becomes revealed. Prakāśante mahātmanaḥ.



So that is the secret, not that erudite scholarship. One must be very much sincere. Then Kṛṣṇa will give you dictation. He is within. Guru-kṛṣṇa... First of all, if I am sincere and if I want to serve the Supreme Lord... The Supreme Lord is within you. He'll give you direction: "All right. You do this. You do this. You just go to this man, and he'll give you good counsel." He'll give you direction. Therefore first mercy is of Kṛṣṇa, and then the spiritual master is considered as the mercy-representation of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa helps us from within and without. From within He's helping us as the Supersoul, and from without, He's helping us as the spiritual master. So Kṛṣṇa is ready to help us in all, always, in all perfectional stage, if we are simply sincere. Parā bhakti. Yasya deve parā bhaktiḥ. If you have got transcendental devotional mood, then everything will come. It does not depend on this linguistic, I mean to say, advancement or academically... Simply we have to develop our transcendental love and devotional service to the Supreme Lord, and then gradually He'll give me direction. He'll give me right direction. Everything will be all right.

So Nārada Muni is advising that "You do something which will be accepted." Śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ. "Do something for the saintly persons, transcendentalists. What you have done this, literature for the crowlike persons. Do something for the swanlike persons." Na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam.

naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam

kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare

na cārpitaṁ karma yad apy akāraṇam



So our problem is that we may not make any more cause for our next material birth. That is called akāraṇam. Akāraṇam. Just like I have got this body. The cause is my previous activities, in my past life's activities. Similarly, if I continue my materialistic way of life, then I am causing another material body. This is called kāraṇam. If I have got a doggish mentality, then I am causing myself to get a dog's body. Akāraṇam.



So if we want to stop these causal activities, then, as it is stated: yāvān na prītir mayi vāsudeve. Unless you develop your love of Godhead, there is no other way to stop this causal, cause and effect. The cause is this and the effect is this. Cause and effect. The whole material world is going on, cause and effect. People do not consider that why there are so many, 8,400,000 species of life. There must be something. Some of them foolishly think that once one gets this human form of life he does not glide down. Is it not? He remains in the human form of life. No. There are many instances. Just like Bharata Mahārāja, he got the body of a deer. There are so many instances.

So it is not a permanent settlement that once we have got this human form of body we cannot glide down. We can glide down. Bhagavad-gītā says: yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran loke tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. At the time of death the mental position will give you another body of the same type as you are mentally absorbed at that time. So therefore we have to prepare, we have to prepare ourselves so that at the time of death we may... Ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. At the time of death we can once think of Kṛṣṇa. Then our life is successful. It is said in Bengali that bhajana kara sādhana kara matijanle haya.(?) What is that? That whatever spiritual advancement you are doing, that's all right. The test will be at the time of your death. Examination. That is the point of examination. What is the mental state at that time. Difficult job.

Therefore we have to practice: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. In this way, unconsciously or consciously, if we simply can remember Hare Kṛṣṇa, then our life is successful. This is a most scientific method. Simply if we can remember... It doesn't require how far we are educated, how far we are scholar, no. Ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ [SB 2.1.6]. Etāvaj janma-sāphalyam. Then there is... So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was to die within seven days. Therefore he called for... Not called for. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, out of his own accord, came, because he knew Parīkṣit Mahārāja was a great king, and great devotee. He's, from his childhood... It is described... Just like this child is playing with Deity, Parīkṣit Mahārāja used to play with Deities. We had also the opportunity from our father to play with Deities. So these are great opportunities, to get ideas, good ideas, and training, training. Really, this is the training, this association. Simply by associating, associating with these members, this chanting, regulative chanting, dancing, and taking prasādam, he's being educated. Highly educated. Tan manye adhītam uttamam. One who has learned about the devotional service, then he's to be understood highly educated. That is the recommendation by Prahlāda Mahārāja.

So actually we don't require any other education. This association will give anyone who will come, either child or old man. That doesn't matter. He'll be highly educated. But because we are in this material world, therefore we have to give some education. But that is secondary. Real education this. Just like you are doing, all rising early in the morning, maṅgala-ārātrika, kīrtana, and then... These regulative principles, this is real education. It does not require any academic education. It is simply practice. Tan manye adhītam uttamam. That is Prahlāda Mahārāja's recommendation.

So Nārada Muni is inducing his disciple, Vyāsadeva, to write Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, will be, which will be heard and, śṛṇvanti, will be accepted, and gṛṇanti, and śṛṇvanti gāyanti, and chanted. So those who are actually in the transcen..., they accept Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Śrīmad-bhāgavatam amalaṁ purāṇam, yasmin pāramahaṁsyaṁ gīyate. Paramahaṁsa-saṁhitā. This is paramahaṁsa-saṁhitā. This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is meant for the topmost transcendentalists. It is not for ordinary... Not for the impersonalists, or for the yogis. The topmost transcendentalist means devotees. Because Kṛṣṇa says... Who is transcendentalist? Who wants to know God, he is transcendentalist. Not ordinary person. No, no, who is topmost transcendentalist? The devotees. Why? Why not the yogis, and the jñānīs, impersonalists, and the, the meditators about...? Why they are not? Because Kṛṣṇa says that bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55], "Only through devotional service one can understand Me."

So transcendental life means to understand the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth can be understood perfectly only through devotional service. There is no other way. There is no other way. In every scripture, Vedic scripture, this is announced. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also, the same thing confirmed: evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. When, by discharging devotional service, one will be prasanna-manasaḥ, very jolly mood, always jolly... Bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-saṅgasya jāyate... Unless one is freed from material anxiety, unless one is spiritually joyful, he cannot understand what is the science of Kṛṣṇa. It is not possible. So therefore we have to cultivate this devotional service. Then our ultimate goal of life, to understand the Absolute Truth, our relationship with Him, that will be perfectly done.

Thank you very much. (end)



730912SB.LON

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.11

-

London, September 12, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes, etc., of the unlimited Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words directed toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world's misdirected civilization. Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest. [SB 1.5.11]



Purport: It is a qualification of the great thinkers to pick up the best even from the worst. It is said that the intelligent man should pick up nectar from a stock of poison, should accept gold even from a filthy place, should accept a good and qualified wife even from an obscure family and should accept a good lesson even from a man or from a teacher who comes from the untouchables. These are some of the ethical instructions for everyone in every place without exception. But a saint is far above the level of an ordinary man. He is always absorbed in glorifying the Supreme Lord because by broadcasting the holy name and fame of the Supreme Lord, the polluted atmosphere of the world will change, and as a result of propagating the transcendental literatures like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, people will become sane in their transactions. While preparing this commentation on this particular stanza of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we have a crisis before us. Our neighboring friend China has attacked the border of India with a militaristic spirit. We have practically no business in the political field, yet we see that previously there were both China and India, and they both lived peacefully for centuries without ill feeling. The reason is that they lived those days in an atmosphere of God consciousness, and every country, over the surface of the world, was God-fearing, pure-hearted and simple, and there was no question of political diplomacy. There is no cause of quarrel between the two countries China and India over land which is not very suitable for habitation, and certainly there is no cause for fighting on this issue. But due to the age of quarrel, Kali, which we have discussed, there is always a chance of quarrel on slight provocation. This is due not to the issue in question, but to the polluted atmosphere of this age: systematically there is propaganda by a section of people to stop glorification of the name and fame of the Supreme Lord. Therefore, there is a great need for disseminating the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam all over the world. It is the duty of every responsible Indian to broadcast the transcendental message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam throughout the world to do all the supermost good as well as to bring about the desired peace in the world. Because India has failed in her duty by neglecting this responsible work, there is so much quarrel and trouble all over the world. We are confident that if the transcendental message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is received only by the leading men of the world, certainly there will be a change of heart, and naturally the people in general will follow them. The mass of people in general are tools in the hands of the modern politicians and leaders of the people. If there is a change of heart of the leaders only, certainly there will be a radical change in the atmosphere of the world. We know that our honest attempt to present this great literature conveying transcendental messages for reviving the God consciousness of the people in general and respiritualizing the world atmosphere is fraught with many difficulties. Our presenting this matter in adequate language, especially a foreign language, will certainly fail, and there will be so many literary discrepancies despite our honest attempt to present it in the proper way. But we are sure that with all our faults in this connection the seriousness of the subject matter will be taken into consideration, and the leaders of society will still accept this due to its being an honest attempt to glorify the Almighty God. When there is fire in a house, the inmates of the house go out to get help from the neighbors who may be foreigners, and yet without knowing the language the victims of the fire express themselves, and the neighbors understand the need, even though not expressed in the same language. The same spirit of cooperation is needed to broadcast this transcendental message of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam throughout the polluted atmosphere of the world. After all, it is a technical science of spiritual values, and thus we are concerned with the techniques and not with the language. If the techniques of this great literature are understood by the people of the world, there will be success.





When there are too many materialistic activities by the people in general all over the world, there is no wonder that a person or a nation attacks another person or nation on slight provocation. That is the rule of this age of Kali or quarrel. The atmosphere is already polluted with corruption of all description, and everyone knows it well. There are so many unwanted literatures full of materialistic ideas of sense gratification. In many countries there are bodies appointed by the state to detect and censor obscene literature. This means that neither the government nor the responsible leaders of the public want such literature, yet it is in the marketplace because the people want it for sense gratification. The people in general want to read (that is a natural instinct), but because their minds are polluted they want such literatures. Under the circumstances, transcendental literature like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam will not only diminish the activities of the corrupt mind of the people in general, but also it will supply food for their hankering after reading some interesting literature. In the beginning they may not like it because one suffering from jaundice is reluctant to take sugar candy, but we should know that sugar candy is the only remedy for jaundice. Similarly, let there be systematic propaganda for popularizing reading of the Bhagavad-gītā and the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which will act like sugar candy for the jaundicelike condition of sense gratification. When men have a taste for this literature, the other literatures, which are catering poison to society, will then automatically cease.



We are sure, therefore, that everyone in human society will welcome Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, even though it is now presented with so many faults, for it is recommended by Śrī Nārada, who has very kindly appeared in this chapter.



Prabhupāda: In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, there is a description of the age of Kali. Age of..., this is age of Kali. According to Vedic understanding, there are four ages: Satya-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, Tretā-yuga, and Kali-yuga. This age is called Kali-yuga. It has begun about five thousand years ago, after the battle of Kurukṣetra. The duration of this Kali-yuga is estimated four hundred thousand..., four hundred and twenty-seven thousands of years. Out of that, we have passed only five thousand years. So the symptom of the human being in this age is that prāyeṇālpāyuṣa: people will become very short duration of life. It is said that time, at the end of Kali-yuga, the, if somebody lives for twenty to thirty years, he will be considered as very old man. So gradually the food grains like rice, wheat, milk, and sugar will disappear. In this way, in the Kali-yuga, prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ sabhya kalāv asmin yuge janāḥ. In this age, people will be of short duration of life; manda, very slow; sumanda-matayaḥ, accepting some rubbish theology. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyāḥ [SB 1.1.10], almost all of them are unfortunate. Manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ: over and above that, they will be disturbed, especially by lack of rain, lack of..., scarcity of food grains, and overtaxed by the government, so much so that people will give up their hearth and home and go to the forest and hills in disappointment and confusion. So these are the symptoms of Kali-yuga, gradually degrading.



So this is also recommended, prāyeṇa... In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in another chapter, Twelfth Canto, it is said, kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan. These instructions were given by Śukadeva Gosvāmī to Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So he addressed the king, "My dear king, in this age the faults are like the ocean," kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan. Doṣa-nidhe. Nidhi means ocean. "There are so many faults in this age that it can be accepted as the ocean of faults." Kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ. "There is one great opportunity. Although it is full of faulty things, still there is one hope. That hope is," kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51], "if one simply chants the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, then gradually he becomes purified from the contamination of this age." Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ: "He becomes free from the contamination of this age." It is just like vaccine. In contagious disease, there is vaccine, cholera. So this mantra, mahā-mantra, this is not ordinary sound. This is spiritual. So by chanting this mantra-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare-one becomes free from the contamination of this age. And not only he becomes free from the contamination of this age, but paraṁ vrajet, he goes back to the spiritual world.

We have no information in this age, at the present time, what is that spiritual world, but they are all stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. Everything is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. Bhagavad-gītā is the preliminary study of spiritual life, ABCD of spiritual life. The people cannot understand even the ABCD of Bhagavad-gītā, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the graduate study. So everything is there. Unfortunately it was not distributed. So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has started to distribute this literature, especially Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. We have already translated about twenty books. They are present before you, and our aim is to present to the human society sixty books. Still translation is going on. So our request to the publishers and book sellers, that "Let this literature be distributed properly. People will be benefited." Because, after all, each and every human being is a spiritual being. He is not this body. That is the mistake of the present civilization. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Ātma-buddhi, "self." People, everyone thinks that this body, "I am this body." If I ask any gentleman, "What you are?" He'll say, "I am Mr. Such-and-such. I am born in this country," "I am American," "I am Englishman," "I am Indian." These are all bodily description. But basically I am not this body. This is called illusion. You have got practical experience. When one man's father or son or any relative dies, he cries, "Oh, my son has gone away," "My father has gone away." Then, "Your father is lying there on the bed. How do you say that 'My father has gone away'? " That means the actual father, he has never seen. He has seen the body only. And on this bodily conception of life, everything is being manipulated. This is called illusion. Therefore, in the Vedic literature it is stated,

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



A person who is in the bodily concept of life, and thinking a bodily designation as everything, nationalism, or ..., bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. Bhauma, "on the land," ijya-dhīḥ... The whole world is going on, worshiping the land in which he is born. But he does not know that he took birth in many lands. Not only in this land, in other planet also. But he does not know which land (is) his own land. This is called illusion, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhā..., sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ.



So the world is going on under misconception of self, that "I am this body." In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find, the first instruction given by Kṛṣṇa:

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



Asmin dehe, in this body, there is the proprietor of the body, dehī, who possesses this body. But there is no information. Nobody knows. There is no education on this point: what is that proprietor of this body. They are simply going on, like cats and dogs. Cats and... If you try to instruct a cat or dog, "My dear dog, you are not these bodies," he'll not understand. He is so grossly in ignorance, it is very difficult for him to understand that he is not this body. But human being, although at the present moment they are grossly ignorant for want of spiritual education, still, because he is human being, he can be educated. He can be revived to his original consciousness, which is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So we are trying our bit, almost single-handed, although the important literatures are there, Vedic literatures, four Vedas, Vedānta-sūtra, eighteen Purāṇas, hundred and eight Upaniṣads, then Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata, so many, full of knowledge, transcendental knowledge. They can be distributed all over the world. But there was no organized attempt. We are just begun from 1966, this movement, Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, distributing this literature. Through literature, of course, we are very hopeful. Our literatures are selling. In London also, they sell at least $200, er, pounds, in the street. Similarly, in New York, in Los Angeles, every city we are selling about thirty-to forty thousand rupees' worth books daily. People are appreciating. But if the publishers and the book sellers also help us in this movement, then people will be very much benefited. That is our request. We have come to this, I mean to say, bookseller's office to request... Of course, we have no means to advertise very much, but our advertisement is the saṅkīrtana movement. We go from city to city, street to street, to invoke, invoke the spiritual consciousness of that. There is already there. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, it is said,

nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema 'sādhya' kabhu naya

śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

[Cc. Madhya 22.107]



It is simply awakened. This spiritual consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is already there in everyone. Otherwise how this European, American, and other foreign country boys and girls, they are taking? It is already there. Simply it has to be awakened by this transcendental vibration.



That transcendental vibration... Just like we are chanting, this is one vibration. And these books are bigger vibration. This is... This, when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, a few yards, people can hear, "Here is Hare Kṛṣṇa." But this, my Guru Mahārāja used to say, that "This is bṛhad-mṛdaṅga." Mṛdaṅga, that drum, you have seen, that is small mṛdaṅga. If I beat on this drum, maybe a few yards, people can heard from few yards. But this is... The books are distributed, it can go from country to country, from continent to continent, actually it is so happening. So our only appeal is that all book sellers, all publishers, may come forward and cooperate with us and distribute the transcendental literature in the unique form. They will find something sublime, and we'll be benefited.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



690611SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.12-13

-

New Vrindaban, June 11, 1969



Prabhupāda:



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave-namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



[My dear Lord, and the spiritual energy of the Lord, kindly engage me in Your service. I am now embarrassed with this material service. Please engage me in Your service.]



naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam

kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare

na cārpitaṁ karma yad apy akāraṇam

[SB 1.5.12]



Now Vyāsadeva is discussing different kinds of literature. So he has explained that any literature, however nicely prepared from rhetorical point of view, or poetical, metaphorical, grammatical, but if there is no information of the Absolute Truth, such literatures are useless and no saintly person will take any interest in such literature. They give it up. Just like the swans, they do not take pleasure in a place where the crows can take pleasure. As there is distinction between the crows and the swans, even in the bird's kingdom, or even in the animal kingdom... You'll find always. The different kinds of varieties of birds and beasts, they live together. Similarly, those who are saintly persons, those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious persons, their taste is different from the persons who are just like crows. Crows are interested in things... Carvita-carvaṇānām. Prahlāda Mahārāja says, "chewing the chewed." Already it has been chewed, and if somebody wants to try it, "Let me see. What is the taste there?" it is useless labor only.



So this material world is going on on the system of chewing the chewed. Just like a person, he has done very good business, amassed money, and sense gratification he has done. But he is not satisfied. But still, he'll induce his sons and grandsons to the same business. He has experienced that "In this way, life is not very pleasing. I have not satisfied myself, but still, why I am engaging my sons and grandsons to the same business, chewing the chewed?" But because they have no better information... Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. Prahlāda Mahārāja advised his father, atheistic father. He said... When his father inquired, "My dear boy, where you got all these ideas?" He was perfect devotee, and the father was perfect atheist. He said, "This status is..., cannot be achieved without being favored by a pure devotee."

Naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghrim [SB 7.5.32]. Urukramāṅghrim, aṅghri. Aṅghri means lotus feet. Nobody can be interested to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead... Because to be become interested in the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead means to become liberated. Anartha-apagamaḥ yad-arthaḥ. Anartha. Anartha means unnecessary. We are creating unnecessary necessities of life and becoming entangled. This is material life. But if one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, interested in Kṛṣṇa, then he becomes detestful: "What is the use?" Just like our brahmacārīs, our devotees, they can lie, lie down flat on the ground. They don't require any nice bedstead or cushion. Because the life is so molded, they think, "Well, I have to take some rest. So in this way and that way, why should I bother about that?" Yes. That is the sign of advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. Those who have no taste of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are trying to be happy by unnecessarily increasing the material demands because they have no other information. But as soon as one is engaged in devotional service of Kṛṣṇa, pareśānubhūti, he relishes some transcendental pleasure, and, as a result of that, this nonsensical pleasure becomes insignificant.

That is the test. A devotee can..., cannot be equally interested with material pleasure and transcendental pleasure. No. Virakti. Bhagavad-gītā also says that paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. Just like in a hospital a diseased person is forced not to accept a certain type of foodstuff. He has the desire. He has the desire to take such food. Just like a typhoid patient, suffering from typhoid. Doctor says that "You cannot take any solid food. A little liquid food you can take." But he has the desire to take the solid food. "Oh, doctor has asked me not to take such food. All right, what can I do?" But he has got the desire. But a devotee, he hasn't got to be forced just like the physician asks him, "Don't do this." He automatically does so. Why? Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate: he has seen or he has tasted something better for which he doesn't like to take any more this abominable taste. That is bhaktiḥ pareśānu... That means when we become detestful such abominable things, then we should know that we are advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The test is in your hand. You haven't got to ask anybody, "Do you think I am increasing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness," but you can understand. Exactly in the same way: if you are hungry and if you are eating, you know, by eating, how much your hunger is satisfied, how much you are feeling strength, how much you are feeling pleasure. You haven't got to ask anybody. Similarly, if anybody increases his Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the test will be that he will be disinterested with all material pleasures. That is test.

Just like Yāmunācārya. He was emperor. He was emperor. And his standard of living is very, was very high. Standard of living, materialistic standard of living, means, high standard of living means, unrestricted enjoyment of wine and woman. That's all. That is the standard. So he was addicted to all these habits. He was king. At his command everything was there. If, if a man is rich, three things, four things will be at his command: wine, woman, gold and gambling. It is called. Yes. So therefore these are the places, I mean to say, allotted to Kali by Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Therefore a persons who is desirous of advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he should take care. So this Yāmunācārya later on became a great devotee. So he has got... He happened to be the spiritual master of Rāmānujācārya. He became a great devotee, Yāmunācārya, in the Śrī-sampradāya Vaiṣṇavas. So he writes very nice... These are practical experience of the ācārya. Yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde nava-nava-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt... He was, in his previous life, very extravagant. So he says, "Since I have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and I am enjoying daily new, new transcendental pleasure, being advancing myself in that science, the result is," tad-avadhi, "from that day, since that day," bata nārī-saṅgame... Because he was accustomed to associate with women very much. "So now, simply by thinking of this womanly association..." Means sex life. He says, bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca: "Oh, I hate. My face immediately becomes turned. Oh, what nonsense. I used to..." So the bhakti, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the test is there. The more you become advanced, more you become, no more any interest in this material pleasure.

So ordinary literature, they're full with all this, I mean to say, grāmya-kathā. The man and woman's behavior, that is good literature. There is a hero; there is a heroine. So those who are saintly persons, they do not take interest. So Nārada was advising Vyāsadeva that "You have written this Mahābhārata. That's all right. It is a great epic, history. But the, mostly... History means the ordinary dealings of the worldly men. So what benefit there is? That is nothing. No saintly person will take interest." Actually, this Mahābhārata was written by this, by Vyāsadeva for giving instruction, Vedic instruction to the less intelligent class of men. He has given introduction, strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā: [SB 1.4.25] "The Vedic knowledge is difficult to be understood by these classes of men and women: strī-śūdra-śūdra class, woman class, strī, śūdra-and dvija-bandhu." And dvija-bandhu means born in high family, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, but their behavior is different, like śūdras. They cannot understand Vedas. Therefore there is restriction, that "The śūdras cannot read Vedas." They are restricted.

So therefore Mahābhārata was written by Vyāsadeva. But Nārada says that "This kind of literature will not appeal to the saintly devotees. So you write something for the satisfaction of the saintly devotees." And he is giving the instruction that "Even such literature is written in broken language, not in the proper way from grammatical point of view, from poetic point of view, from rhetorical, still, because such literature is full with glorification of the Supreme Lord, saintly persons, they accept it, they hear it, and they chant it." Then he says, naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitam. Acyuta. Acyuta means Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's name is Acyuta. You'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā. Arjuna says to Kṛṣṇa, senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me acyuta [Bg. 1.21]. He's addressing Kṛṣṇa as Acyuta. Acyuta means "not," and cyuta means "falldown." So God never falls down. Therefore God's name is Acyuta. The Māyāvāda philosopher says that God has become man, being, I mean to say, complicated in māyā, being illusioned. But God is acyuta. God never falls down. Then what is the meaning of this acyuta? If God falls down, becomes under the clutches of māyā, then māyā is greater than God. Then how God is great? That is the fallacy of their argument. They say that "I am God, but now I am under the clutches of māyā. As soon as māyā will be cleared, then I am again God." But they cannot answer the question that "Why? You are God. Why you are under the clutches of māyā? How you fall down?" That answer, there is none. Because God is great, acyuta. He never falls down. Then how He can fall down? If He falls down under the clutches of māyā, then māyā becomes great, not God great.

Anyway, Vyāsadeva, Nārada says that "Even jñānaṁ nirañjanam..." Nirañjana means... Añjana... Añjana means ointment or designation, something covering. So nirañjanam. If one is elevated in knowledge, then he becomes free from this designated life. Our material life is añjana life, or designated life. Añjana... Just like we decorate. I think I wrote one article in my Back to Godhead in India, "Decoration of the Dead Body." This material qualification means decoration of the dead body. Actually, the body is dead, but there are certain men who wants to decorate this dead body. In India also, still the custom is in lower class men, when some of their relative die... I hear that here also they do such. They decorate the dead body very nicely. Here also the same system is there?

Devotees: Yes.



Prabhupāda: So śāstra says that what is the meaning of this decoration? What benefit the man who is dead, what benefit he's getting? Suppose you make lips very smiling, but actually that man is smiling? (laughter) Similarly, in India also, the cobbler class men, they, during their life, they will dress very wretchedly, not spend money, but after death they will purchase some velvet and cover the body and very nicely decorate, and with band party they'll take, lead the dead body. Aprāṇasyeva dehasya maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam. So it may be very much pleasing to the relatives. Just like the dead body's decorated. The sons of that dead body may see him, that "Oh, my father is smiling." (laughter) But he does not know where his father has already gone. You see?



So this material civilization is just like decorating the dead body. This body is dead. That is a fact. So long the soul is there, it is working, it is moving. Just like your coat. It is dead. But so long it is on your body, it appears the coat is moving. The coat is moving. But if somebody is very much astonished, "Oh, how nice the coat is moving!" (laughter) He does not know the coat cannot move. The coat is dead. But because the man is there who is putting on the coat, therefore the coat is moving, the pant is moving, the shoe is moving, the hat is moving. Similarly, this body is dead. It is numbered: this dead body will remain for such and such time. That is called duration of life. But people are interested with this dead body exactly like the cobbler class or these decorating men. So decoration of the dead body. Aprāṇasyeva... Aprāṇasya means dead. Aprāṇasyeva maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam. Loka-rañjanam: "It is very pleasing to the relatives." That's all. Similarly, to get liberation, nirañjanam-nirañjanam means to get out of this so-called decoration of the dead body-one requires to acquire knowledge.

So Nārada says, naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam. (aside:) Before the Deity, not like that. Yes. That "Even there is advanced knowledge for getting liberation, and if there is no mention of acyuta..." Acyuta-bhāva. Acyuta-bhāva means bhakti, acyuta-bhāva. Just like here, in this temple, there is Acyuta-bhāva. Acyuta-bhāva means Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There may be another room in the neighborhood, but the difference between this room and that room: here the atmosphere is acyuta-bhāva, Kṛṣṇa conscious. The other room is not that. Similarly, Nārada says, "Even high, elevated discussions of knowledge, how to get out of this designated or decorated body to self-realization platform, spiritual realization, but if that is acyuta-bhāva-varjita, if there is no mention of Kṛṣṇa consciousness," Vyāsadeva, er, Nārada says, na śobhate, "that does not look very well." Therefore the devotees, they're not very much interested with the dry philosophical speculation because there is no acyuta-bhāva. There is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They, they, they have been described as vāk-cāturyam, simply jugglery of words, Māyāvādī philosophical speculation. There must be acyuta... We have got sufficient philosophy, but it is plus Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the difference, Māyāvāda philosophy and our philosophy. We are discussing also... The Bhāgavata, each line is full of philosophy, each line, practical philosophy. But there is acyuta-bhāva, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the beauty. Bhagavad-gītā, it is full of philosophy, but there is Kṛṣṇa in the center. This philosophy's not dry. Other philosophies, they're simply dry, because that is without Kṛṣṇa. In the... You'll find Buddha philosophy or Māyāvāda philosophy or Jain philosophy, they're philosophy, but simply dry. There is no God consciousness. There is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So here it is condemned that naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ na śobhate: "It does not look very well. It is not first-class philosophy." Na śobhate. So kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare na cārpitaṁ karma yad apy akāraṇam: "Then what to speak of those who are karmīs?" The philosopher class, they are better than the karmīs because they are searching after something. They are making research by knowledge. But the karmīs, they are simply satisfied just like animals. They have been described in the Bhagavad-gītā as mūḍha. Mūḍha. Na māṁ prapadyante mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Mūḍha means ass. The karmīs have been described as ass, whole day working, a beast of burden. Simply, unnecessarily, they have piled up on their back so many work. They have no more interest, nothing, no more interest, neither philosophy, nor Kṛṣṇa, nor... Simply work hard and get some money and enjoy in eating, sleeping and mating, eat, drink, be merry and enjoy. That is their... That is... They are called karmīs. So Nārada says that "Even great philosophers who are trying to elevate themselves in the self-realization platform, if that sort of philosophy is acyuta-bhāva-varjitam, without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that does not look well. That is not first-class philosophy." Philosophy should be to search out Kṛṣṇa. That is philosophy. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. What is the Vedic knowledge searching after? Kṛṣṇa says, "Searching Me." Aham. Aham eva vedyaḥ: "I am the ultimate goal to understand." In another place Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate: [Bg. 7.19] "Those who are actually philosophers, actually wise and attained wisdom, and after many, many births: research work..." Research work is very good. But the end of research work is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore after many, many births, if one is actually wise and attained wisdom, then he finds Kṛṣṇa. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti: [Bg. 7.19] "He finds that Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is everything." But sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ: "But such kind of great soul is very rare." These are the statement of Bhagavad-gītā.

So the karmīs, they are mūḍhas. They do not... They are not wise. Unless one is wise, he cannot surrender unto Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta says, kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei baḍa catura. Catura means very intelligent. Only the first-class intelligent men in the human society, they can take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not even second class, what to speak of the third class? The third-class men are karmīs, the second-class men are philosophers, and the first-class men are devotees. So Nārada says that,

...na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam

kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare

na cārpitaṁ karma...

[SB 1.5.12]



Then what to speak of the karmīs? Their whole life is abhadra. Abhadra means abominable. Just like when earning money, I want to earn, say, millions of dollars. So I have to make plan. I have to go to black market, this and that, so many things. Then if I earn money, then how to invest it to make it double? Then how to keep it? Which bank I shall keep it so that my money will be safe? How I shall distribute it? So abhadra. Abhadra means the whole procedure is simply abominable, beginning to the end. [break] ...karmīs, simply full of anxiety: "How to earn money? How to distribute it? How to keep it? How to spend it? How to utilize it?" Therefore, it is advised that saintly persons, they should avoid money. As soon as... Money is great māyā. As soon it comes in my possession, then the same thing will come: "How to utilize it? How to do this? How to do that? How to do that?"



So Śrīdhara Svāmī says that, evaṁ bhūta-vijñānam acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ cet alaṁ tata na śobhate tadā sat-sādhana kāle phala kāle ca abhadraṁ duḥkha duḥkham yat kāmam.(?) Lust. We require money for fulfilling our lust. So it is, beginning, from the beginning to the end, it is abominable. Yadyapy akatak ceti cakarasya anvaya.(?) So therefore we should employ our money for Acyuta, for Kṛṣṇa. Then it will be nice. Otherwise, it will be simply abominable. How money can be utilized for Kṛṣṇa? How? If somebody says, "It is the same money. How, by spending it for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it become nice?" The question may be raised: "The money is the same. How you say that when it is employed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness business, it is nice, and when it is not employed, it is bad? Money is the same." The reply is there. Bhāgavata says. What is that reply?

Now cikitsitam. The example is given: just like milk. If you take... Milk is very nice food. But if you take more, then there will be disorder of the bowel. If you, by greediness, you take more milk, then there will be bowel complaint. Yes. Then, when there is bowel complaint, you go to physician. Then he gives you prescription: another milk preparation. What is that? Yogurt. If you say to the physician, "Well, I am suffering by taking milk preparation, and you are giving another milk preparation. How it will be cured?" No, it will be cured. Similarly, this material world, there is different type of use. As soon as you use it for your sense gratification, you'll be affected with material disease. And if you use it for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it will elevate you to the liberated condition. Just like the same example. In your diseased condition, if you go on again taking milk preparation as it is, then it will increase your bowel complaint, but if you take in another form, in prasādam, under the direction of the authority, then you, the same thing, the same enjoyment, that is, material, will elevate you to the liberated stage.

So we should employ... Without Kṛṣṇa, either philosophy, or karma, or jñāna, or yoga, they are useless. Nārada says that "You should write books simply describing about Acyuta, or Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead." He says,

atho mahā-bhāga bhavān amogha-dṛk

śuci-śravāḥ satya-rato dhṛta-vrataḥ

urukramasyākhila-bandha-muktaye

samādhinānusmara tad-viceṣṭitam

[SB 1.5.13]



"Now you are mahā-bhāga. You are most fortunate man." Vyāsadeva is not ordinary. Just see. Nārada is his spiritual master. He's not ordinary man. And besides that, he is taken as incarnation of God. Mahā-bhāga. Atho mahā-bhāga bhavān amogha-dṛk: "Your vision is without any sin." Because he has dedicated his life to present the Vedic literature for the benefit of the human society, that "They have forgotten God, Kṛṣṇa. Let me help." Therefore, he is trying to give all this Vedic literature.



That is the duty of all devotee, to give literature so that people may take benefit out of it. Just like about the Gosvāmīs, it is stated about the Gosvāmīs,

nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau

lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-padāravinda-bhajanānandena mattālikau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau srī-jīva-gopālakau



The six Gosvāmīs, they engaged themselves in literary work. Nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika. They are... You'll find in Rūpa Gosvāmī's books. Oh, how many references are there! From Purāṇas, from Vedas, from this literature, that literature. Highly, great scholars. So that is one of the duty. We have given the list of qualification of a devotee. One of the qualification is poetic. Poetic means not write poetry. Poetic means literary man. They must give literature. Naturally they'll give. That is the nature of devotee. Because without literature, how can we enlighten the people at large? My Guru Mahārāja used to say that this press is bṛhad-mṛdaṅga. Bṛhat means bigger, at large, bigger mṛdaṅga, bigger. Just like we are playing mṛdaṅga. This mṛdaṅga can be vibrated in the neighboring quarter, but our mṛdaṅga, Back to Godhead, that will go far, far away. So therefore this press was considered by my Guru Mahārāja as bṛhad-mṛdaṅga. He said. You'll find in the picture: there is this mṛdaṅga and press. He was very much fond of press. In the very beginning of his, this life, he started one press. You'll find in his life a small press.



So this press propaganda, this literary propaganda, is required because it is not sentiment. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not sentiment. It is not that some sentimental people have gathered here and dancing and chanting. No. There is background. There is philosophical background. There is theological understanding. It is not blind or sentimental. So therefore Nārada advises Vyāsadeva that "You are not only fortunate, but you are amogha-dṛk. Your vision is perfect because you are liberated." Amogha. Our vision-we are not perfect. Therefore you'll find in Vedic version, anuśṛṇuyet, anuvarṇayet. Anu. Anu means following. Following. We have to follow the ācāryas. Just like Vyāsadeva. Amogha-dṛk: his vision is without any impediment. There are four kinds of impediments for the conditioned soul. What are those? That we are subjected to commit error. Any man will commit error because he's conditioned, he'll be illusioned, and he will try to cheat, and his senses are imperfect. These four imperfectness of a conditioned soul. Anywhere, you take any great man, any big man, he has got these four imperfections. Therefore without liberated man, you cannot get real knowledge. Therefore you'll find even the so-called scientists, astrologer, and the astronomer, or... They're studying this nature, "Perhaps," "It might be," because they have no clear vision. And another scientist comes. They changes. But you'll find in the Vedic literature, everything clear understanding. Just like the Vedic literature says the division of the living entities. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi. Accurate number is that "There are 900,000 species of life in the water." Accurate. So they might have said ten, one million, or 800,000. No. Nine hundred thousand. Nine hundred thousand. Because accurate, amogha-dṛk, they have been placed. How it has been acquired? The..., the same process: paramparā, amogha-dṛk. If you receive knowledge from the person who is liberated, then it is all right.

So Vyāsadeva is liberated person. Amogha-dṛk. He's amogha-dṛk. Bhavān amogha-dṛk śuci-śravāḥ: "And your behavior is pure." Śuci-śravāḥ: "You have heard the Vedic knowledge from right sources, from pure sources." Śuci-śravāḥ satya-rataḥ. Satya-rataḥ means "You are dedicated to the Absolute Truth." These are the qualification. One must be liberated, one must be pure, one must be dedicated to the service of the Lord, and dhṛta-vrataḥ, and one must be determined. Then he can do something to the human society. Not a conditioned soul, by whims he can manufacture something, that "I can do something to the human..." It is not possible. Here are the qualifications, that,

atho mahā-bhāga bhavān amogha-dṛk

śuci-śravāḥ satya-rato dhṛta-vrataḥ

urukramasyākhila-bandha-muktaye...



"If you actually desire to get this suffering humanity to become liberated from all kinds of material bondage, then, samādhinā." Samādhinā: in samādhi, in trance. Samādhinā, anusmara... Here the same thing, anusmara. The, as I told you before, anu. Anu means following. Just like Vyāsadeva. Even after so many qualifications, he has a spiritual master, Nārada. Not that because he's incarnation of God, not that because he's so learned, so great scholar and śuci-śravāḥ, and dedicated his life for the benefit of the human society... So many good qualifications. Still, you see practically: he has got a spiritual master, and-Nārada-and he's giving instruction.



So this is necessary. Therefore it is said samādhinā, means "Don't manufacture your meditation." Samādhi, this trance by meditation, cannot be attained by something manufacturing. Anu: "Just follow the great predecessor ācārya." Samādhinā anusmara tad-viceṣṭitam. Tat means the acyuta, acyuta, the activities of the Lord. Therefore we have to learn Kṛṣṇa consciousness through the disciplic succession. Our, this sampradāya, the Gauḍīya-sampradāya, is also in the same line-Nārada, Vyāsadeva. Nārada is the disciple of Brahmā. It is, therefore, called, this sampradāya... This party is called Brahma-sampradāya. Brahma-madhva-gauḍīya-brahma-sampradāya. Originally from Brahmā. Brahmā instructed Nārada. You'll find in the Bhāgavata. Brahmā is instructing Nārada. Now you see Nārada is instructing Vyāsadeva. Similarly, Vyāsadeva instructed Madhva Muni. Now, Madhva Muni, by disciplic succession, Mādhavendra Purī. Now, Mādhavendra Purī instructed Īśvara Purī. Īśvara Purī instructed Lord Caitanya. Lord Caitanya instructed the six Gosvāmīs. The six Gosvāmīs instructed Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. Kṛṣṇadāsa instructed Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Viśvanātha Cakravartī. Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī. In this way, there is a clear line of disciplic succession.

So that is recommended here, that samādhinā. Samādhinā, meditation, anusmara: "Don't manufacture your meditation." Just like there are so many meditators. They have manufactured their own way of meditation. That is not recommended, anusmara. Anu means "Follow. You become thoughtful, you think, but taking the instruction from higher authority." Just like Arjuna is taking instruction from Kṛṣṇa. He is thinking, "Whether I shall fight or not fight?" So you become thoughtful. That's very nice. But don't be thoughtful without accepting a spiritual master. That thoughtfulness will not help you, because you are conditioned. You are, you have got the four kinds of defects. So that defect will not... Simply by becoming philosopher, speculator, will not help you. Athāpi te deva ciraṁ vicinvan [SB 10.14.29]. You cannot understand God for millions and millions of thinking. No, it is not possible.

Panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām [Bs. 5.34]. That is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Muni-puṅgava. Muni-puṅgava means "the greatest of all thoughtful men." Muni means mental speculator, and puṅgava means first class, the highest, topmost. Puṅgava. So if such thoughtful speculators go on speculating about understanding God... How? Vāyor athāpi manasaḥ. In the speed of, in the velocity of air and mind. Not sputnik. A sputnik can run... Your mechanical can run, say, eighteen thousand miles per hour, but the air, that can run still more quicker. And the mind can run still more quicker. So here it is recommended that if one is seated not on the ordinary airplane, but the airplane of air... The yogis can do that. The yogis know how to rise on the aeroplane of air, and they can immediately transfer to any planet. Vāyoḥ. Vāyor athāpi. There were... There were planes made of air. Here... Just like now we have manufactured the planes, iron or aluminium, but there are planes of air, and similarly, there are planes of mind. You see?

So that, these are explained in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām. And manufactured by greatest, stalwart thinker, or scientist. And going in this speed for many, many thousands of years. Still, you cannot reach where is Kṛṣṇaloka.

panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo

vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām

so 'py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve

[Bs. 5.34]



Still... Just like when we go to the...by airplane above the cloud, we see, still, the sky is unlimited. That is our experience. Still, the sunshine is unlimited, and we do not know where is the sun. Similarly, if one goes on the plane of mind and air, try to find out the Absolute Truth, it is not possible. Even many, many years, no, no. Still it remains avicintya-tattve, still inconceivable.



But this process, if you take anu... Anuvarṇaye. If you take the process of... Just like the same example, as I told you, that there are 900,000's species of life in the water. Now, if you make research, it is impossible for you, whether actually... If you want to, want to know by experimental knowledge, "Let me see how far this Vedic instruction is right, that there are 900,000 thousand species of...," you, you...whatever experience you have got, it is not even one thousand species of life you have seen. But there are 900,000 species of life. But if you accept this Vedic knowledge, then your knowledge is there immediately.

So thing is that we have to take knowledge from the perfect. Then, even it is very difficult, but the knowledge is there. Even it is very difficult. Just like we are taking knowledge from Kṛṣṇa. By our own effort, by the plane of mind and plane of air, we cannot reach where is Kṛṣṇaloka. But Kṛṣṇa says that mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām: [Bg. 9.25] "Those who are My devotees, they can reach to My planet." So at least, we know that Kṛṣṇa has got a planet, and if we take to devotional service, then we can go. Then why not try? There is no loss, but if there is such gain that we can go to Kṛṣṇaloka, so why not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, simply chanting and dancing and taking prasādam? Is it very difficult job? The authority's Kṛṣṇa. It is confirmed by Vyāsadeva. It is confirmed by Nārada. It is confirmed...

Therefore Arjuna says that "Kṛṣṇa, whatever You are speaking in the Bhagavad-gītā, I accept in toto." That is study of Bhagavad-gītā. I do not select, "Oh, this portion is nice. I accept." Ardha-kukkuṭī-nyāya: [Cc. Ādi-līlā 5.176] "The back portion is nice. It is giving, the hen, daily, one egg. It is very nice. And the mouth portion is expensive. Cut it." The fool does not know if you cut this portion, that portion will be stopped also. So these, all these ordinary commentator... Just like Gandhi. He wanted to prove his nonviolence some way or other from Bhagavad-gītā. How he can prove? This is the same thing, that he was finding out, "If there is something, simply cutting the head, if I can get egg?" That is not possible. That is not... If we have to accept Bhagavad-gītā just like Arjuna says, that sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye yad vadasi keśava: [Bg. 10.14] "My dear Kṛṣṇa, Keśava, whatever You are saying, I accept in toto. And this is confirmed by such authorities like Devala, Vyāsa, Asita. It is not that because we are friends, I am accepting You, but I know it is confirmed by such great authorities like Nārada, Asita, Vyāsa."

So we have to follow. This is called anu. Anu means following. Therefore it is recommended by Nārada that samādhinā anusmara: "You try to understand the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by samādhi, by trance, meditation, by following the instruction of me, or predecessors, like that." This is the way.

That's all right. (end)



690613SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.13

-

New Vrindaban, June 13, 1969



Prabhupāda:



atho mahā-bhāga bhavān amogha-dṛk

śuci-śravāḥ satya-rato dhṛta-vrataḥ

urukramasyākhila-bandha-muktaye

samādhinānusmara tad-viceṣṭitam

[SB 1.5.13]



Each and every word of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, full of volumes of explanation, each and every word. This is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Vidyā-bhāgavatāvadhi. One's learning will be understood when he's able to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Vidyā. Vidyā means learning, not this science, that science. When one can understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in true perspective, then he's to be understood that he has finished his all educational advancement. Avadhi. Avadhi means "this is the limit of education." Vidyā-bhāgavatāvadhi.



So here Nārada says that akhila-bandha-muktaye: "You should present literature for the people so that they can become liberated from this conditional stage of life, not that you should more and more entangle them in this conditional..." That is the main theme of Nārada's instruction to Vyāsadeva: "Why should you present rubbish literature to continue the conditional stage?" Whole Vedic civilization is meant for giving liberation to the living entities from this material bondage. People do not know what is the aim of education. The aim of education, the aim of civilization, perfection of civilization, should be how people should get liberated from this conditional life. That is the whole scheme of Vedic civilization, to give liberation to the people.

So it is said: akhila-bandha-muktaye. Samādhinā, akhilasya bandhasya muktaye, akhilasya bandhasya. We are in conditional stage, perpetually bound up by the laws of material nature. This is our status. And Nārada is giving instruction to Vyāsadeva that "Present literature so that they can become liberated. Don't give them more and more opportunity to continue this conditional life." Akhila-bandha. Akhila. Akhila means complete, wholesale. And who can give this contribution? That is also stated, that atho mahā-bhāga bhavān amogha-dṛk. Whose vision is clear. Whose vision is clear. (about a child:) He's disturb.

Woman devotee: Is he disturbing you?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Woman devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Clear vision. Unless one has clear vision, how he can do welfare activities? You do not know what is welfare. His vision is clouded. If one's vision is clouded, if you do not know what is the destination of your journey, how you can make progress? Therefore the qualification... Those who are prepared to do good to the human society, they must have clear vision. Then where is the clear vision? Everyone is becoming leader. Everyone is trying to lead people. But he himself is blind. He does not know what is the end of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. So therefore Vyāsadeva can do it because he has clear vision. Nārada certifies. Nārada knows his disciple, what is the position. A spiritual master knows what is the condition. Just like a physician knows. By simply feeling the beating of pulse, a... An expert physician can know what is the condition of this patient, and he treats him and gives him medicine accordingly. Similarly, a spiritual master who is actually spiritual master, he can know, he knows the pulse-beating of the disciple, and he therefore gives him particular kind of medicine so that he may be cured.



So Nārada Muni knows what is the status of Vyāsadeva. He knows that he has got clear vision. Amogha-dṛk. Śrīdhara Svāmī says, amogha. Amogha means... Mogha means sinful, and amogha means without any sin. Amogha. So long one lives sinful life, he cannot have clear vision. Diseased condition. How? "Physician, heal thyself." He cannot have clear vision. Therefore amogha-dṛk means he is liberated person. He can see. Amogha-dṛk. Dṛk means vision. Amogha-dṛk. And Śuci-śravāḥ. Śuci-śravāḥ. Śuci-śravāḥ means whose śravāḥ, means aural reception... śuci. Śuci means pure. Who has received knowledge by aural reception in pure heart, or from the pure source. Śuci-śravāḥ. Śuci means pure. Śravāḥ. Śravāḥ means hearing. Śuci... These are the qualification of the person who can actually do benefit to the human society. Not that everyone can do. That is the mistake of the... Everyone is giving some idea and some theory that "This way there will be peace, there will be nice thing in the world." But he does not know that he has to receive from the pure source by aural reception. One has to hear from the pure source what is actually benefit to the human society. These are the qualifications. Śuci-śravāḥ. Then next word is satya-rataḥ. Satya means truth, and rataḥ means engaged. "One who is engaged in the matter of the Absolute Truth," not relative truth. Absolute, satya-rataḥ. And dhṛta-vrataḥ. Dhṛta-vrataḥ. Vrata. Vrata means vow, and dhṛta means who has taken vow that "I shall do this." These are the qualifications.

Now, when these qualifications are there, then Nārada Muni entrusts Vyāsadeva that "You can liberate all the conditioned souls." How? Conditioned souls... Samādhinā anusmara tad-viceṣṭitam: "Simply you try to contemplate, meditate, on the activities of the Supreme Lord." Samādhinā. This is samādhi. Yoga process means to come to the stage of samādhi. Aṣṭāṅga-yoga. Yoga means there are eight different stages, and the last stage is called samādhi. The first stage is yama, saṁyama, controlling the senses. Yoga indriya-saṁyama. The beginning of yoga system means you have to control your senses. This is the first beginning. It is not a play thing, that you do all nonsense and you become a yogi. No. These things are very clearly explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. You have to regulate your life. You have to stop sex life. You have to eat certain procedure. You have to sit under certain procedure. In this way, you have to follow so many regulative principles. That is called yama. And niyama. Niyama means regulative principles. Yama means controlling the senses. Yama, niyama. Then āsana. Then sitting posture. Generally, in these yoga societies in your country, they give some lesson on the sitting posture, and people become captivated that he is practicing yoga. No. First one has to follow regulative principles and control the senses, then practice the sitting postures. Yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma. And when your sitting posture is correct, then you can exercise breathing. Exercise. Breathing exercise means the nostril which is stopped breathing. You have to press that side and try to breathe from the other side. In this way, breathing exercise. Yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma. This is called prāṇāyāma.

Then dhāraṇā, meditation. And what is that meditation? That meditation... Here it is recommended, tad-viceṣṭitam: "meditation on the activities of the Supreme Lord." If the Supreme Lord is impersonal, then where is the question of activities? And how you can concentrate your mind something impersonal? Bhagavad-gītā says that kleśaḥ adhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām: "Those who are trying to meditate on the impersonal feature, impersonal feature, their process is very troublesome." Kleśo 'dhikataraḥ. Adhikatara means greater. Any spiritual realization, without painstaking, without accepting some voluntary trouble... And nobody can very easily..., eating, drinking, merrying. No, that will... That is not spiritual advancement. One has to accept voluntarily some principles. That is called tapasya. So dhyāna. Dhyāna means meditation. So that dhyāna.

Then dhāraṇā. Dhāraṇā means meditating, then the subject matter will be fixed up in your heart. It will not move. Not that every day I am meditating on some new subject, no. The meditation is viṣṇu-mūrti. Actually those who are yogis, they meditate on the four-handed viṣṇu-mūrti. Mat-paraḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, mat-paraḥ: "unto Me," either Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. That is meditation. Dhyāna, dhāraṇā. And one, when one is practiced meditating, first beginning from the lotus feet... These things are all explained in the Bhāgavata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavata, Bhagavad-gītā. Then gradually, when you are practiced to think of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet or Viṣṇu's lotus feet, then you proceed-then the thighs, then the waist, then the chest, then the mouth, I mean to, face, then... In this way, one after another, one after another, you have to meditate. In this way, when your meditation is fixed up, that is called dhāraṇā. Dhāraṇā. It is not moving. Dhyāna, dhāraṇā.

Then pratyāhāra. Pratyāhāra means that your senses have been withdrawn from material engagement. The example is just like the tortoise. The tortoise can wind up all these parts of the limbs of the body within immediately. And when it is required, he can expand. So pratyāhāra means that you have to withdraw the sensual activities inside. When you withdraw your senses for inside activities, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You have to think of always how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Therefore hṛṣīka, hṛṣīka means the senses, and hṛṣīkeśa means the master of the senses. Kṛṣṇa is the master of the senses. I am possessing my hand, but actually the owner of the hand is Kṛṣṇa. These things are very nicely explained in Bhagavad-gītā. Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. Suppose you are writing with your hands. So your memory must be acting; otherwise you cannot write. If your memory, if your brain, does not act, how you can write? Suppose you are typing. If memory does not act, then what is the use of this hand or your leg? Then Bhagavad-gītā says, Kṛṣṇa says, sarvasya cāham hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: "I am sitting in everyone's heart." Mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam: "The knowledge and memory is from Me." Therefore, when Kṛṣṇa gives you memorization, gives you knowledge, then you can write or do something.

Therefore this hand is not yours; it is Kṛṣṇa's. And Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to know that "This hand does not belong to me. It is Kṛṣṇa's. Therefore it must be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service." Hṛṣīka, "These indriya, the sense," hṛṣīkeṇa, by hṛṣīkeṇa, "by these senses, Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the sense should be served." Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], "service." Bhaktir ucyate: "This is bhakti." Bhakti is nothing new or something extraordinary. Simply to know, to be conscious that "All my senses, they belong to Kṛṣṇa." Just like I am sitting here. These boys who are conducting this New Vrindaban, they have kindly given me this seat. So this is an example. So this seat I am not... I am a sannyāsī. This seat does not belong to me, but I am sitting very comfortably because they have given to me. Similarly, these hand, legs, all these senses, five knowledge-acquiring senses and five active senses, ten kinds of senses, and the mind is in the center-all these senses belong to Kṛṣṇa.

So,

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



What is the bhakti, Kṛṣṇa consciousness? That one has to purify the senses. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Now I am claiming that "This hand is my hand. This is mine. This is my. This is I. This is my. This is..." This is the disease. Ahaṁ mameti janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. What is illusion? Illu... This is illusion: "my and mine." Everyone. Everyone is claiming, "It is my body. It is my wife. It is my child. It is my country. It is my society, my this, my, my, my..." And "I." Unless "I," there is no "my."



So ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], this is the disease. And Kṛṣṇa consciousness is to cure the disease, this cure diseases, to cure this illusion. What is that? When I understand that "I have no existence without Kṛṣṇa. I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. In that sense, I am Kṛṣṇa's," then my... That means to understand one's identification. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Because I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, then what is my duty? To serve Kṛṣṇa. There is no other duty. Any other duty I manufacture, that is illusion. That is māyā, any duty I manufacture. So under illusion, I am manufacturing duties. This is called conditional life. So Vyāsadeva is advised that akhila-bandha-muktaye:"People are under illusion, 'I' and 'mine.' So, just try to get them liberated from this illusion." This is Vaiṣṇava's duty. Just like Nārada is advising Vyāsadeva, Vyāsadeva is advising his disciple Madhvācārya. He is advising his disciple. This is Vaiṣṇavism. They are not concerned for personal self. Akhila-bandha-muktaye: "Just try to liberate all these conditioned souls." Just like Lord Jesus Christ. For himself... He was son of God. He had nothing to do. God consciousness, he was. He's perfectly... He knows everything. But why he was crucified? Because he wanted to work for others. That is Vaiṣṇavism.

Lord Caitanya advises, therefore, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Kṛṣṇa consciousness means whomever you meet... Suppose I practice some yoga practice. Suppose I become perfect. So that I make for myself. For myself. But Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice... Just like Vyāsadeva is advised, "For others, just..." Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. So Nārada advises that "You do this." What is that? Urukramasya. Each word is meaningful. Urukrama. Uru means uncommon. Uru. Uru means great. And krama. Krama means activities. So who is Urukrama? Urukrama is Kṛṣṇa, God. His activities are uncommon. Just see. This Pacific Ocean is just like in a cup. And it is floating in the sky. Is it not? We see: "Oh, it is vast ocean." But what is the position of this? This vast ocean is in a cup, and it is floating in the sky. That's all. Just see. This is called urukrama. This is God's activity. Can you float a cup of water in the sky? Is it possible? Let any scientist come and make any arrangement. They have discovered all this gravity of... What is called? Gravitation. So many things they have discovered. But let them fly a cup of water in the sky. Is it possible? Is there any scientist?

Therefore wonderful activities means... The wonderful actor means Kṛṣṇa, Urukrama. Uru, urukrama... Just like Vāmanadeva. Vāmanadeva, He asked Bali Mahārāja to give Him land covering His three feet. So he said, "My dear Sir, You are asking from me land. You ask something more. Your feet is so small. What you'll do with these three feet?" No. He said, "Yes, it is all right." So by the one feet, the whole universe became covered, upside. And another feet, the downside. And then there is no place to step the another feet. Therefore it is called urukrama. Just like Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, at the age of seven years, He lifted the Govardhana Hill. Just like the children plucks out a flower like this, He immediately lifted. This is called urukrama, urukrama, uncommon, wonderful. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is, another name is, Urukrama.

So here it is stated that tad-viceṣṭitam. Whose? His activities. Whose activities? Urukramasya, "who acts wonderfully." Not that somebody is meditating-his activities should be described. What wonderful things he has done? We are accepting anyone as God, but we do not test what, what proof he has given to become God? Here is God: Urukrama. Here is God. We accept Kṛṣṇa as God. He has done from the very childhood uncommon, wonderful activities. We are not fool that we accept somebody, a nonsense having a great beard, and we accept God. No. We must see that he has wonderful activities. What is that wonderful activities? First of all test.

So here it is said, urukramasya. "If you describe the activities of the Supreme Lord, who acts wonderfully, then..." Samādhinā. That you can... That samādhi, yoga-samādhi. After passing all these stages, when one comes to the samādhi, fixed up, his concentration, meditation, fixed up on Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu, that is called samādhi, and in that samādhi, one can become liberated simply by thinking of the activities of the Lord. How it is so? It is described in the Bhagavad-gītā that,

janma karma ca me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti kaunteya

[Bg. 4.9]



"My dear son of Kuntī, Arjuna, if somebody knows actually what are My activities, then simply by knowing what are My activities, he becomes liberated." Just see how Bhagavad-gītā and Bhāgavata is working. What is said by... This is called paramparā system, that the what is spoken in the Bhagavad-gītā by the Lord Himself is here also confirmed by Nārada. You don't find any contradiction. In the Bhagavad-gītā... Just like Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. And what we are saying? That "You give up everything. Just become Kṛṣṇa conscious." The same thing. Therefore it is for liberation. What was spoken by God Himself directly, the same thing is spoken by Nārada, and same thing we are speaking also.



So these are the points how one can spiritually make advance. Urukramasya akhila-bandha-muktaye, samādhinā anusmara tad-viceṣṭitam. Tad-viceṣṭitam means "His activities." Kṛṣṇa also says, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, tyaktvā deham [Bg. 4.9]. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei guru haya: [Cc. Madhya 8.128] "Anyone who understands factually what are the activities of Kṛṣṇa, what is Kṛṣṇa, he is spiritual master. He is spiritual..." Therefore Vyāsadeva... Nārada is spiritual master, Vyāsadeva is spiritual master, or anyone who knows by following their footprints, he is also spiritual master. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei guru haya [Cc. Madhya 8.128]. And one who knows kṛṣṇa-tattva, he becomes immediately liberated. Because it is said here, akhila-bandha-muktaye, "liberated from all conditions of material nature."

So a spiritual master means one who knows Kṛṣṇa. And as soon as one knows Kṛṣṇa, he's liberated. Therefore a spiritual master is liberated. Or a spiritual master or anyone who knows kṛṣṇa-tattva, he immediately liberated. Akhila-bandha-muktaye. Samādhinā, that "This has to be meditated." Anusmara. This another word, anusmara. Anusmara means you don't manufacture your meditation. You try to follow the footprints who have had actually meditated. So then your meditation will be... Not that you manufacture some process of meditation and you get perfection. No, anusmara. And again he says... What is the subject matter of meditation? Tad-viceṣṭitam, the activities of the Lord. So if we simply remember how Kṛṣṇa is teaching Arjuna, what He is speaking, and how Arjuna is receiving, that is meditation. That is meditation.

Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu approved one brāhmaṇa. He was illiterate. He could not know what is the Sanskrit alphabet or character, what to speak of reading. But when he was initiated, his spiritual master said, "You read daily so many chapters of Bhagavad-gītā." The spiritual master knew that he is illiterate. And he also knew that "I am illiterate. I cannot know what is alphabet, Sanskrit." Still, the order of spiritual master, that is... This is discipleship. "All right, my spiritual master, I shall try to read." So how he was reading? He, he took the book, and he was seeing the book, and "Ohhhh," like... That's all. His friends, who knew that this man is illiterate, and what he is reading: "Mr. such-and-such, how you are reading?" Criticizing. He was silent because he knew that "I am illiterate. My friends are criticizing. That's all right. What can I do?"

Then Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw that these things are going on in the Raṅganātha temple. But He saw that "This brāhmaṇa is very gentle and grave, and he's handling the book. That's all." So He inquired, "My dear brāhmaṇa, what you are reading?" He said... He could understand that "He's not criticizing. He's a, mean, a great man." So he said, "Sir, what can I say? My spiritual master asked me to read every day Bhagavad-gītā, so many chapters, but I am illiterate. I cannot read. Therefore I have taken the book, simply seeing. That's all. What can I do?" "But I see you are sometimes crying. You must be reading. Otherwise, how you are feeling and you are crying?" "Yes, I am feeling. That's a fact." "How, what is that?" "Now, as soon as I take this book, Bhagavad-gītā, the picture of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna comes before me. I see that both Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are sitting on the chariot, and Kṛṣṇa is instructing Bhagavad-gītā. So I am appreciating how Lord is kind, that He has accepted the charioteer, to become a charioteer of His devotee. He's so kind. So when I feel this, that 'Kṛṣṇa is so kind that He become the servant of His servant,' that feeling gives me some ecstasy, and I cry." Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately embraced him. "Your Bhagavad-gītā reading is perfect."

Devotees: Haribol!



Prabhupāda: Yes. So this is the thing, tad-viceṣṭitam. He's simply thinking of the activities of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. That's all. That is perfect reading of Bhagavad-gītā. It does not require to read Bhagavad-gītā by your academic education. If you simply hear from the authoritative source the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, and if you simply meditate upon that speech, that instruction, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa instructed like this. Arjuna received like this. He questioned like this. He answered like this," that is meditation, perfect meditation, and you become liberated. Tad-viceṣṭitam. It is not very difficult job. Simply you have to receive. Therefore satya-śravāḥ, śuci-śravāḥ. Śuci-śravāḥ. You have to hear from the pure source, give aural reception, and think of it, meditate upon it. Simply by doing this, you are liberated. These are not bluff. Here is the evidence. Simply receive the message from the right source and contemplate and meditate upon that instruction. You are liberated. Chanting and hearing. Hearing and... śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. First hearing, then chanting. Hear from the right source and discuss amongst yourselves. Iṣṭagoṣṭhi. Then the perfection.



So samādhinā anusmara tad-viceṣṭitam, śuci, śuddhyā, śravā, yaśa, satye rataḥ dhṛtāni ghṛtāni yasya bhavān, evaṁ mahā-guṇas tāvad atha urukramasya vidhitaṁ ceṣṭitaṁ līlā samādhinā citta, cittaika, aikāgrena.(?) This samādhi. Samādhi does not mean something artificial. Here Śrīdhara Swami says, citta aikāgrena. Citta means your mind, or heart, completely absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought. That means Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is samādhi. Citta aikāgrena. Ekāgra,(?) without diverting your heart and mind to any other business, if you simply be engaged twenty-four hours in Kṛṣṇa's activities, that is samādhi. That is samādhi. So by yoga process, one has to come to this platform of samādhi. That is the perfection of yoga. And this Kṛṣṇa consciousness is directly that stage. Therefore it is the perfect yoga system. One has to come to that stage, samādhi. And samādhi means without any diversion, you have to think always of Kṛṣṇa. So even a... Just like this man, this brāhmaṇa. He was simply... He was illiterate. He did not know what is Bhagavad-gītā's character, what is written there. But there is samādhi. He was thinking of "Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, how they are talking, how they are sitting, how the chariot is going, how Kṛṣṇa is nice." This is thinking. That is samādhi. Samādhi is not an artificial thing, by pressing your nose, or this or... That is... These things are recommended for the third-class men who cannot concentrate his mind in Kṛṣṇa, for the fourth-class, third-class men. It is not for the first-class man. A first-class man is automatically Kṛṣṇa conscious.

So these things are to be studied very minutely and understood, and then the things are very easy. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. Now, the samādhi, samādhinā. Śrīdhara... We have to take the comments of authorities, that here you see samādhinā citta aikāgrena. Actually, that is samādhi. Now, these sitting posture, these breathing exercise, controlling the senses and mind-everything means that you have to make your mind so nice that it will never deviate from Kṛṣṇa. So these are different types of exercise. Just like by exercise you can make your circulation of the blood nicely, you keep yourself healthy, similarly, the all these yogic process means to come to the stage of samādhi. Samādhi. And that is said also in the authoritative yogic literature. But what is that samādhi? Samādhi means not to deviate. The mind should always be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought without any deviation.

So anyone who is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, he is in samādhi. Anyone who is cooking for Kṛṣṇa, he is in samādhi. Anyones who is typing for Kṛṣṇa, he is in samādhi. Anyone who is working in the field for Kṛṣṇa, he is in samādhi. Because his consciousness is that "I am doing here for satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa." Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Anuśīlanam, cultivation of Kṛṣṇa knowledge favorably, not unfavorably. Then it is perfection. Bhaktir uttamā. Ānukūlyena. Anyābhilaṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. When you cook, if you think, "Oh, this nice thing is being cooked. I shall eat it very nicely," then it is not Kṛṣṇa. But while cooking, if you think, "Let me do it very nicely so that Kṛṣṇa will taste it," it is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The same thing. Activities is the same, but the consciousness is different. That is samādhi.

So samādhi is not very extraordinary thing. One has to become simply serious and sincere to Kṛṣṇa. Then he is in samādhi. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā:

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

[Bg. 6.47]



"Anyone who is always thinking of Me within his heart and he's engaged in My service, he's first-class yogi." So any person who is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who's acting simply for Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours, he's in samādhi. Samādhinā tad, anusmara tad-viceṣṭitam. Anusmara: "That meditation should not be manufactured by you, but under the direction of the representative of Kṛṣṇa." Therefore it is called anusmara.



Cittaga..., akhilasya bandhasya muktaye. Then again, Śrīdhara Svāmī says that "This process is for giving liberation from all kinds of material bondage." Akhilasya bandhasya muktaye tam anusmara smṛtya varṇayata.(?) And again Śrīdhara Svāmī gives note herewith that "Not only you meditate, but you preach. That will help your meditation." Just like I am speaking to you. I am meditating simultaneously. Unless I remember, how can I speak to you? Unless my attention is concentrated without any diversion in Kṛṣṇa subject matter, how can I speak to you? So that is also samādhi. Don't think that one who is simply sitting, he is in samādhi. One who is preaching, he's also in samādhi, because he's thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, how he can talk of Kṛṣṇa if he does not think of Kṛṣṇa? Śrīdhara Swami gives... Tam anusmara smṛtya varṇayata. Varṇayata means "Describe also, preach." Ity artha. Etac ca vakhyantaram iti madhyama-puruṣa-prayogaḥ.(?)

So this preaching, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23], simply hearing of Kṛṣṇa and chanting of Kṛṣṇa, preaching of Kṛṣṇa, is samādhi. And this will make one liberated, akhila-bandha-muktaye, from all kinds of bondage, material bondage.

Thank you very much. [break]



...liberation, oh, she is canvassing me, "Will you kindly take my service?" Muktiḥ mukulitāñjali sevate asmān: "We are devotees of Kṛṣṇa. Oh, mukti is standing on my door and just trying to, begging, 'May I serve you? May I serve you? What can I do for you? What can I do for you?" Muktiḥ mukulitāñjali means the folded hand. Mukti is serving us always in folded hands. We are not very much anxious for mukti, or liberation. Liberation is at our door. That means Kṛṣṇa... A bhakta, Kṛṣṇa devotee, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is already liberated. Liberated is very... Just like if a person is M.A., that means he has already passed all other examinations. Muktiḥ mukulitāñjali... This Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. Try to understand and preach. Just like Śrīdhara Mahārāja: varṇaya, smṛtya varṇaya ity arataḥ. Don't simply be satisfied that you are simply thinking, but try to preach. That will make your life sublime. (end)



690616SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.13

-

New Vrindaban, June 16, 1969



Prabhupāda: So Nārada Muni is instructing his disciple Vyāsadeva to write books specially by which one may be helped, everyone will be helped, to cross over the nescience, akhila-bandha-muktaye, to become liberated from all conditional stage. We are spirit soul. We cannot be under any material condition. Just like our normal condition is healthy life, not under feverish condition. That is abnormal life. If one is attacked with fever, that is not his normal life. That is temporary, abnormal life. Actual life is healthy life. We should nicely eat. We shall nicely sleep. We shall work very nicely. We..., our brain must work very nicely. These are healthy signs. But when I cannot work nicely, I cannot sleep nicely, I cannot work nicely, I cannot act my brain very nicely, that means abnormal condition. So at that time, he requires to be treated by expert physician.



So here is the expert physician, Nārada Muni. And he is advising his disciple to make him expert. This is called paramparā system. In the same way, we are coming from the same disciplic succession. As Nārada Muni was expert physician for curing this material disease, similarly, he made Vyāsadeva expert physician; Vyāsadeva made Madhvācārya expert physician. So one has to come down in that disciplic succession and become expert physician, or bona fide spiritual master. Here, as we require to go to a physician, to a medical man, for curing our material, I mean, bodily diseases, similarly, to cure our material disease, one has to approach an expert spiritual, bona fide spiritual master. Otherwise it is not possible. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. That is the injunction of the Vedas. Tad-vijñānārtham. If you want to know what is your healthy life, normal life, spiritual life...

Spiritual life means normal life, and material life means diseased life. Therefore we are always suffering in materialistic way of life. Diseased condition means suffering. So when we have got suffering, how we can say, "It is normal life. It is healthy life"? The common sense. Can any materialistic way, those who are living in a materialistic, can say that "I am very happy"? No. That cannot be. That cannot be. This is diseased condition. One who is intelligent, he can understand that "This is diseased life. Why I am suffering?" That is intelligence.

Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī. He was minister, a very big post, government minister, chief man. Not only minister-Nawab Hussain Shah entrusted the whole kingdom in his hand: "You manage, whatever you like." Because he knew that "Here is a trustworthy man. He'll do very nicely." And he was a Muhammadan Nawab, so he was engaged in hunting and dancing with girls. But he was confident that "Sanātana is there." His name was changed, Sākara Mallika... Dabira Khāsa. His name was Dabira Khāsa, and his brother Rūpa Gosvāmī's name was Sākara Mallika. They almost became Muhammadan. Very responsible officer. When they wanted to resign, oh, Nawab Hussain Shah became topsy-turvied: "Oh, what do you say? I am depending on you. The whole thing is depending on you. And you want to resign? Oh, you have gone crazy. I cannot allow you." So actually... But he was thinking... Since he met Lord Caitanya, he was thinking that "I am diseased. What is the value of my this education and this post? I am diseased."

This is intelligence. People are enamored by so-called education, so-called high post or nationality or family or beauty or opulence. These things will not save. We are under the grip of material nature. The... Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. You are working under the influence of certain material quality, and you are preparing your next life. You cannot say, "All right, I am very happy. I am... I'm born in America. My nation is very great nation, and we are very rich. So I shall, next life also, I shall come to America. I shall take my birth here and enjoy like this." Oh, that is not in your hand. That you cannot say. That is daiva-netreṇa. Daiva. Daiva means that is in the supernatural power. Daiva. The same thing: daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14]. You cannot say. Daiva-netreṇa. You are preparing your life. The higher authorities will give you chance. If you prepare yourself nicely, you get good chance; you get birth in higher planet. Or if you prepare himself, yourself nicely, then you go to Kṛṣṇa even. Now it is your choice. It is your choice. But we must know that "What is my condition." If I am in darkness, I do not understand what is, in what condition I am living, this is conditional life. That's... Everyone can understand. That Sanātana Gosvāmī understood. And we should follow the footprints of Sanātana Gosvāmī.

So he understood that "Although I am minister, although I am very educated..." Educated, what do you mean by educated? He said, grāmya-vyavahāre kahe paṇḍita: "Some, my neighbors, they call me very learned man, my neighbors." Grāmya-vyavahāre kahe paṇḍita. Because he was minister, and he was Sanskrit scholar, Urdu scholar, actually, from scholastic point of view, very educated... So he was born in brāhmaṇa family. So people used to... A brāhmaṇa family. A brāhmaṇa is addressed as paṇḍita. Paṇḍita. Paṇḍita means learned, because brāhmaṇa's business is to become learned. So he was called "Panditji." But he was thinking that "People call me very learned man, but what sort of learned man I am?" So he submitted his defects to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that grāmya-vyavahāre kahe paṇḍita, tāi satya māni: "These people, my neighbors, they address me 'Panditji,' a learned man, and I am also such a fool that I accept that I am very much learned." "Why you disagree that you are not learned? You are learned." Now, he said that tāi satya māni, āpanāra hitāhita kichui nā jāni: "I am so learned that I do not know what is my destination, what is good for me."

This is the position of conditional life. Everyone is thinking that "I am very learned," "I am very rich," "I am very opulent," but if you ask him that "Why you are suffering? Wherefrom you have come? Where you are going next life? What is God? What is your relationship with...," he is silent. He's silent. You ask anybody, any learned professor in the, in the university, these questions, and let him... He will simply answer, "Perhaps," "Maybe," "Like this," "Like that...," no definite answer, because he does not know. This is our conditional life. This is our conditional life, that we do not know our position.

Therefore the same principle, as Nārada is asking Vyāsadeva, that "You try to meditate upon the activities of the Supreme Lord." Tad-viceṣṭitam, samādhinā anusmara tad-viceṣṭitam. "And you are already..." This, this meditation cannot be done by ordinary person. And that qualification he has got. He has already said that "You have got so many qualifications. So you can do that. And why you are, you shall meditate?" Now, the reason is, urukramasya akhila-bandha-muktaye: "You shall yourself be liberated from all conditional stage of life, and you shall be able to make others also." Unless you become liberated from the conditional life, you cannot make others liberated. You cannot imitate.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra.

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



That is the message of Lord Caitanya, that "Anyone who has taken birth as a human being in the land of India, Bhāratavarṣa..." "India" is given by foreigners, a name to the country, but actual name is Bhāratavarṣa. Not only that portion, the whole, this whole planet is called Bhāratavarṣa. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "Anyone who has taken birth on this land of Bhāratavarṣa, India," janma sārthaka kari', "just become, yourself, liberated, and then make others liberated." Para-upakāra. "Just make yourself first liberated." Unless you are liberated, how you can make others liberated? If your hands are tied up, how you can open the hands of others? That is not possible. So therefore Nārada Muni, he said the same thing, that urukramasya, urukramasya akhila-bandha-muktaye: "You just become yourself liberated and make others liberated."



Next verse is:

tato 'nyathā kiñcana yad vivakṣataḥ

pṛthag dṛśas tat-kṛta-rūpa-nāmabhiḥ

na karhicit kvāpi ca duḥsthitā matir

labheta vātāhata-naur ivāspadam

[SB 1.5.14]



Now, Vyāsadeva can say, "Yes, I have already thought about the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I have inserted the activities of Kṛṣṇa in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra-His teachings, Bhagavad-gītā-in the Mahābhārata." So Nārada Muni says, "Yes, that you have done. I admit. But that will not help much." Just like Bhagavad-gītā is being read practically all over the world, but they cannot understand. Why? The reason is, here it is stated, that na karhicit kvāpi ca duḥsthitā matir labheta vātāhata-naur ivāspadam: "The little idea of God is there, certainly, in every literature, every scripture, but those who are too much disturbed, they cannot accept it." Vāta. Just like if your ship is on the ocean and it is being tossed by heavy wind, you cannot sit very nicely. I have got experience when I was coming to your country. So it is moving like that. "Similarly, those who are too much disturbed by these material affairs... Mahābhārata is the history. So there are politics, sociology, intricacy, so many nonsense things, in which you have given Bhagavad-gītā, little portion. That's all right. But that will not help very much."



The idea is that one has not only to understand little about God, but one has to live in God. Then his life will be successful. Not that "Yes, God is great, and I go weekly in the church or in the temple. I offer my respect." No, that will not make you liberated. You have to be very serious to understand your relationship with God and go back to Godhead. Then your life will be successful, not that simply by understanding little. No. That is the same position. Just like you cannot derive any benefit or you cannot sit down very nicely in a tottering ship, so if you keep your life always tottering... That tottering, that stage, or, I mean to say, what is called, tilting stage of life can be stopped only by devotional service, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Evaṁ prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ [SB 1.2.20]. One has to make his life tranquil. How this is possible? By this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise, it is not possible. We have to disinfect us, counteract all result of sinful activities. Asat. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says that sat-saṅga chāḍi' kainu asate vilāsa, te-kāraṇe lāgila ye karma-bandha-phāṅsa. If we give up sat-saṅga, association of Kṛṣṇa consciousness or God consciousness, and if we simply take pleasure in the materialistic way of life, then we shall be entangled, simply entangled. Sat-saṅga chāḍi kainu asate vilāsa.

So people, generally, even though they have some kind of religion, all over the world, religion has become a secondary thing. Understanding of God, it is something like recreation, weekly recreation. That sort of life will not help. Of course, that is the beginning. That's nice. That is not bad. In the Bhagavad-gītā, two classes of men have been described. One class of men:

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



There are two classes of men all over the world. One class of men is called deva, devatā, or demigods, and one class of men are called demons. And what is the difference between demons and the demigods? The difference is, viṣṇu-bhakto bhaved daiva āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ: "Those who are devotees of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu, they are demigods." Demigod does not mean that you have got a bigger head or so many legs or so... No. Simply this is the qualification: viṣṇu-bhakto bhaved daiva. Only viṣṇu-bhakta, not other, demigod's devotee. No. Viṣṇu-bhakto bhaved daiva āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ. Just like Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa is designated as asura. Hiraṇyakaśipu is designated as asura. Rāvaṇa is designated as rākṣasa. He was very civilized. He was materially very well-to-do. His kingdom was described as made..., "golden kingdom." Everything was there, but he's described as rākṣasa. Why? He was against Rāma. That was his disqualification. (aside:) Don't bother now. That was his disqualification.



So viṣṇu-bhakto bhaved daiva āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ. Unless, even after having all the qualifications, material qualifications, if one is simply nonsense about God, he is rākṣasa, or demon. That is the injunction, or that is the verdict of Vedas. You may have all material qualifications. That's all right. You may be very great man. You may be very well situated man, very much educated, but if you are godless, then you are demon. Viṣṇu-bhakta... That is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Kṛṣṇa says, na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Duṣkṛtinaḥ. Duṣkṛtinaḥ means these rascals, these demons, these atheists, these godless men can act in any way for their sense gratification. They can do any sinful act, never mind, however grievous it may be. If it is applicable for their satisfaction of senses, they'll do it. They'll do it. They don't care anything. "Oh, I can satisfy my senses by this way. Never mind. Oh, we don't care for God, don't care for sin or hell or this or that. They are all simply allegory." Hedonism.

So whatever "ism"-"ism" is nowadays there-they were all experimental in Indian philosophy. Just like Cārvāka Muni. He was atheist. Amongst the sages there are atheist philosophers also, as in the modern days there are atheist philosopher also. So this Cārvāka Muni, he said, ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet. Ghṛtam. Ghṛtam means butter, clarified butter. If you want to have very palatable dishes, then you require ghee. Without ghee, you cannot make. Either sweetball or kacuris, srngara,(?) so many nice things. So we require sweetball. So... And in India, of course, they wanted palatable dishes, but not otherwise it is made of ghee. But too much eating of these palatable dishes is not good. That makes our senses very strong. So we should not take much of it, but we can take something of kṛṣṇa-prasādam and satisfy ourself. So he says that, Cārvāka Muni, ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet: "Beg, borrow or steal. Get some money and eat, as much as possible, ghee." You see? This is modern civilization. "Any way, bring money and satisfy your senses. That's all. Finish business."

So he, he propagated this philosophy, Cārvāka Muni, that ṛṇaṁ kṛtvā ghṛtaṁ pibet. In India, according to Vedic civilization, one is very much afraid of taking loan from others because he has conviction, "If I do not pay, then in my next life I'll have to pay many times. So I must liquidate my debt." That's a fact. If you take one cent from somebody else without doing something good to him or without exchanging something, then you are debtor, and you have to pay him with interest and compound interest. That is the law of karma. You cannot take anything. We are debtor to so many things. People have no idea. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41]. These are stated in the śāstras, that we are indebted, debtor to the demigods. Just like we are getting so much sunlight. We are enjoying: "Oh, today is a very nice day." But do we pay any tax? Do we pay anything? No. But in the Vedic injunction there is sun-god worship. Therefore we find that so many demigods' worship, yajñas. The feeling that "I am taking so much advantage from the sunshine, so I must give him something," this is called sacrifice.

So everything is arranged by God. Everyone... Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Everyone is... So if you worship Kṛṣṇa, then your everything is... Just like if you pay tax to the government, you satisfy all the department-the vehicle department, this department, that, light department, water department. You pay once. Similarly, sarvārhaṇam acyutejya. Acyuta means Kṛṣṇa. If anyone is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, if he, one is not sacrificing for Kṛṣṇa, he's becoming indebted to the demigods, to the sages, ṛṣi. Ṛṣi. Just like Nārada Ṛṣi is giving us good literature. He is instructing Vyāsadeva, "Give this literature to the people." We are taking advantage of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Are we not debtor? We go to school, college, and pay so much fees to the teachers. Are we not debtor to Vyāsadeva and Nārada? But we don't care for it. So acyutejya. If you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, naturally you will try to propagate the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That means you are paying. You have learned something from them, and you are distributing the knowledge. That was their mission. If you keep it for yourself, then you are simply debtor. You are not paying. So there are so many complications. So all these complications can be solved simply by Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sarvārhaṇam acyutejya. That is the verdict of Veda.

So the godless creature means they are demons. That is described in the Bhāgavata. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Āsuri. Āsuri-bhāva means the attitude of a demon. "What is God? Oh, this is all nonsense. Who is God? I am God. Everyone is God. Oh, don't you see? So many Gods are loitering in the street. Why you are finding out another God?" These are the going on. Vivekananda said that "Why you are bothering yourself, finding out God? Don't you see, so many Gods are loitering in the street?" You see? So "God is loitering in the street, daridra-nārāyaṇa. God has become daridra, poor, and He has come to my door to beg. God is suffering. God is..." Like that. Lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam [Bs. 5.29]. We read from Vedic literature that "God is being served by millions of goddesses of fortune"-and He has become daridra, poor. Wherefrom he got this language, where, how he applied, I do not know.

Anyway, this godlessness, atheism, is called āsuraṁ bhāvam, āsuraṁ bhāvam. So those who are demons and narādhama... Na māṁ prapadyante mūḍhāḥ duṣkṛtino narādhamāḥ, māyayāpahṛta-jñānā āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Demons. Demons, they are mūḍha-mūḍha means rascal-and duṣkṛtina, always acting sinful. Their life is simply full of sinful activities. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be accepted by persons who are full with sinful activities. That is not possible. That is not possible because in the Bhagavad-gītā we understand, Kṛṣṇa says, yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam: "One who has finished his sinful activities, or sinful life...," yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām, "always engaged in pious activities..." If you don't engage yourself in pious activities, naturally you'll be engaged...

Just like this child. He wants some activities. He's fortunate by the association. He is engaged with Jagannātha, with Hare Kṛṣṇa, with Kṛṣṇa's picture, with Prabhupāda's picture. He's engaged. And chanting in his way, Hare Kṛṣṇa. We must have engagement. But if the same child was not engaged in this way, he would be naughty. He would be doing something mischief, this way and that way. We must have engagement. Māyāvādī philosophers, they do not understand it. They want to make stop. Of course, that stop, for the time being, may be. Just like if this child is very naughty, I can stop him: "Don't do this. Sit down here, silent." But how long he'll sit silently? He wants some engagement. Similarly, this meditation process is like that. They... In order to stop him for doing some nonsense activities, better let him sit down, like this. But how long he'll sit down like this? As soon as he is free from that so-called meditation, he will immediately engage himself in all nonsense activities.

Therefore he must have pious activities. These pious activities is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Everyone is engaged for Kṛṣṇa, working from morning to..., early rise in the morning, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, have ārati, prepare prasādam, go, work, this way and that way. So we must have always engagement, pious activities. The same example. Otherwise, our nature is we must have some engagement, if not Kṛṣṇa, then māyā. You cannot be without engagement. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. Puṇya-karmaṇām means always being engaged in pious activities. And the most pious activity is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, always be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service.

So in one way you stop your impious activities; in other way you improve your spiritual understanding in this way. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya. Anta-gataṁ pāpam means you stop. Anta-gatam. So if you engage yourself in pious activities, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness activities, where is the scope of dong nonsense work? Therefore it is stopped. Automatically it is stopped. So yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām, in this way, te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā [Bg. 7.28]. They have no other engagement. They do not know anything else except Kṛṣṇa. Dvandva-moha. Dvandva means duality, and illusion. Moha means illusion. Nirmuktā: "He becomes liberated from these two things." Duality means "Whether I shall become Kṛṣṇa conscious or this conscious, material conscious or this...?" This is duality, "Whether this or that?" But one who is firmly convinced... Vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana [Bg. 2.41]. One who is firmly convinced that kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya: "If I become Kṛṣṇa conscious, then every perfection is there," this conviction, then there is no duality, "Whether I shall do it or not do it?" "I must do it." Dvandva. And moha, and illusion. And except Kṛṣṇa consciousness, everything is moha, illusion, except Kṛṣṇa consciousness, all illusion.

So these things are stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām, te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā [Bg. 7.28]. Duality. Actually, we are monists. We do not know anything except Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādīs, they say they are monists, but they're dualists. They say, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. Why? Wherefrom the jagat come? If Brahman is satya, if the Absolute Truth is truth, then janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], this world has emanated from the Absolute Truth. Then how it can be untruth? Does it mean that truth produces untruth? This is the defect of Māyāvāda philosophy. They are not actually monists. They are dualists. They are distinguishing Brahman and māyā. But we say that only Kṛṣṇa. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Māyā is the servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is a, that is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā, in Brahma-saṁhitā. In all the Vedic literature this is confirmed. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "This prakṛti, this māyā, this material energy, is acting under My superintendence, under My guidance."

So we don't accept this material nature as final. We have Kṛṣṇa on the background, that He is, only, the master. So therefore we are monists. Simply we know Kṛṣṇa and everything emanating from Kṛṣṇa. That is described everywhere. In the Brahma-saṁhitā the same truth is... Sṛṣṭi-sthiti, sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. This material energy is called Durgā, but she is so powerful... Sṛṣṭi-sthiti.... She can create wonderful things. She can maintain wonderful things. She can dissolve wonderful things, so powerful, but she is acting under the direction... Chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā. Chāyeva. Just like shadow moves by the movement of the reality, similarly, this material nature is working under the direction of the Supreme.

Therefore, any way you, either way you go, if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, simply come to this understanding that Kṛṣṇa is everything, and "By serving Kṛṣṇa, all my objective, all my perfection is there"-this conviction makes you perfect. And this is real, this is reality. There is no imposition. It is reality. Simply one has to understand. The same thing is expressed here by Nārada, urukramasya. Who is urukrama? Wonderful actor. The wonderful actor is Kṛṣṇa, Urukrama. So Nārada Muni says, "Although you have mentioned in other purāṇas or in itihāsa, Mahābhārata, about Kṛṣṇa, some of the activities of Kṛṣṇa..." Just like this same thing, as I told you. So many people are reading Bhagavad-gītā, but all nonsense. They do not understand what is Kṛṣṇa, because they are disturbed. They are not situated in Kṛṣṇa. Nārada Muni says that "Be situated in Kṛṣṇa. You write something, simply Kṛṣṇa's activities." Akhila "Then you'll be liberated, and those who will stick to this principle, they'll be liberated."

Akhila-bandha-muktaye... Vipakṣe doṣam anta, that "If you do not do this..." Śrīdhara Svāmī comments, vipakṣe. Vipakṣe means if you do not understand this philosophy, that simply Kṛṣṇa consciousness can save the human race, then you are faulty. If you do not understand... If you understand it nicely, it is very good. But if you do not understand it, if you direct your activities in a, in a different way, then it is faulty. You'll never be happy. Because the whole thing has begun-Vyāsadeva was unhappy. Even after producing a literature like Vedānta-sūtra, he was not happy, and Nārada is giving him instruction how to become happy. Here is the answer, that "If you do not accept this proposition, that you have simply to be in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then vipakṣe, it is just against your welfare." Vipakṣe doṣāntaram ahaḥ tataḥ urukramasya viceṣṭitam pṛthag dṛśaḥ, athaiva anyathā prakarantrena yat kiñcit athāntaram vipakṣyatha taya vibaksaya itaiḥ sphuritaiḥ nāmabhis ca bhaktabhya:(?) "So whatever little activities of Kṛṣṇa you have described..."

Just like people are understanding... By reading Bhagavad-gītā, somebody is taking Kṛṣṇa as a great politician. Everyone accept Kṛṣṇa as a great personality, but somebody's accepting Him as a great politician, a great diplomat, or in this way, according to one's angle of vision. Just like in Bombay... There are in India and all over the world, I calculated, there are more than six hundred commentary on Bhagavad-gītā, more than. And each one is presentation of the author's own view. One Doctor Rele(?) in Bombay, he has also explained Bhagavad-gītā in his own way. He says that it is a talk between a diseased person, a patient, and the physician. Because he is physician, he has made Kṛṣṇa as physician. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is physician in other way. But he has tried to explain the medical science through the Bhagavad-gītā-anatomy, physiology, medicine, like that. Just like Gandhi, he wanted to prove Bhagavad-gītā as nonviolence. In this way, everyone is trying. But actually who is understanding Kṛṣṇa? That is being explained by Nārada, that "In this way, people will misunderstand. You simply apply, simply write and explain the science of Kṛṣṇa."

Therefore in the, from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from the beginning, Vyāsadeva offers his obeisances to the Supreme, satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi, janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] "I am just offering my obeisances unto the Supreme Absolute Truth, who is the source of everything." And in the beginning he also writes, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Then he aims Kṛṣṇa. Vāsudeva means Kṛṣṇa. But he explains philosophically what Kṛṣṇa is: janmādy asya yataḥ anvayāt itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. "Kṛṣṇa, the Vāsudeva, is the original source of everything." Janmādy asya yataḥ. That is the Vedānta philosophy.

So under instruction of Nārada he... So Nārada says that "If you do not, I mean to say, cent percent simply be in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then it will be faulty. I admit that you have mentioned something about Kṛṣṇa's activities in other literatures like Mahābhārata and other Purāṇas, but that will not do." Yate kadācit kvāpi viṣaya kono sthānam:(?) "That will not be very steady understanding of Kṛṣṇa." Vātāhata-agunvitaḥ naur iva:(?) "Just like you cannot be steady on the ocean when there is tossing wind," I mean to say, "there is hurricane, you must be always tilting, similarly, unless we are firmly convinced about Supreme Lord, we must be tilting. So that, you must prepare some literature by which one shall be firmly steady, steadily convinced about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, God consciousness." Vātāhata-agunvita, yad uktam gitasuḥ.(?) And here also, Śrīdhara Svāmī... Gītā is so authoritative that he, he is giving quotation from Bhagavad-gītā,

vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām

[Bg. 2.41]



Bhagavad-gītā also, Kṛṣṇa says, vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ... Those who are convinced for making a sure progress of life, he's called niścayātmikā buddhiḥ. That is determination. Dṛḍha-vrata, dṛḍha-vrata. These are Sanskrit words: "firmly convinced, steady." They have got only one business, one business. Vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha...bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca buddha... Those who are not steady, they have got many business, many business. Why many? If that one is the source of everything, take that one.



The example is that just like the root of the tree is the source of distribution of energy. Then pour water in the root, not in the leaves, not in the branches. So people are enamored by the branches and leaves and flowers. They are inventing so many societies, humanitarian societies, altruistic societies, nonviolent societies, United Nation, this, that, all nonsense. Simply concentrate in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Everything will be right. That they do not know. Vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha... [Bg. 2.41] One. This is intelligence, how to act. Just work on one switch, and everything will be right. That they do not know.

So we have got very great responsibility to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to the world. By switching on this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you solve all the problems, as much as by pouring water in the root of the tree, all energy is distributed to the tree-to the leaves, to the twigs, to the flowers, to the leaves. Thousands and millions of leaves are there and flowers are... Everything will be nourished. Just like putting your foodstuff through one way. The rascal says that "You can accept any way." No! Only one way: Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You cannot supply foodstuff to your body by so many holes. You have got nine holes in your body. One hole, this hole. You have to supply food to, not this hole, rectum.

Devotee: But the navel you can... Sometimes it does that...



Prabhupāda: When you are diseased. That is not normal. And if you have to take food from rectum for many days, then you finished.



So this is the philosophy taught by Nārada Muni to Vyāsadeva, and Vyāsadeva taught to Madhvācārya. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is on that authority and Kṛṣṇa also. Kṛṣṇa taught Brahmā, Brahmā taught Nārada, Nārada taught Vyāsadeva. Vyāsadeva taught... In this way, evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. In the Fourth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā it is said, "By this disciplic succession..." So our business is not to make any research work, not to invent something, not to write voluminous books, something mental concoction. We have got everything ready, given by this, received through the paramparā system. Everything, real fact, real goods, not bogus things. So we have to simply accept. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that "Every one of you just become... Each and every one of you become a spiritual master under My order." "Oh, so what is Your order?" Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] "Whomever you meet, simply you say what Kṛṣṇa has spoken or what about Kṛṣṇa has been spoken." The Kṛṣṇa has spoken the Bhagavad-gītā. You simply speak about Bhagavad-gītā. And this Bhāgavata is also spoken about Kṛṣṇa. This is also kṛṣṇa-kathā; that is also kṛṣṇa-kathā. One is spoken directly by Kṛṣṇa, and the other is spoken about Kṛṣṇa. So they're practically the same thing. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends that yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] "You simply deliver the instruction of Kṛṣṇa, and you become a spiritual master."

So you haven't got to make yourself very learned scholar or... Just like a postal peon. He's not necessarily very learned scholar or even a very literary man. His only business is to take the envelope and put it in the right place. That's all. Similarly, to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you haven't got to become a very learned scholar or literary man. You have simply to understand... Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. You hear and spread this. People will be happy. Akhila-bandha-muktaye. They will be liberated from all problems. It is so nice thing.

Thank you very much. (end)



690618SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.14

-

New Vrindaban, June 18, 1969



Prabhupāda:



tato 'nyathā kiñcana yad vivakṣataḥ

pṛthag dṛśas tat-kṛta-rūpa-nāmabhiḥ

na karhicit kvāpi ca duḥsthitā matir

labheta vātāhata-naur ivāspadam

[SB 1.5.14]



Now we are discussing instruction of Nārada to his disciple, Vyāsadeva. Such a learned scholar, Vyāsadeva. He's known as Vedavyāsa, the authority on all Vedic literature. And he's supposed to be incarnation of Nārāyaṇa, exalted position. Still, he requires the instruction of a spiritual master. That is the way of Vedic way. Avaroha-panthā, āroha-panthā. Āroha-panthā means inductive process. To know from here, from the lower status to the higher status, speculative method, or ascending process. And avaroha-panthā is deductive process, getting knowledge from higher authorities. So our Vedic understanding is to receive knowledge from the authorities. That is perfect knowledge.



So there are three kinds of processes to receive knowledge: pratyakṣa, aitihya and śabda. Pratyakṣa means by direct perception, experimental knowledge. And aitihya, or anumāna. Anumāna, hypothesis, "It may be like this," "Perhaps like this." Just like modern scientists say, "Perhaps it is like this." That is called anumāna, hypothesis. And another process is śabda-pramāṇa. Śruti-pramāṇa. Śabda means sound vibration, and śruti means aural reception. So out of three processes, the śabda-pramāṇa, or receiving vibration, sound vibration from authorities by aural reception, that is considered to be the perfect.

So Nārada Muni says... Before this, Nārada Muni has advised Vyāsadeva that "In order to release all these conditioned souls, you just describe the wonderful activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Simply by hearing... Uttama-ślokasya guṇānuvādāt. Uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloka means the Supreme Lord who is described by transcendental literature or very fine, scholarly language. He's called Uttama-śloka. Uttama-ślokasya urukramasya. "That will save all conditioned souls from being implicated in the clutches of māyā." Now, Vyāsadeva has already described... He has made many purāṇas, eighteen purāṇas. So there is mention of God's activities. Just like in Mahābhārata he has put this Bhagavad-gītā. So Nārada Muni says that pṛthag dṛśas tat-kṛta-rūpa-nāmabhiḥ, tato 'nyathā kiñcana yad vivakṣataḥ: "If you do not exceptionally, exclusively describe simply the pastimes of the uncommon activities of the Lord, the other way, as you have given as a sidelight, as you have described Bhagavad-gītā, the activities of Kṛṣṇa as a sideline, not..." Actually, the whole Mahābhārata is full of activities of Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa is only a scene in the Mahābhārata. He's speaking in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. So Nārada Muni says, "That sort of description will not be very much congenial, because the people are not steady. Their anxiety... Their mind is disturbed in so many ways exactly like a boat moving in the tossing of the waves of the sea. So this sort of understanding of God will not give them much benefit. You describe completely on the pastimes, on the activities of the Supreme Lord. That will give people release from these material clutches."

So the next verse says... Vyāsadeva may say that "Sir, I have already compiled so many books, eighteen purāṇas, Mahābhārata, even Vedānta-sūtra. So are they not sufficient literature to revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" So in reply to that, Nārada says,

jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte 'nuśāsataḥ

sva-bhāva-raktasya mahān vyatikramaḥ



Sva-bhāva-raktasya mahān vyatikramaḥ. Sva-bhāva-raktasya means by nature. Just like Vedic scripture says, "By nature every living entity has a propensity for sex life, for intoxication." Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantoḥ. Jantoḥ means living entities. Nitya. So long he is in contact with this material world, he has got a natural propensity for sex life and intoxication. Vyavāya means sex life, and āmiṣa means meat-eating. Āmiṣa, meat-eating. Sex life, meat-eating, and madya-sevā. Madhya-sevā means intoxication, drinking liquor. It is not unnatural. To drink wine or liquor or to eat meat and to have free sex life, that is the desire of all conditioned souls. Therefore, sva-bhāva-raktasya, "by nature." Nobody is taught in the educational institution how to drink, or how to eat meat or how to enjoy sex life. Natural. That is natural. Sva-bhāva-raktasya. "And if these things you describe as dharma, as religious principles, then they are doomed."



Just like a man is addicted to commit theft. He has got a habit of stealing. And if I say, "Stealing is very nice art. You can go on with you, with it," then where is the reformation? There is no question of... He, he's already addicted. So it is encouragement. So similarly, in the dharma-śāstra... Just like in Mahābhārata there is... (aside:) Where is that "cut cut" noise? Don't make that sound. Just like in marriage ceremony. Marriage ceremony... Of course, in your country, the marriage ceremony is different. In India still, the people spend as much as possible in the marriage ceremony, millions of dollars. If one man is rich, he'll spend for his son's marriage or daughter's marriage. That is a great credit. "Oh, this man is very rich man. He's spending so much money." So there are so many religious performances, ritualistic performances. You have to spend money. So you must find out so many performances. So they have all these in the śāstras.

So Nārada Muni says that "What is this, marriage ceremony? The marriage ceremony is to allow the boy and the girl for legitimate sex life. That's all. So that propensity he has already got. And what is the use of making such propaganda and spending so much money?" Very practical proposition. But in the śāstras there are. Similarly, drinking or meat-eating. According to Vedic śāstra, meat-eating is not allowed by purchasing from the slaughterhouse. No. They... There is motive. The marriage ceremony or the meat-eating, the so much ritualistic performances, there is motive. What is that motive? Motive is restriction. Just like the same example, marriage: the real idea is to restrict the boy and the girl to one woman and one man. That is the idea, main idea. If he's not married, then he will be just like cats and dogs. So idea is very good. But Nārada Muni says, "After all, you're coming to the point of sex life. So why so much propaganda?" Similarly, for meat-eating, there is also sanction in the śāstras, tāmasika-śāstra, not sāttvika. There are three divisions of śāstra-sāttvika, rājasika and tāmasika. Those who are meat-eaters, cannot give up meat-eating, for them, the prescription is, "All right, you can eat meat, but you have to sacrifice one goat, but not cow." The... For sacrifice the animal is recommended: goat. So you can, I mean to say, cut throat of a goat in the presence of goddess Kālī and you can eat. There are so many prescriptions. But that is also restriction, that Kālī-worship is one day in a month, on the dark moon day. What is called, dark moon? Amāvasyā. Full moon and...? Eh? No, no, no. When there is... On that particular..., there is no moon in the sky.

Hayagrīva(?): The dark of the moon.



Prabhupāda: It is called dark moon, yes. So that Kālī-pūjā is recommended on the dark moon day. The... That is one day in a month. Similarly, according to marriage life, the sex life is also allowed one day in a month. The whole thing is restriction. Similarly, drinking wine also, there is Devī-pūjā. That is also once in a year or something like that. The whole point is restriction. But after all, this is drinking and mating and meat-eating.



So Nārada Muni says that "You have described these things for which a man has got natural propensity in a religious form. So it is jugupsitam. This is most abominable." Just see. Even the restricted system of marriage, drinking and meat-eating, described in the śāstra, that is also condemned by Nārada. Jugupsitam. Jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte 'nuśāsataḥ: "You are the leader of the śāstras. You are writing śāstras. People will follow you." Just like in Vedic, Vedas, there is recommendation of sacri..., in the sacrifice, animal-killing, but that animal-killing is not killing. This... There was a discussion between Lord Caitanya and Chand Kazi, the Muhammadan magistrate. That story perhaps you know, that He started civil disobedience movement. And the brāhmaṇas of Navadvīpa, they complained to the Muhammadan ma... At that time, Bengal was being governed by Pathans, Muhammadans, and so there was Muhammadan magistrate called Kazi Saheb. So the brāhmaṇas, they lodged complaint to the Kazi Saheb that "This boy, Nimāi Paṇḍita, He has started one movement, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and people are being enthused, excited to chant this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and He is making propaganda that "Simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, you'll get all perfection." So the brāhmaṇas thought that "If this boy makes propaganda and popularize this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, then, oh, what about ourself?" They were priestly class. "Then how we will live?" So they lodged complaint to the Chand Kazi that "He's doing something against our Vedic rituals. It is not Hindu religion. And..." Of course, he was Muhammadan magistrate, but after all, he was meant for giving justice to the people. So when big brāhmaṇas complained, he took action and he sent some constables to warn the followers of Lord Caitanya that "You are disturbing. You are disturbing, this Hare Kṛṣṇa chanting. You cannot do this. There is complaint."

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu was informed that "The Chand Kazi has warned us not to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. What shall we do?" Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "Don't care. Go on chanting. Go on chanting." So then, when the magistrate saw that they have not stopped, then he sent some constables and government police force, who broke their mṛdaṅgas and dispersed the crowd. So this information was given to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and He said, "All right, then we shall, I mean to say, issue this civil disobedience." So He called for many thousands of people. He was very popular. This incidence shows that even He was at that time sixteen-years-old boy, He was so learned, Nimāi Paṇḍita, that He defeated a great scholar, and at the same time, He was very popular because by His simple calling, many hundred thousands of people gathered with mṛdaṅgas, and they began kīrtana in the street and went to the house of that Kazi.

So at that time Kazi thought that "This is a mass movement. So my order will not be... There will be some disturbance." So he came to his senses. Then he wanted to make some compromise with Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And first of all there was some discussion, because he was also very learned scholar, Chand Kazi, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was also very learned scholar. So first of all he compromised, Chand Kazi, "Nimāi, You are a boy, and in our village relationship You are just my nephew because Your grandfather, Your mother's father, I call him 'Cācā.' " Cācā means uncle. "So, in that sense, Your mother is my sister. So You are my nephew. Why You are so angry upon Your uncle?" So He said, "Yes, My dear uncle, I have come My uncle's house to be received very nicely, but you went upstairs. Why? I am very glad that you have come down." In this way, the things were... Then He first of all asked Chand Kazi, "Yes, My dear uncle..." He was maternal uncle, māmu... Māmu or māmā. Māmā means maternal uncle. "My dear māmā, Uncle, what is your religion, that you eat your father and mother?" That was His challenge, first. "What sort of religion you have got?" He said, "What You say? We eat our father...?" "Yes, because you eat cow. So cow gives you milk. She's your mother. You drink milk and kill your mother. And the bull, she (he) helps you in agricultural..., producing grains just like father gives you grains to eat. So you are killing your father and mother. How is that?"

So Chand Kazi was also very learned scholar. He said, "Well, this cow-killing is also recommended in Your Vedas, because there is cow sacrifice." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied... Now, we should know it that the animal sacrifice, according to the Vedic scripture, that is not killing. That is explained by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He said that "In the previous time, this cow sacrifice was actually being done. That's all right. But that was not for killing. That-to give the cow, the old cow or bull, a new life. By the power of mantra, just to give evidence of the Vedic mantras, the brāhmaṇas would sacrifice a cow, old cow or old bull, in the fire and give, give him, again, new life. That was... Now, in this age, there is no such powerful brāhmaṇa who can chant the mantras rightly and give again rejuvenation, another new life. It is not possible. Therefore in the śāstras, these sort of sacrifices are forbidden."

aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ

sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ

kalau pañca vivarjayet

[Cc. Ādi 17.164]



So there was nice discussion, and the compromise was that "No more Your saṅkīrtana movement will be checked by my men."



So the point is that although in the Vedic scripture there is recommendation that animal sacrifice allowed, but that is not meant for killing. That is giving a new life. So when this animal sacrifice was going on simply for eating, simply for eating... Just like in a particular mission they say that "We are devotees of goddess Kālī." Their real mission is to eat meat. Therefore they have become devotees of goddess Kālī. But actually, these sacrifices were not meant, as explained by Caitanya Mahāprabhu, for killing the animals. That was to test the power, the strength, of the Vedic mantras. So Lord Buddha's movement was therefore started... When people began to eat meat like anything on the plea of Vedic sacrifice, so Lord Buddha, at that time-Lord Buddha means he's also incarnation of Kṛṣṇa-he appeared to stop this animal killing. That is the prayer of Lord Buddha we sing:

nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātaṁ

sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam

keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare



The buddha-śarīra... Just like we offer prayer to Nṛsiṁhadeva,



tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgaṁ

dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam

keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare



Similarly, there is prayer for Lord Buddha also. The, that prayer is: nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātam, "Although in the Vedic literature there is recommendation for animal sacrifice, you are forbidding, 'No, this should not be done.' " Therefore Buddhism is not Vedic religion, because he was against this Vedic sacrifice. Sadaya-hṛdaya darśi... His main business was to stop this animal killing, but people wanted to give evidence from the Vedas. Therefore he said, "I don't care for your Vedas." Veda nā māniyā bauddha haila nāstika. Therefore Śaṅkarācārya came, and he drove away the Buddhists from the land of India. That's a long history.



So this sacrifice, this animal killing, that is also forbidding, that... Nārada Muni said that "Why you have bothered your head in that, that way, that you have made this, this is a type of religion?" Jugupsitam: "This is abominable." Jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte 'nuśāsataḥ: "You are authority, and if you recommend animal sacrifice, they will take it. They have got already natural tendency, and they will accept it, 'This is the religious process.' And when they will be forbidden by other, saner persons, they'll not care for it. So it is jugupsitam. It is abominable." Jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte 'nuśāsataḥ sva-bhāva-raktasya mahān vyatikramaḥ: "It's a great mistake you have done." Yad-vākyato dharma itītaraḥ sthitaḥ: "They'll accept you authority, and they'll be steady in that assertion, in that conviction." And na manyate tasya nivāraṇam: "And if you say..." Just like in other religious principles, if we say that "Don't eat meat..." I had some conversation with some Christian priests. They put forward this argument, "Why should we not eat? Our Christ took flesh. And why should we not? We must do it." They say like that. But Christ said that "You should... You shall not kill." So they cannot give any proper explanation why they kill. So in every religion... In Muhammadan religion, there...

So if, if this killing process or this drinking process, or this, which a man has got natural, that is excited under the name of religion, then Nārada says, "Then when actually they will be forbidden for higher elevation of life, they'll not accept it. Therefore your description in the śāstras of all these nonsense, jugupsitam, is abominable." Jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte 'nuśāsataḥ sva-bhāva-rakta... "The natural tendency, this. You should not incite them more and more." Here it is said that patṛka viruddham eva. It is against... Jātam ita jugupsitam. Jugupsitaṁ nindaṁ kāma karmādi(?). Jugupsitam. Śrīdhara Svāmī gives note, nindam: abominable; kāma karma... Kāma karma means that fruitive result. You do, act something, and you want to enjoy the fruit. That is called kāma karma. Karma, akarma, vikarma. There are three kinds of activities. First karma is prescribed duties. And akarma means to do act, but the result is not enjoyable by you. And there is vikarma. Vikarma means doing against. So this kāma karma. People are engaged in ritualistic ceremony for receiving some result for sense gratification. That is nindam. That is abominable. Nindam.

Sva-bhavata eva raktasya ragina puruṣasya dharma-kṛte, dharmārtham anuśāsas tataḥ mahān vyatikramaḥ(?): "So this is not good for you. It is most abominable." Kutaḥ iti utaḥ yasyeti vākyataḥ ayaṁ mukhya dharma: "Because they will accept it as authority, and they will think this is religion." They will not make further progress. They will stick to that principle. So therefore it is abominable. Yatasya kāma karmādi anyayena tattva-jñānena kriyamānāya(?). Tattva-jñānena. When they'll be advised higher truth... Just like those who are addicted to killing process under the shadow of religious rights, if they are said that "You don't kill. This is not good. After all, this living entity is as good as you are. As you are also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, or God, similarly, this cow, or this animal, is also part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, but he has got a different dress only. That does not mean that you should kill..." If these things are instructed for higher elevation of life, they will not accept. They will not accept. They will say, "Oh, my religion says this. So I must do it."

Tasya nivāraṇaṁ janaḥ. Raktasya karma nivāram nivāraṇaṁ samatam etad na manyate kintu pravṛtti mārgam anuviyukta veṣan tada vidhi kalpa vidhi(?): "Because he has got already natural tendency. And if he is, there is sanction by religiosity, ritualistic, religious process, then he will stick to it. So you have not done very nice work." That is... Na manyate tasya nivāraṇaṁ janaḥ. Vicakṣaṇo 'syārhati vedituṁ vibhor ananta-pārasya nivṛttitaḥ sukham: "Because actually, if anyone wants real happiness, that happiness is not by gratifying your senses." In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said that sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. Real happiness, that is not perceived by this gratification of these material senses. So nivṛttitaḥ. One has to cease from this material sense gratification, and then he can enjoy the real happiness, which is transcendental to sense enjoyment. That is... That is the instruction.

In the, in the Padma Purāṇa also there is a verse, ramante yogino 'nante: "Those who are yogis..." Yogi means transcendentalist, not the so-called yogi. Those who have contacted the Absolute Truth, they are called yogis. So yoginaḥ, actually a yogi, ramante, they enjoy. They also enjoy. Why they are, I mean to say, undergoing so much austerities and penances and regulative principles? Because they are trying for being elevated to the real platform of happiness. So ramante yogino 'nante. Everyone is hankering after happiness, either materialistic or spiritualistic, but the difference is that materialistic, materialistic persons, they are satisfied with temporary happiness, and those who are transcendentalists, they are also seeking happiness. That is real happiness, spiritual happiness, eternal happiness. So therefore it is stated in the Padma Purāṇa that ramante yogino 'nante. Anante means unlimited happiness. They enjoy unlimited happiness. Ramante yogino 'nante. And satyānande. And that is real happiness. Happiness does not mean it is for few minutes. No. Happiness should continue, eternally. One should be situated in that happiness so that other, temporary happiness will not attract him.

So ramante yogino 'nante satyānande cid-ātmani. Cit, cit means that he's full of knowledge. That is not in ignorance. This material happiness is in ignorance. And spiritual happiness is śuddha-sattva. Śuddha-sattva means pure goodness. In the material world there are three stages: ignorance, passion and goodness. The goodness platform is very nice in the material world, but there is another platform, which is called śuddha-sattva. Sattvaṁ viśuddham, viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam. That is transcendental platform, and in that platform you can understand God. God is Vāsudeva, and in the vasudeva platform... So ramante yogino 'nante satyānande cid-ātmani. That is cid-ātmani. Cit means knowledge; ātmani means self. In that platform. Iti rāma-padenāsau paraṁ brahmābhidhīyate [Cc. Madhya 9.29]. This is the description, this is the meaning of the word rāma. Rāma, this word, comes from ramante, ram. Ram-dhātu. Ram means enjoyment. And rāma means the full of pleasure. If you contact with Rāma, or Kṛṣṇa, the absolute attractive, then you are placed in the absolute platform for eternal enjoyment.

Enjoyment is the goal of everyone's life. But the difference is that the materialist is trying to hanker after flickering enjoyment, and the transcendentalists, they are hankering after the spiritual enjoyment, or eternal enjoyment. Enjoyment... Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Because enjoyment is our life. We cannot be void. That is not possible. Therefore the impersonalists, about impersonalists, this Bhāgavata version is that although they rise up almost to the spiritual platform, but because they cannot enjoy... Impersonalists means there is no enjoyment. There is simply light, a life of knowledge. But simply knowledge will not make me happy. I must enjoyment. I must have enjoyment. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12), because my nature is to enjoy. That enjoyment cannot be done in the impersonal or void philosophy. That is not possible. Therefore Bhāgavata says, ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ: "If somebody thinks that he has become liberated after undergoing the process of impersonal philosophy and austerities and penances..." The impersonalists, they also practice severe penances to attain to that Brahman stage. That is also nice thing. But they cannot stay there, because there is no enjoyment.

Therefore, as I was saying the other day, that many sannyāsīs, they say that "This world is false; Brahman is truth." So in spite of their rising to that platform of Brahman understanding, they again come down. That is described in the Bhāgavatam, āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ: [SB 10.2.32] "After undergoing severe penances and austerities, they may rise to the Brahman platform but again falls down." Why falls down? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ: "Because they do not enjoy Your association." They have neglected the association of Kṛṣṇa and company. Therefore they have no, I mean to say, shelter. The same example can be explained: just like if you go on a plane or sputnik very high, very high, it is void, all side void. If you go very high, 25,000 miles, you'll see void. But that, there you cannot stay. You can travel for many years in that void, but if you don't take shelter in a planet, then you'll come back again to this planet. Similarly, the impersonalists, they cannot stay in their impersonal understanding. Simply they suffer some trouble. Kleśa... Bhagavad-gītā says, kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām [Bg. 12.5]. Those who are attached, those who are attached to that impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth, they undergo greater trouble. We transcendentalists, we personalists, we also, from the materialistic point of view, we are... Our standard of living is not very opulent. We lie down anywhere. We are... Our dresses are not so clean. Our rooms are not clean. From the materialistic point of view, somebody comes. He says, "Oh. How wretched these people are living!" That is also another kind of austerity. They have adopted. But that is pleasing. Even they are in so-called wretched condition, they are happy. They are happy. So they're in both ways. But those who are simply attached to the impersonal feature, their trouble is more painful. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā.

So vicakṣaṇo 'syārhati vedituṁ vibhoḥ. So one has to cease. One has to make a stop of this material enjoyment. Then one can approach to the spiritual enjoyment. You cannot enjoy spiritual life if you stick to the materialistic way of... Therefore we have got so..., a little restriction, that "You cannot do this." Although those who are addicted to this life, this restriction is sometimes painful, but it is required. Unless... Just like to cure your disease, you have to follow some regulative principle prescribed by the physician, similarly, in order to cure yourself from this material disease, you have to accept. Nivṛttitaḥ. Nivṛttitaḥ means ceasing this process of material life. Nivṛttitaḥ sukham, pravartamānasya guṇair anātmanas tato bhavān darśaya ceṣṭitaṁ vibhoḥ.

So how it can be achieved, nivṛtti, ceasing this materialistic way of life? So Nārada Muni says that "You simply describe the activities of the Lord, Kṛṣṇa, and by hearing simply the activities of Kṛṣṇa, one will be very easily able to cease from this materialistic way of life." Caitanya Mahāprabhu also recommended that people should be given chance to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or kṛṣṇa-kathā. Kṛṣṇa-kathā means speaking or, I mean to say, narration about Kṛṣṇa. So Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also recommended that "Let them be situated in their own position. There is no necessity of changing his position. Give him chance. Give him chance to hear. Then gradually..." Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam.

So our attempt is... We are opening so many branches. The idea is that people should get chance of hearing about the Supreme Lord, either by chanting this mahā-mantra or... This is also chanting. What I am speaking before you from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Bhagavad-gītā, that is also chanting. This is also kīrtana. Kīrtana means describing. So you can describe the glories of the Lord either by musical instruments or by chant, singing, or you can describe the glories of the Lord by reading from authoritative scripture. Both of them are called kīrtana. This, this Bhāgavata reading is also described as kīrtana by Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Abhavad vaiyāsakiḥ kīrtane. Kīrtane. It is called kīrtana. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. The process is śravaṇa and kīrtana, hearing and chanting. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he attained salvation and perfection simply by hearing. And Śukadeva Gosvāmī attained salvation and perfection simply by chanting. This chanting means describing the glories of the Lord from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

So he says, pravartamānasya guṇair anātmanas tato bhavān darśaya ceṣṭitam: "People are so much entangled by the modes of material nature. So in order to get them free from this entanglement, you show the path. Simply let them hear. Let them give aural reception to the wonderful activities of the Lord. That activity..." Because absolute... Kṛṣṇa is Absolute Truth. So Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's activities are the same because it is absolute. It is not duality. In the material world, myself and my activities are different. But it is the... This world is dual world. But in the absolute world, Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name, Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's quality, Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's fame, they're all Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's associates, they're all Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is cowherd boy. So Kṛṣṇa and the cows, they're all Kṛṣṇa. That we have to learn. They're not different from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, they're all Kṛṣṇa. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. So we have to understand that.

So any way, if we try to associate, simply by chanting or hearing, that means we are associating with Kṛṣṇa. And the more we associate with Kṛṣṇa, the more we become purified. Just like more you remain with the fire, you become warmer, warmer, warmer. And one day you become so warm you exactly like fire. The example I have given that if you put an iron rod in the fire, it becomes warm, warmer, warmest, and then it becomes red. And when it is red, it is no longer iron. It is fire. Similarly, simply by chanting and hearing you spiritualize yourself. So a day will come when this material body also will be fully spiritualized. The... That fully spiritualized means there will be no more material activities; simply these spiritual activities will be there.

So Nārada Muni is instructing Vyāsadeva, and we shall discuss next meeting. Thank you very much. (end)



690619SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.15

-

New Vrindaban, June 19, 1969



Prabhupāda: ...is not our Vaiṣṇava. If you say, you have to say this also. Yes.



Kīrtanānanda: Whole thing?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Otherwise keep everything.



om ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave-namaḥ



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, who with the torchlight of knowledge has opened my eyes, which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.]



śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam



[When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?]



vande 'haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca

śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-jīvam

sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca



[I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and of all the other preceptors on the path of devotional service. I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇavas and unto the six Gosvāmīs, including Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī and their associates. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrī Advaita Ācārya Prabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all His devotees, headed by Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura. I then offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and all the gopīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśākhā.]



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te



[O my dear Kṛṣṇa, ocean of mercy, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of the cowherdmen and the lover of the gopīs, especially Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.]



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi praṇamāmi hari-priye



[I offer my respects to Rādhārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.]



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



[My dear Lord, and the spiritual energy of the Lord, kindly engage me in Your service. I am now embarrassed with this material service. Please engage me in Your service.]



(aside:) So you keep there. You can keep here. It is open? Yes.



jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte 'nuśāsataḥ

svabhāva-raktasya mahān vyatikramaḥ

[SB 1.5.15]



So in our last meeting we have been discussing that śāstras, scriptures, if they simply deal with material activities... Of course, material activities should be regulated to come to the spiritual platform. But if we do not come to the spiritual platform, simply some regulative principle on the material platform will not help us.



Religiosity means to prepare the ground, prepare the ground for being elevated to the spiritual platform. Just like it is said,

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



Dharma, religious faith-everything is very punctual. One is going punctually to the church or to the temple and executing all ritualistic ceremonies very rigidly, following the rules and regulations. But at the end if he has not developed love for God, then, Bhāgavata says, śrama eva hi kevalam: "This is simply laboring, formalities." Caste priest, caste gosvāmī, caste spiritual master-simply a formality. But the objective is not Kṛṣṇa. Objective is material happiness. That sort of religiosity or following the regulative principle will not help.



So Vyāsadeva says, jugupsitam: "This is abominable, because if you simply stick to that principle... You are authority. People will understand that this is religion, nothing more." Na manyate tasya nivāraṇam janaḥ, yad-vākyataḥ. Nanu yad pravṛtti-mārga nindate 'tha nivṛtti-mārge sarva-kriyā-tyāgena parameśvara-sukhasya rūpe anubhuteḥ kiṁ tad yaśaḥ-kathānenāpi tatrāha vicakṣaṇaiti, vicakṣaṇa ati-nipunaḥ kaścid eva nivṛttitaḥ sarva-kriyā-nivṛttya, asya bibhaḥ sukhaṁ nirvikalpaka-sukhātmākaṁ svarūpaṁ vedituṁ jñātum arhati.(?) One may be very expert in the matter of executing religious performances, but that does not mean he can be elevated to the spiritual platform.

vicakṣaṇo 'syārhati vedituṁ vibhor

ananta-pārasya nivṛttitaḥ sukham

pravartamānasya guṇair anātmanas

tato bhavān darśaya ceṣṭitaṁ vibhoḥ



This may be little helpful to rise to the spiritual platform, but unless one is actually engaged in the service of the Lord, it cannot be achieved perfectly.



Then Vyāsadeva says, Nārada Muni says, tataḥ karuṇārthe vibhu anātmanaḥ deha-vimāna athaiva guṇaiḥ satyādibhiḥ pravartamānasya guṇair janasya darśaya bhavān iti.(?) "Therefore you write literature in such a way that people will become attracted to Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Lord." Simply official understanding of Kṛṣṇa-"God is great" or "Kṛṣṇa is all-powerful"-but my attention is only how to improve my material condition... So this picture was given in our Back to Godhead. Perhaps you all remember that a bridegroom party was to go to the bride's home. In India the marriage party, bridegroom party, the bride, his father, his relatives, go with the bride, bridegroom, to the bride's home, and the marriage ceremony takes place there in the presence of all kinds of relatives. That is the system. So the marriage was to take place in a different village some miles away, and in Bengal the land is full of rivers. The rivers are considered to be high roads. So it was settled that the bridegroom's party will start in the evening before the marriage day and reach there in the morning and rest whole day, and in the evening the marriage will take place.

So they got up in a boat, and the boat was started and the, all the members of the bridegroom's party, the, they fell asleep. It was on the river. The breeze was very pleasing. And next morning when they arose, they saw they were standing on the same place. Then they were surprised, "How is that?" The boatman was asked, "How is that, we are in the same place? We have not proceeded even a few yards. How is that?" The boatman said that "We were plying the whole night. We do not know how it happened." Then one boatman found out that the anchor was not taken out. The anchor was fixed up, and the whole night they were plying meant the boat was round about the anchor only, moving, and it was... It did not go a step forward.

Similarly, if our anchor, that we want this material happiness, for which we can worship God, we may go to the temple, go to the church, offer our respect... Ārto arthārthī. That is accepted as good. But one has to go far above that position. That means if one, being distressed, approaches Kṛṣṇa, that "My Lord, I am in distress. Please help me," the qualification is good in this sense, that he, somehow or other, he has approached God. But his motive is not pure. His motive is material enjoyment. So Vyāsadeva says, "This kind of instruction in your book will not help people to come to the standard of pure devotional service, which can save him from all material bondage." That is the whole purport. Then what is to be done? The same thing, as Kṛṣṇa advises, that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. You haven't got to do anything. Simply be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So here, of course, I am very pleased that the boys and girls who have come to me, they have immediately taken to Kṛṣṇa. But India, although the Bhagavad-gītā is the scripture of Hindus and the Indians, still, they are not so easy to accept Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because their brain is puzzled. Somebody says that "You worship goddess Kālī." Somebody says that "You worship Lord Śiva." Somebody says, "You worship Brahmā." So mostly, in temples, in, I mean to say, temples which are meant for earning some money, they have got all kinds of deities. In one place there is Lord Śiva, one place there is Goddess Kālī, one place there is Rāmacandra, one place is... Just like store, store. You go to a store, and you'll find all kinds of goods are ready there. Whatever goods you want, you pay price and take. So that is another business, that "Whomever you may love, please come to my temple, pay something, and you see. Your God is there." You see? So... And there are some missionary activities also. They say that "Whatever God you may worship, it is the same."

But our Vaiṣṇava philosophy does not say that. Vaiṣṇava philosophy says, "God is one." Not in... Vaiṣṇava philosophy, you do not think that it is a sectarian. This is based on Vedic conclusion. In the Ṛg Veda also it is said, "God is one." Tad viṣṇoḥ. Viṣṇu is paramaṁ padam. He is Supreme. Vedas does not say that Brahmā is supreme, or Lord Śiva is the supreme, or Goddess Kālī is supreme. No. Tad viṣṇoḥ paramam... This is Ṛg Veda mantra. And so far Bhagavad-gītā is concerned, it is clearly said there by Kṛṣṇa. He says, "I am the Supreme. Nobody's greater than Me." We find in Brahma-saṁhitā also the same thing, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. So actually in the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted-Viṣṇu, or Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa, different names of viṣṇu-tattva. Even Śaṅkarācārya, he also accepts, nārāyaṇaḥ paraḥ: "Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme, Nārāyaṇa."

So God is one, but there are different kinds of demigods. That is also a fact. They are accepted as different parts and parcels of God, as we are also. The demigods are also living entities. They are not viṣṇu-tattva. There are viṣṇu-tattva, jīva-tattva and śakti-tattva. Viṣṇu-tattva is the Supreme Absolute Truth, jīva-tattva is part and parcel, and śakti-tattva is the energy of God. So the demigods... You can become a demigod. You can become. If you follow the process how to become, then you become one day the demigod in the sun planet. It is not difficult. You can become one day even Lord Brahmā. Just like you can become one day President Nixon, like him. That requires your qualification. But you can... But you cannot become Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa. That is not possible. God is one. You cannot become God, but you can become part and parcel of God, more powerful. That is possible. Just like you are all Americans, but some of you can become a big officer in the government, the president, the secretary, the governor, but their position is better than ordinary man, similarly, the demigods are like that. They are different officers of the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa. These things are described in Bhāgavatam, that the sun rises under the order of the Supreme Lord. The moon rises under the order of the Supreme Lord. The ocean is not disturbing, it is calm and quiet... Not calm and quiet. It is in its position by the order of the Supreme Lord. So everyone is acting under the Supreme Lord. And Caitanya-caritāmṛta says, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa: "Yes, the Supreme Lord is only Kṛṣṇa." Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya [Cc. Ādi 5.142]. Āra, "Any other demigod or even viṣṇu-tattva, even Nārāyaṇa, Viṣṇu"-there are so many, I mean to say, manifestation of viṣṇu-tattva-"they're all subordinate to Kṛṣṇa." Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1].

So here the point is that just direct people to Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Lord. Don't misguide them that "Here is another god, here is another god, here is another..." The Bhagavad-gītā also, in the last instruction, Bhagavān says, mām ekam. Ekam means one. "Only surrender to Me." So this is the verdict of all Vedic literatures. But if somebody thinks that "I can worship Brahmā, I can worship Kālī, I can worship Śiva, or many other demigods, and still the same thing," this is impersonalist view. It is not a fact. Because according to them, "The Absolute Truth is impersonal. There is no question of personality. But because we cannot concentrate our devotional energy or attention in the impersonal feature, therefore let us imagine some form of God." This is the, I mean to say, principle of the impersonalists. They imagine some form of God, and they get perfection. And ultimately they become impersonal, merge into the effulgence, brahmajyoti. That is their philosophy. The Māyāvāda philosophy and Vaiṣṇava philosophy differs here. Our Bhāgavata says that ultimate truth, Absolute Truth, is a person. Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti [SB 1.2.11]. Vyāsadeva says that "You direct people, attention, to the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

Now, the question may be that one may take to the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead without understanding the truth, by sentiment. Just like sometimes... It is mostly in this country. Some of the disciples, some of the students, they are coming, not that one has understood this philosophy very nicely and he is convinced. Some of them are coming by sentiment: "All right, let me join this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement." So in that case what happens? Suppose one does not understand the philosophy, but he comes to join this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, then what is the effect? That is also clearly explained by Nāradadeva, that,

tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ

[SB 1.5.17]



So Nārada says that "Giving up all other engagements..." Just like it is instructed in the Bhagavad-gītā that "Give up all other engagements. Simply surrender unto Me." So if somebody, out of sentiment, without understanding, out of sentiment, surrenders, comes to Kṛṣṇa... Here he had many duties to perform, his family life, his duty to the country, so many duties. Everyone has got so many duties. But one gives up all other duties, simply comes to Kṛṣṇa. Then what happens to him? This is very important version of Nārada Muni. He says, sva-dharma: "Everyone has got some occupational duty. So he gives it up according to the instruction of Kṛṣṇa," and caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ, "and begins devotional service, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then, after some time..." Just like many... When I came, in the beginning, there were many, not many, a few, say within five or six, they were working with me, but now they are not working. So that is possibility. Because one may come by sentiment. Then, after staying for some time, he may find it: "Oh, what is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Let me do something else." Or "Let me join in my previous occupation." So Nārada Muni says that "Even a person joins Kṛṣṇa consciousness, giving up all other occupational duties and without being mature, falls down, some..."



There are so many reasons one may fall down. Not only... Actually, the reason is māyā. Māyā, māyā. It is a fight. To take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness means it is a fight against māyā. Māyā is trying to keep you captivated within this material world. But if anyone takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he, māyā has to give him up. Māyā cannot control anymore. That is not the jurisdiction of māyā. Because you have read in the Bhagavad-gītā that Kṛṣṇa says, daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā: [Bg. 7.14] "It is very, very, very difficult to get out of the grip of the strong māyā." It is not... But mām eva ye prapadyante: "If anyone comes to Me or surrenders unto Me," māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14], "he immediately becomes out of the jurisdiction of māyā." So māyā is strong always. Just like I was explaining this morning what is māyā. Māyā is already there, side by side, Kṛṣṇa and māyā. Just like this light. This side is light; this side is darkness. Take this example. This light, the one side is very bright; another side is dark. So this darkness and this light is always side by side. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa and māyā... Because māyā is one of the energy of Kṛṣṇa. When Vyāsadeva by bhakti-yoga meditation experienced the whole thing, what did he see? He saw Kṛṣṇa. Apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam: "He saw the Supreme Person." Māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayam: "And he saw also māyā on the back side." Just like when you, if you stand, the light side, your shadow is not on the light side. The light... The shadow is on the back side.

So in our back side the māyā is there, although you are in front of Kṛṣṇa. So as soon as you become little slack in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, immediately māyā is ready to capture you. Māyā is always going side by side. As Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading, the māyā is also all-pervading. As soon as there is lack of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is immediately māyā.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



Jāpaṭiyā dhare means embrace. What is that? What is called, to capture like this?



Devotee: Hug?



Devotees: Hug, hug, embrace?



Prabhupāda: Embrace? Yes. So as soon as one, kṛṣṇa-bhuliyā, forgets Kṛṣṇa... Forgetting Kṛṣṇa means sense enjoyment. Two things are there. One, the materialistic persons, they are engaged in the activities of sense enjoyment, forgetting Kṛṣṇa; and the transcendentalists, the devotees, they are, even though they are not forgotten, but they are not interested in sense enjoyment. They are interested in Kṛṣṇa. That is the difference. This is māyā and Kṛṣṇa.



So māyā is always strong. As soon as we little slack in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, māyā will capture us in the same process. So here it is said, bhajann apakvo 'tha. If one is not very strong, not very much advanced, not mature, and falls down under the clutches of māyā again, so, Nārada Muni says, yatra kva vābhadram abhūt: "There is no," I mean to say, "loss." Abhadra means great loss, or inauspicity. There is no... "It is still good, even if he falls down." Why? Yatra kva vā abhadram amuṣya kiṁ ko vārtha āpto 'bha...: "In comparison to the person who is simply sticking to the formalities of religious principles without any development of love of Godhead, simply following the routine work, in comparison to that person, this person who came to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, either by sentiment or some way or other but falls down, this man is better. This man is better. There is no," I mean to say, "any great loss. Rather it is a great gain."

How it is gain? Kṛṣṇa has confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā that yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāya... Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe. This question was raised by Arjuna, that "Kṛṣṇa, one person is engaged in bhakti-yoga. It is very good. If he can execute bhakti-yoga to the perfect point and becomes liberated, goes back to Kṛṣṇa, it is very nice. But if he falls down, then what is his position? He loses both things? He loses Kṛṣṇa consciousness and all this material enjoyment. Then he is nowhere?" Kṛṣṇa said, "No, no, no, no. It is not like that. His position is not like that. His position is better still, even if he has fallen down."

What is that? Now, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate: [Bg. 6.41] "If one, anyone, immaturely falls down, then in next life he will have the opportunity to take birth in very rich family or in a family of a, I mean, real brāhmaṇa." Real brāhmaṇa means śuci, always pure. That is real brahminical qualification. Truthful, clean, wise, God consciousness-these are brahminical qualifications. We are giving thread ceremony to our disciples to recognize him that he has got the brahminical qualifications. He has given up this meat-eating, illicit sex life, gambling and intoxication. He is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. He is being purified gradually. He's trying to understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he's always pure. This is the recognition. This thread ceremony is recognition. But if we simply make it a show, that "Now I have got thread. I have become liberated. I may not do anything," and then again I fall down... The same principle is always going on, māyā and Kṛṣṇa.

Just like in India, those who are born in brāhmaṇa family, they are falsely proud that "We are born in brāhmaṇa family. Now we are perfect. Now we can do any nonsense thing. Still I am brāhmaṇa." And it is actually being done. They are doing work less than a śūdra, and still, they are passing on as brāhmaṇa. That is the cause of India's spiritual falldown. Some people, they have exploited simply being born in high family. But actually that is not the position. Actual position is by quality. If one has got the quality of a brāhmaṇa, then he should be recognized as brāhmaṇa, as we are doing here. Here nobody is born in a brāhmaṇa family, but how we are offering him sacred thread? By the quality. That is recommended by Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sanātana Gosvāmī gives a very nice example in his Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, that yathā kāṁsyam,

yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāti

kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena

dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām



He gives that "Just like by chemical process one can turn gun metal into gold, similarly, by the process of initiation, one can become dvija." Dvija means twice-born, or brāhmaṇa.



So the chance is given. If one falls down immaturely from the standard of bhakti-yoga, devotional service, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he gets next birth either in a very nice brāhmaṇa family, or very rich family. So is not...? So what is the loss there, even if I fall? But that does not mean I shall wait for falling down. No. Just like in India, formerly, in medical college there were two designations-one as M.D., and another was L.M.S. So what is the distinction? Now, after passing, after regularly attending the class, say, five or six years, if one passes the examination, he takes the title M.D., Doctor of Medicine, or something like that. And if he fails, then he is given the title L.M.S., Licensed in Medical, Medicine and Surgery. So after studying in medical college for the regular years, five or six years, so even if he fails, he is recognized, but not to the standard of that passed medical man, but he is given license: "All right, if you don't wish to study more, you get the license to practice." License. Similarly, a devotee, a person in devotional service, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even if he falls down by some reason or other, without being mature, then he has, he's not in loss.

He says, Nārada Muni says, that evaṁ tāvat tat karma-karmādi anartha-hetutva taṁ vihāya harer līlāiva bandhaniya tam.(?) Therefore everyone should be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If we pass Kṛṣṇa consciousness examination at the end of our life, it is very good, but even if we fail, just like the medical man, failing, as we can execute, we can work as a medical man, we get the license, just like to take birth in a nice family, that means again devotional service. In India, a rich family means they must have their own private temple. Generally they have got private temple, all rich men. Now they are not constructing. Just like in your country, those who are rich, now they are not constructing any churches. They... Everywhere, people are losing interest in religion. But in formerly, say, even twenty-five years ago, both the Hindus and Mussulman, if one becomes rich, immediately he tries to construct a temple or a mosque. I have got personal experience. When I was doing medical business, one Muhammadan... His name was Abdullah. He was supplying me bottles. So he was very poor man, but by making business in bottle supply he became rich. So one day I asked him, "Abdullah, you have got now money. How you are going to utilize your money?" So he said, "Bābājī, masjid banāyange(?)" He said that "My dear sir," that, "I have got an intention to construct a mosque." So people, either Christian or Jew or Muhammadan or Hindu, formerly they were religious and, according to their faith, they used to construct either synagogue or church or mosque or temple all over the world. Now they have lost interest. You see?

So to get birth in the family of a pure brāhmaṇa means he gets the association. Because in a brāhmaṇa family or a rich family the worship of Kṛṣṇa is there. Every brāhmaṇa family, according to Vedic culture, must worship Nārāyaṇa, every brāhmaṇa family. If he is not worshiping Nārāyaṇa, then he's rejected from brāhmaṇa family. That was the stricture. And śrīmatām. Śrīmatām means rich family, very rich family. So every rich family had a temple, private temple. Just like I was born in a family. Although I was not a member of that family, but I was born in a very rich family. They had a temple. Still that temple existing. When I last year went to India, I stayed in that temple. Acyutānanda, recently he was there. He informed me that he is staying in that temple. So that is the facility. We got the facility of this temple. Because we were born in that family, from the very beginning of our life we got the idea of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa worship. It is very nice.

So śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. So there is no loss. He begins again worship of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, either in the brāhmaṇa family or in the rich family. And ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ: "And if anyone does not take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, devotional service, simply engages in his, mean, prescribed duties as a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya or a śūdra, and he's very strict moralist, he may get, he may not get also." There is... Because this life, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, yes, Vedas, Upaniṣad, kṣurasya dhara iti duratyayā.(?) The people do not understand that how we are stationed. Any little difference, we may fall down. As there is chance of falldown from Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is chance of falldown from any position. This human life, human form of life, should be very carefully and cautiously utilized. This verse I was explaining yesterday, labdhvā sudurlabham idaṁ bahu-sambhavānte [SB 11.9.29].

So Nārada Muni advises that "Induce everyone to be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Never mind if he, even if he falls down. There is no loss." This is the principle. If he becomes successful, oh, the greatest boon. That greatest boon is described in Bhagavad-gītā, saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ, highest perfection. Highest... Saṁsiddhim. Saṁsiddhim means perfection. Paramām, the supreme.

mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



So if we become successful in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we achieve the greatest success of life, but even if we fall down, oh, there is no loss. Because we are going to get birth in śucīnām, in nice brāhmaṇa family, or rich mercantile family where it is supposed...



Nowadays, at the present moment, there is no brāhmaṇa, no kṣatriya, no vaiśyas. Everyone is a śūdra. Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. The situation is different. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has made the thing very easy. Either you become brāhmaṇa or śūdra or kṣatriya or less than śūdra, caṇḍāla, or, or anything, it doesn't matter. Take to this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa, and if you stick to this and if you follow the regulative principles, your success is sure. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's gift. And that is confirmed here by Nārada Muni, that "There is no loss even one falls down from Kṛṣṇa consciousness platform." That does not mean we shall fall down. We must be very steady and rigid and with vow, dṛḍha-vratāḥ. Bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ. Kṛṣṇa says that te dvandva-moha-nirmuktāḥ. How we can become fixed up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpam: "Anyone who is completely free from all sinful reaction..." Yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. And who can be completely free from all sinful reaction? They are always engaged in pious activities. Such persons... Because if you engage yourself in pious activities, there is no chance of your being engaged in sinful activities.

So this activity, Kṛṣṇa consciousness activity, is not only pious; it is transcendental. So if you stay on this platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the easy process, just like we are executing in New Vrindaban, chanting, dancing, eating bhāgavata-prasādam, hearing Bhāgavata or Bhagavad-gītā, trying to understand, simple process... It is not very difficult. And you are satisfied with little prasādam. Never mind what it is. This process will make you stay firm. So don't deviate. Whatever little regulative principles are there, they are not very difficult. Just stick to this principle, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, eat prasādam, and your life will be successful.

Here is the assurance by Nārada Muni, that "Even if he falls down, still, there is no loss. But the, on the other side, those who are not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if he's very regular businessman or regular worker, so many things, still, his gain is nothing." He... Śrama eva hi kevalam [SB 1.2.8]. He's simply laboring, because he has no connection with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The life mission, this human form of life mission, is to understand Kṛṣṇa and relation. He's neglecting that. He has no information. Therefore he does not gain. If you... Suppose if you go to a place, to a..., where you can earn money, as much as you like, and if you go there, and if you do not earn anything, you come empty-handed, so, as your mission becomes unsuccessful. Similarly, if in the human form of life you are simply engaged in the animalistic way of life-eating, sleeping, mating, and defending in a nice way than the birds and beasts-then you are not gaining anything. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jātaḥ. In many places these things are very nicely explained. Abodha-jātaḥ. We are born... We are born ignorant. A child is born ignorant. If the father, mother, guardians, do not give him education, then his life is spoiled. The child has no fault. It is the fault of the guardian. Similarly, in this human form of life, if the state, the father, the teacher, the school, college, and every, who are responsible for raising the child to knowledge, to become wise, if they do not care and simply they have trained for eating nicely, sleeping nicely and mating nicely and defending nicely, then there is no gain. The life is the... A chance is missed. Nārada Muni says that "Without coming to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if he's simply engaged in a polished way to this animalistic way of life-eating, sleeping, mating and defending-then he does not gain anything. On the other side, if a person without any knowledge, without any understanding, by sentiment takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and, being immature, if he falls down, there is no loss." This is the conclusion.

Thank you very much. (end)



690621SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.17-18

-

New Vrindaban, June 21, 1969



Prabhupāda: So we are discussing Nārada Muni's instruction to Vyāsadeva to make him correct. Vyāsadeva, such a scholar, Vedavyāsa... He is known as the topmost scholar in Vedic knowledge. Not only that, he has compiled so many books, literary achievement. There is no comparison in the world. But still, he is not satisfied, and Nārada Muni is instructing him that "You should write exclusively on the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, hearing which, there will be actual peace and prosperity all over the world." This is the secret. Without God consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there cannot be any peace in the world.



So we were discussing in our last meeting that if a person, by sentiment or by persuasion or by some material gain or somehow or other, decides to accept the statement of Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Ekam: "Only unto Me." He even does not say that there are many incarnations of Kṛṣṇa, but He says, mām ekam. So this ekam can be understood in this way, that when we speak "Kṛṣṇa," this term includes everything Kṛṣṇa, all-attractive. But we can capture everything in Kṛṣṇa simply by... Just like the same example, as we have repeatedly..., that by supplying food in the stomach, you supply food to all the limbs of the body. You don't require... This is practical. Or pouring water on the root of the tree, you supply water to all the branches, leaves, everywhere. We see every day... This is practical example. Simply... Similarly, there must be something, central point of all this manifestation. That is Kṛṣṇa. If we simply capture Kṛṣṇa, then we capture everything. And the Vedas also says, kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. We are searching after departmental knowledge, but if you simply understand Kṛṣṇa, the central point, then you understand everything. You understand everything. Just like we sometimes speak which great scientists cannot speak. Why? Because we have captured the central point, Kṛṣṇa.

So in the last day's meeting we discussed that even by sentiment, without understanding Kṛṣṇa, simply by sentiment, "All right, these, all these boys and girls are dancing in 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.' So let me also join this Kṛṣṇa Movement and dance," he will derive the greatest benefit. Simply... Tyaktvā sva-dharmam. Everyone is engaged, busy in his own occupation-businessman, student, lawyer, engineer, politician, so many. But Nārada says that "If these people give up everything..." The same instruction, as Kṛṣṇa says, "Give up everything. Surrender unto Me," Nārada says the same thing. That is the, I mean to say, significance, that whatever God, or Kṛṣṇa, says, His devotee also will say the same thing. There is no difference. Therefore it is called paramparā. Devotee will not manufacture something, interpretation, which is against the version of Kṛṣṇa. Then he is not devotee. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is playing the role of a devotee. So Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me," and Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, "You surrender unto Kṛṣṇa." So there is no difference between the teaching, teachings of Lord Caitanya and teachings of Lord Kṛṣṇa. The object is the same. So we are... What we are doing? We are also asking people, "Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa," the same thing. There is no difference. Therefore one has to accept the real thing from the paramparā system, serious devotee. Then... Because a serious devotee will speak the same thing as Kṛṣṇa says. There is no invention.

So Nārada Muni says... Because Nārada Muni is our previous ācārya, disciplic succession from Brahmā to Nārada, Nārada to Vyāsadeva, and Vyāsadeva to others. So Nārada Muni's instructing his disciple that tyaktvā sva-dharmam: "If somebody gives, gives up his occupational duty..." Just like sometimes we are taken as some crazy fellows. We have no concern with any political movement or social movement. We have taken simply Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So they may think that "This is a society of crazy fellows. They have given up everything, simply chanting: Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa." But Nārada Muni confirms, it is the first-class thing. He says that "If somebody, giving up everything, simply takes to Kṛṣṇa..." Tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ [SB 1.5.17], caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ. He takes, determines: "Now, from this day, I shall simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. I shall do nothing." "So," Nārada Muni says, "if somebody does like that..." Bhajana... And Śrīdhara Svāmī says that svadharma tyāgena, nānusvadharma tyāgena bhajana paripakena yadi kṛtārtho bhavet tadā na kadācit cintā:(?) "All right, this boy has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is very good. Let him do that. If he comes to the perfectional point of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is very good." But yadi punar apakva eva mriyate: "But if he does not prosecute Kṛṣṇa consciousness rightly, maturely, and if he dies..." Because death is expected any moment.

So suppose we are prosecuting this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Now death may come immediately. We all die. So Nārada Muni gives us encouragement that punar eva tato svedva:(?) "Either we die or sometimes we fall down..." Because māyā and Kṛṣṇa, side by side. "So it is all right. We are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But if we fall down." Vrase vā tadā sva-dharma tyāga nimitta narthāśraya:(?) "Then you have given up your all other duties. So for giving up your duty, there must be some punishment." I don't mean in this worldly punishment. Just like, according to Vedic system, there are brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, for example. Just like Kṛṣṇa was advising Arjuna that "You are kṣatriya. So if you die in this fight, then your heavenly door is open." Because, according to śāstra, if a kṣatriya dies while fighting, then automatically he gets promotion in the heavenly planet. And if he goes away, giving up the fighting, then he goes to hell. So similarly, if one does not discharge his duties, prescribed duties, then he falls down. Nārada Muni says, "Even if he falls down, still, there is no loss. Even if he falls down, there is no loss." Sva-dharma tyāgena anartha syād asam kara tato bhajanam pated katancid vrasyed mriyate vā yadi tathāpi bhaktir asikasya karmaṇy adhikarad na.(?) Even there is such chance, that I may fall down or I may not be mature, still, Nārada Muni gives: "There is no question of hesitation. Accept it. Even if you think that you'll not be able to prosecute Kṛṣṇa consciousness in full, still, you accept it."

Na sāṅkhya. Ami krte apy aha va śabda kathake.(?) Śrīdhara Svāmī says that this word, here... Bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi vā. Vā means "What is there, even if he falls down?" Yatra kva vā nica-yony apy amuṣya bhaktir eka sya abhūt kim.(?) Now, now suppose a brāhmaṇa, a brāhmaṇa, he is, he has got so many duties. As a brahminical, he has to perform so many sacrifices, nitya... There are different... Satya, śamo damas titikṣā. Satya means truthfulness. Śama means controlling the senses. Dama means... Dama means controlling senses. Śama means controlling the mind. Satya, śama, dama, titikṣā, tolerance [Bg. 18.42] There are so many nice qualification. So if a brāhmaṇa does not discharge his duties, it is said that he becomes a śūdra, or falls down. Sthānād bhraṣṭaḥ patanty adhaḥ. So Nārada Muni says that "Suppose next life a brāhmaṇa falls down. He takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Neither he executes the brahminical duties, nor he could prosecute Kṛṣṇa consciousness to perfection, still," Nārada Muni says, "there is no loss. There is no loss." Yatra kva va nica-yony apy amuṣya abhadra abhūt kim.(?) Now, if the brāhmaṇa, by not executing his prescribed duties, he becomes a śūdra-next life he takes birth in a śūdra family or lower than śūdra family-so Nārada Muni says, "What is the loss there? Because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice that it will not leave the person who has once taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It will revive even in that lower status of life."

Just like, according to Hindu civilization... Now, in this country, so the boys and girls who are taking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, previous to this, they were meat-eater. They were so many things which, according to brahminical religion, these are abominable condition. But see the practical. Even they were fallen this abominable condition some way or other, but because in the their last life they had some advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, immediately they are taking up. So those who are joining in this movement, in this country, they were supposed to be previously Kṛṣṇa conscious. Somehow or other, they could not execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness in full. So although they are born in a country where there is no trace of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no, I mean to, even purity of life, still, they are taking up. So where is the loss? There is no loss. Nārada Muni wants to point out that anywhere... Bhagavad-gītā also confirms it, that one who has once taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, anywhere he is in the next birth, he will again take it up. This is natural.

So Nārada Muni stresses this point, that yatra kva vā abhadram abhūd amuṣya kim. There is no loss. The... Because the seed, once sown, it will grow. It will grow. This example is given in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta by Lord Caitanya to Rūpa Gosvāmī, bhakti-latā, the plant of bhakti, growing. Simply we have to water it. Those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they should not be satisfied that whatever they have done, it is nice-"Even I fall down, there is no..." No, you have to execute as far as possible. But this is spoken. If by chance there is falldown, there is no loss. But we should not take that... We should not be careless. Śravaṇa-kīrtana-jale karaye secana [Cc. Madhya 19.152]. Just like our program in this New Vrindaban, very nice program. From four-thirty in the morning till ten o'clock, there is nice program. So this program should be continued. Then there is no question of falling down. Simply executing this program.

Next verse: bhakti-vāsanā sad-bhāva iti bhava avayad vistu kevalam sva dharma pakvo 'tha

vayaptya abhajatam(?) Now, once this Kṛṣṇa consciousness awakens, it is so nice that it will not let the person fall down. No. The... Rest assured. Fall down. It will go simply. If it is checked for the time being, but that checking is for temporary checking. It will again come out. So don't lose this opportunity. Go on with Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the simple method. So there is no question of falldown. Bhakti-vāsanā sad-bhāvāt.(?) Bhakti-vāsanā, this desire, that "I'll serve Kṛṣṇa," this desire is sufficient to keep him, I mean to say, intact. This very desire, bhakti-sad-bhāvāt. This desire will never die.

tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



Nanu svadharma matrad api karmana pitṛloka srute, pitṛloka-prāpti phalaṁ asti va tatraha tasyaite kovida viveki tasyaiva hetoḥ tad arthaṁ yatra kuryād yad upary brahmaloka paryantam adhaḥ sthāvara paryantam brahmadbi jivena na labhate.(?) Now, those who are karma-kāṇḍīya, karmīs... Karmīs means those who follow strictly the ritualistic ceremonies, as it is indicated in the Vedas. They are karmīs. Karma, akarma and vikarma. There are three divisions of our activities. Generally we say karmīs, ordinary men, who are working hard to earn some money and enjoy. Actually, they are not karmīs. They are vikarmīs. Real karmīs... Just like a thief. A thief is stealing. That is also certain kind of activity. It is not inactivity. So we cannot say that this is bona fide activity. He's also planning. He's also making plan, how to steal, how to go upstairs of the house and then come down. So there is activity. But such kind of activity is not bona fide activity. Therefore, according to śāstra, it is called vikarma. Vikarma means it is counteractivity. Activity means you have to work legally. That is activity. If you say that "I am very much active in stealing," then that is not excused. Then you'll... Government will say, "Please stop your activity. You come into the prison." Yes.



So similarly, this kind of activity, sense gratificatory activities, they are not karmīs even. They are vikarmīs. Because they are preparing their ground-adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisram: [SB 7.5.30] "By such activities they are going to the darkest region of hell." Adānta... Why? Now adānta-gobhiḥ. Adānta means uncontrolled. Go means senses. Such activities, impelled by uncontrolled senses, they will lead... Such activities will lead him to the darkest region of hellish condition of life. So activi..., real activity means to elevate yourself. That is, that is called karma. Karma, akarma, and vikarma. Vikarma means such activities will, which will lead him to the hellish condition of life. And karma means that activity which will promote you to the higher standard of life, in the higher planetary system, where the standard of life is far, far greater than in this planet. So that is called karma.

Therefore, generally, Vedic, those who are following the Vedic principles, they become active in the ritualistic ceremony. The idea is they'll be promoted to higher planets and will be able to enjoy better sense gratification. Suppose a man is very rich and he has got ten thousands of years' living condition. Then he thinks, "Oh, how happy I am. For ten thousands of years I shall be able to gratify my senses." So the karmīs are like that. They want actually sense gratification, but they want higher standard of sense gratification. Yes. That is their... We are... Economic development, in this planet. What is this economic development? That means if we get go more money, then we shall be able to gratify our senses more perfectly and more satisfactorily. That is the idea. Actually, either you become karmī or vikarmī, they are all on the platform of sense gratification.

So one is going down, and one is going up. So Nārada Muni says that tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ: [SB 1.5.18] "You should try... One should try to achieve that thing which cannot be gained even by going up or by going down." "Up" means upper planetary system. And "down" means lower planetary system. And Bhagavad-gītā also confirms this: ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ. There are three modes of material nature. "Those who are situated on the modes of goodness, they are promoted to the higher planetary systems." And ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. There are seven... According to Vedic information, there are fourteen different spheres of planetary system, seven down and seven up. So we are in the middle. This is called Bhūrloka. Above this, there is Bhuvarloka. Above that, there is Svargaloka, heavenly. The moon planet and similar other planets in the orbit, they are called Svargaloka. Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka, Svargaloka. Then Janaloka. In Janaloka... Great saintly persons, after death, they go to Janaloka or Maharloka. Then there is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka. In this way there are seven planetary spheres. Similarly, down also: Tala, Atala, Vitala, Talātala, Rasātala, Pātāla. They are also named, down, down, down, down. The lowest down planetary system is called Pātāla.

So here Nārada Muni says that "Try to achieve that thing which is not gained even if you go to the highest planetary system or if you go to the lowest planetary system. Or if you remain in this planetary system, middle." That means, going up means to be situated in the modes of goodness. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Sattva-sthā, "those who are situated in the mode of goodness, they can be elevated to the higher planetary system." Madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ: "And those who are in the modes of passion, they remain within this world." And adho gacchanti... Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthāḥ. "Those whose habits are very abominable..." Jaghanya. Jaghanya means very abominable, hateful. "One who is addicted to such hateful habits..." Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti, adho gacchanti. Adho gacchanti means either they go down planetary system or down living conditions just like animals. Just like animals. They are jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthāḥ. They can lie down anywhere. They can eat anything. They have no sense that "This is not good. I am doing this." They have no sense. Just like tree. We go sometimes in the jungle. A tree is standing for several thousands of years, but it has no sense, "Oh, I am standing like this, alone?" These are the births of jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti.

If our character and behavior is very low and abominable, then we are awaiting such condition of life. But here Nārada Muni says that there is another thing which is neither achieved either in the higher planetary system or lower planetary system. That means pāpa-puṇya. You go to the higher planetary system by pious activities, and you go to the lower, I mean to say, less than human life or lower planetary system, by papa, or sinful activities. But Kṛṣṇa says that "Don't be attracted by pious activities; neither go down to abominable condition of life. Simply capture Me." Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja. That is the whole instruction of Bhagavad-gītā. He has also explained,

ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ

punar āvartino 'rjuna

mām upetya tu kaunteya

punar janma na vidyate

[Bg. 8.16]



"My dear Arjuna, even if you go up to the Brahmaloka, with so much long duration of life..." Kṛṣṇa does not speak that "You go down." Of course, that is for the third-class, lowest class of men. That is another thing. But even if you first-class man and by your pious activities you go up to the Brahmaloka, so punar āvartinaḥ, you have to again fall down. Mām upetya kaunteya: "But if you come to Me, then there is no such fear that you'll fall down." Mām upetya kaunteya punar janma na vidyate. "Then you haven't got to come here and again take birth."



So Nārada Muni also, the same thing. This is called paramparā system.

tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā

[SB 1.5.18]



The nature's law is acting. So you don't try for being elevated to the higher standard of life or higher planetary system. There is no need of wasting your energy in that way. So higher or lower, that will come. That will come without... Just like we try to become happy or peaceful, but by circumstances we are put into unhappiness, disturbed condition of life. Nobody asks for it, but we are sometimes obliged to accept this. Similarly, by..., without your endeavor, if you can be put into distressed condition of life, why not, without your endeavor, you may be put in the happy condition of life? So don't try to be elevated in happy condition of life or distressed condition of life. Try for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then your energy will be properly utilized. This human form of life so important that in this life only we can try to execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



In the higher planetary systems... Just like Yamala-Arjuna... That story is narrated in our book, Kṛṣṇa. Yamala-Arjuna, they were two sons, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, two sons of Kuvera. Kuvera is supposed to be the treasurer of the heavenly planets. So very rich man's son. So they were enjoying swimming in a very nice lake in the Śivaloka. That description is there. And with young girls and intoxicated. So they forgot that they were demigods, and they were naked. To become naked is the most uncivilized way. In the Vedic system, to..., nakedness is... Why Vedic system? Suppose if you go naked on the street, immediately you'll be punished. You cannot say that "I have got my independence. I can..." No. Against the etiquette. So these boys, Nalakūvara, they were intoxicated and naked and were enjoying swimming with other girls, and Nārada was passing through that way, and he saw, "Oh, they have fallen into such abominable condition? They are forgotten that they belong to very respectable family, and I am passing here with..." So they were cursed. Not cursed, they were given the benediction that... By devotee, either a man is cursed or given benediction, it is the same thing. Just like these boys, they were cursed to take birth of the tree, who has no sense. Tree is naked or a animal is, an animal is naked, but they have no sense. But if a human being becomes like that, then he is considered uncivilized. So Nārada Muni says that kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā. We should try for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise, even if we go in higher standard of life, our, sometimes our consciousness is so degraded that, that that two sons of Kuvera, although they were, they got the body of demigods, still, they had to come down to take the birth of the life of trees, Yamala-Arjuna.

So there is every chance, every chance of falldown. Why there are so many species of life? Why we are thinking that "Our life is guaranteed; we shall continue like this"? This is called ignorance. Any moment this standard of life, this comfortable standard of life, may be lost. Therefore Nārada says that "Everyone should try to achieve that benefit of life which is not available within the fourteen worlds, fourteen," I mean to say, "different types of planetary system." So Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has captured this idea. And he sings, golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana: "This hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is not anything of this material world, either of the higher planetary system or the lower planetary system." It is golokera prema-dhana. It is the happy mode, not this mode of passion or goodness or ignorance. The happy mode, imported from Kṛṣṇaloka, Goloka. Therefore it is transcendental vibration. It is not of this material world. Golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmilo kene tāy: "I am so unfortunate that this hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is imported from Goloka Vṛndāvana, transcendental platform." Rati nā janmilo kene tāy, "But I have no attraction for this." Biṣaya-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale: "Although I am suffering always with the anxieties of this material adjustment of things..." Biṣaya-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jvale, juṛāite nā koinu upāy. Juṛāite means "There is way to get out of this anxious status of life, but I have no attraction." Caitanya Mahāprabhu also says like that. Enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāro lāgi': "I have brought a nice medicine to kill the spell of māyā. So you take it."

So Nārada Muni also says the same thing what Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, what Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, what Kṛṣṇa says. This is paramparā system. He says that "Don't be," I mean to say, "very much anxious how to adjust your material comforts of life. Let it come as it is destined. You simply try to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness, because this consciousness is not available." In higher planetary system... Just like this example. They were puffed up with so much opulence. A man... Just like we are inviting, we are attracting, middle class of men. Those who are too much rich, in consideration of this, they are not attracted. They think that "All right, these boys are chanting in the street. All right." Not, I don't think very rich men contributes. They also, middle class of men, they contribute something. So to become too much rich, too much puffed up with opulence like the two sons of Kuvera, is another chance of being degraded. To remain a little poor is better condition for developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore our duty should be not to become a very great man in the consideration of these materialistic men. If he wants thousands and millions of dollars, become like a Rockefeller or Ford, that will be great a estimation of these common materialistic man, but from spiritual point of view, such things have no value-unless such opulence is engaged in the service of the Lord. Otherwise, it is the cause of falldown.

So Nārada Muni says that "Just try to save people to take to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and other things will automatically... Whatever is destined by the laws of nature, they will get it. So there is no need of performing ritualistic ceremonies for being promoted to the heavenly planets or this or that. It is useless. What does he gain by that? He'll come down again. So don't teach them like that. Simply teach them to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That will make their life successful."

Thank you. (end)



690622SB.NV

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.18

-

New Vrindaban, June 22, 1969



Prabhupāda: So Nārada Muni is advising Vyāsadeva, tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovidaḥ. Kovida means intelligent, expert. One who knows things as they are, he's called kovida. So one who is intelligent, he should try to achieve that thing which is not available-na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ-which is not available even by wandering up and down. This we have already explained in the last meeting, that according to our karma, we are being sometimes elevated to the very high position, and sometimes we are being degraded to become an insignificant creature like ant. This is going on. (baby crying in background) (aside:) This boy... She, she can go to the... Yes. This is very disturbing child.



Nanu sadharmam atradapi karma pitṛ-loka iti śruti pitṛ-loka-prapti phalaṁ aptaiva hatrasapi kovidaḥ viveki; tasyaiva hetoḥ tad artham yartham na kuryad yad upary brahmaloka paryantam adhaḥ sthavara paryantam brahmad bija na labhyate; tato viṣaya sukham anyathā eva praptino sva karmaṇā sarvatra narakadapi labhyate duḥkhavat; yataḥ duḥkham prajadnavina labhyate tadvad; tad uktam apraptithani duḥkhāni tathaiva ayaṁ hi dehināṁ sukhāni api tathā manye daivatra atir-icyata(?).

So our duty is as, I mean to say, indicated by Nārada Muni. Our only duty is how to achieve full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Other things, there is no need of trying. Actually, I have seen that in India... Everywhere the same case. A person without any education, even without any, practically illiterate... I have seen so many merchants, he cannot sign even his name. In Calcutta I've seen practically a Marwari, merchant. He, he cannot... He has deposited money in the bank. Simply he can sign his own name with great difficulty. So he's canvassing, "Will you kindly write here..." That means the check to be paid to the gentleman, he cannot write. He's asking somebody's help, "You write the name of the person whom I can pay." And he'll simply sign. If he writes something wrong, he'll have to accept. If he writes his own name... (laughter) So that man is earning millions of dollars. You see? And I have seen also very educated medical man, England-returned, M.R.C.P I am speaking from my practical experience. So he goes to a hospital, big doctor, but I have seen in his house. He had not even a good utensil at home. He's so poor in spite of so much education and highly qualified, England-returned doctor.

So the statement of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham. You don't try for so-called economic development. You cannot have more than what you are destined to get. It is already settled up. This, this living entity... You see different grades of standard of living condition. So they're according to the past karma, daivena, daiva-netreṇa, karmaṇā. So you cannot change that. That nature's law, you cannot change. Why you have got varieties of life, varieties of position, varieties of de...? It is destined. Viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. Viṣaya, these material enjoyment-means eating, sleeping, mating and defending-these... Only standard is different. I am eating something, you are eating something. Maybe, in my calculation, you are eating not very good. In your calculation I am not eating very good. But the eating is same. You are eating. I am eating.

So in the material world the standard of happiness, taking the basic principle, it is all the same. But we have created, "This is good standard. That is bad standard. This is very nice. This is very bad." Caitanya-caritāmṛta says, dvaite bhadrābhadra sakali samāna. In the material world, "This is good," "This is bad"-actually, it is the same thing. As it is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ: it is due to the skin that we are sometimes feeling warm and sometimes feeling cold. The material nature is the same. Similarly, our feelings of happiness and distress is just like feeling the warmth and, I mean to say, chilly cold. Due to the skin, due to this body. Actually, there is no happiness in the material world. Kṛṣṇa says, duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam: [Bg. 8.15] "This place is full of misery, full of misery." Now, how you can make it happy? Caitanya-caritāmṛta also says that dvaite bhadrābhadra sakali samāna. In this material world it is our mental creation: "This is happiness. This is distress." Actually, it is all distress. After all, we have to die. After all, we have to finish this business. So what is happiness or distress? Bhāgavata also says that "Don't bother yourself to make yourself happy by working day and night without trying for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is simply waste of time." There is no question of happiness in this material world. If you actually want to be happy, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12), if you want to be placed in real happiness, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate [SB 1.5.18].

So this chance we have got in this human form of life. I can execute the business of Kṛṣṇa consciousness very nicely. In other form of life I cannot do that. Even if I try, it is not possible. That the dog cannot because it is not a human being. But we can because we are... So why should we lose this chance? Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta.

na vai jano jātu kathañcanāvrajen

mukunda-sevy anyavad aṅga saṁsṛtim

smaran mukundāṅghry-upagūhanaṁ punar

vihātum icchen na rasa-graho janaḥ



Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice that, if once adopted, he'll not degrade like ordinary man. This is stated here clearly. Na vai jano jātu kathañcanāvrajen mukunda-sevy anyavat. Anyavat, others, as they have become a tool in the hands of material nature, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, because he has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he is not under the jurisdiction of the material nature. Mām eva ya prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti.



So whole stress is being given that "You take, you preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If some way or other..." The whole, the three verses, are stressing that "Even if he falls down, there is no harm. Preach to take Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Caitanya Mahāprabhu also says like that, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] "Whomever you meet, you simply try to make him convinced or to preach him the importance of Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... Some way or other, if he takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then his life become successful. Yad uktaṁ yatra kva vā abhadra abhūd amuṣya kiṁ yad upavadayiti mukunda-sevī jana kadācit kathañcana kujanim kato'pi saṁsṛtiṁ na vrajet na viset.(?) Śrīdhara Svāmī says, mukunda-sevī. Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa's another name is Mukunda. Muk, muk. Muk means liberation, mukti. So... And ānanda. So Kṛṣṇa can give you liberation from this distressful, miserable condition of material existence and give you transcendental pleasure. Therefore His another name is Mukunda. So mukunda-sevī. Sevī means one, he's engaged in the service of Mukunda, or Kṛṣṇa, Śrīdhara Svāmī says that mukunda-sevī vā jana kadācit kathañcana kujanim gato 'pi saṁsiddhin na vrajet.(?) Even a Mukunda-sevī, by chance... There is chance. Every... Just like Bharata Mahārāja. He began Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but by chance he, at the time of death, he was too much affectionate with a deer cub and he become a deer in the next life. So although it is degraded life, still, he did not forget that "For this reason I have become now deer." So he was very cautious. He was keeping company... Just like here. We have got dogs. They are keeping company with devotees. That is very nice. His dog life also be coming perfect. It may be some pious man. Somehow or other, it has become dog. Now he has... Kṛṣṇa has given them the association of the devotees. He's eating prasādam. He's chan... He's hearing, chanting. He's giving some service to the devotees. So they are not in vain. They are not in vain. No. They, they're acquiring.

So mukunda-sevī. Similarly, anyone who has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, even if he falls down... Generally, he does not, but even, taking for accepted that he, somehow or other, he fallen, still, he'll not have to suffer like others. Just like here, the animals, under the protection of the devotees, at least he has no fear of his life. No devotee will kill. Here the cows, the horse, the dog, they're assured of their life. Therefore they're not like ordinary dogs. They're not ordinary cows. Therefore it is said, Śrīdhara Svāmī says, mukunda-sevī, even if he's degraded, he's not degraded as ordinary man. He's not degraded as... Mukunda-sevī na vrajet aṅga, anyavat kevala karma niṣṭhavat iti vaidharma niṣṭha.(?) Just like other karmīs. They are, according to their karma, they're given birth in a specific species of life. So their case, a devotee's case, is different.

So kuto ityataha mukundāṅghry-upagūhanam aliṅganam punaḥ smaran vihātum necchet yathān jana asad graha rasena na gṛhyate.(?) Just like we see sometimes... The other day, the boy, Jayarāma, he went away. Again he came. We have got experience that many boys, they go away. But they cannot find out... Just like I received many letters from Jayagovinda when he was India, in India, that he's missing the company of devotee-Godbrothers. He's missing. So there is a feeling. Anyone who has associated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, I mean to say, association, he cannot forget. Rasa-graho janaḥ. Here it is stated that smaran mukundāṅghry-upagūhanaṁ punar vihātum icchen na. Vihātum means "to give up." He may fall down by māyā's influence for time being, but he cannot give it up. This is the sign. He cannot give... Just like... The example is given: just like hot sugar juice. It is very nice. Because it is hot, one is feeling uncomfortable to take it, but because it is sweet, it cannot give way. Hot sugar juice. Similarly, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice that if somebody, being..., becomes attracted by some kinds of māyā's, I mean to say, influence, still, he does not like to give up this Kṛṣṇa consciousness like others.

This is the specific qualification of a Kṛṣṇa conscious person. Smaran mukundāṅghry-upagūhanaṁ punaḥ. One who has chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa, he cannot give it up. Cannot give it up. He has to come again. This life or next life, Kṛṣṇa will not leave him. Kṛṣṇa... Once surrender sincerely, "Kṛṣṇa, I am Yours," Kṛṣṇa will never leave him. He will protect you. But if he had become little stronger, then there is no question of falling down. Rasagra rasena grhyate vaśi kriyate.(?) Kṛṣṇa vaśi kriyate. Vaśi kriyate means hypnotized. It is so nice that one becomes hypnotized. Otherwise, why the boys are working so hard? They are... (laughter) They're all qualified. They can earn money outside. In your country sufficient money is paid for work, but they are hypnotized here. (laughter)

So Kṛṣṇa is so nice. Yes. He's the all-attractive. He hypnotizes His devotee in spite of... Just like the Pāṇḍavas. The Pāṇḍavas, they were Kṛṣṇa's friends. Arjuna was friend. All the brother... Arjuna was very intimate friend, but other brothers, four brothers, they were also Kṛṣṇa's friend. And Kuntī, the Pāṇḍavas' mother, she happened to be the aunt of Kṛṣṇa. So they were well, mean, established in relation with Kṛṣṇa. But as a result, they were banished for twelve years. They lost the game, so they were banished. And their wife, Draupadī, was insulted. Not... They could not insult her, but they tried to insult her. They tried to make her naked in the assembly. And they lost their kingdom, and they were banished for twelve years. So Nārada met Kṛṣṇa. His devotee, he could speak Kṛṣṇa with little criticism, "My dear Sir, Kṛṣṇa, by becoming Your devotee the Pāṇḍavas are very happy. They have lost their kingdom. Their wife is insulted. And now they are banished for twelve years. So it is very good thing. (laughter) But the wonderful thing I see, now, in spite of all these inconveniences, they have increased their love for You." So Nārada, he is astonished, "What kind of hypnotism you do, I do not know. (laughter) In spite of being placed in so much inconveniences, their love for You has increased." That is the position of Pāṇḍavas. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇaḥ [SB 10.14.8]. The devotee, pure devotee, if they are put into difficulty they take it, "Oh, it is Kṛṣṇa's grace. It is Kṛṣṇa's grace." Tat te 'nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam. They take it in this way, "Kṛṣṇa, I was to suffer hundred times more than this due to my bad activities in my past life, but You are giving me a little out of it. So it is Your grace." So devotee never takes any...

Therefore nārāyaṇa-paraḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati: [SB 6.17.28] "One who has become nārāyaṇa-paraḥ, Kṛṣṇa conscious, he's never afraid of any condition of life." Bhagavad-gītā also, Kṛṣṇa says, yasmin sthito na duḥkhena vicālyate: "If one is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then he's never disturbed." Guruṇāpi duḥkhena: [Bg. 6.20-23] "If he's put in the severest type of difficulty, he's never..." Just see the Pāṇḍavas. That is the effect of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore Nārada is trying to convince Vyāsadeva that "You preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Whatever you have so..., so far written books, they have been useless. Now you write something, by reading which, one will become immediately Kṛṣṇa conscious." Sadyo hṛdy avarudhyate. In the beginning of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said that "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is so nice that simply by reading, immediately one can capture the Supreme Lord within his heart." Sadyo hṛdy avarudhyate śuśrūṣubhis tat-kṣaṇāt. Tat-kṣaṇāt means immediately, provided if he's little willing. That's all. Śuśrūṣu. That is the word.

So our whole program is that Kṛṣṇa is very kind, always kind upon us, but we have to become little willing to take Kṛṣṇa's favor. That... What is the example? My Guru Mahārāja used to give a very nice example. I remember. Just like here is a well. Somebody has fallen down; he's crying, "Please get me out! Get me out! Get me out!" Now, if somebody drops a, a, I mean to, tight, strong rope and asks him, "All right, you catch this rope tightly. I'll get you out," and if he says, "No, that I cannot do," then how he'll be saved? That much endeavor he must have, to catch the rope. Then he'll be lifted immediately. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa says that sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. So we have to do that. Simply to surrender unto... Then everything is there. That is the only. Because... Now the rope is there. Now we have to capture. Now, if you don't use your independence to catch it, then how can you expect to be lifted? That much you have to do. Because you have got... You are living. You are not a dead stone. You have got the independence. Therefore you have to capture, and Kṛṣṇa will do everything. Then Kṛṣṇa will do everything. Simply you have to capture, that "Kṛṣṇa, from this day I am Yours. Whatever You like, You do."

Just like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, mānasa deho geho, jo kichu mora, arpiluṅ tuwā pade, nanda-kiśora. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Nanda-kiśora. Kṛṣṇa has thousands and thousands of names, but this word, Kṛṣṇa, is the original name, the exact name, "all-attractive." So here Nanda-kiśora. Nanda-kiśora means the young boy of Mahārāja Nanda, Nanda-kiśora. So Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura addressing, "My dear Nanda-kiśora, young boy of, young child, or young son of Nanda Mahārāja," mānasa deho geho, "my mind, my body, my family," mānasa deho geho jo kichu, "whatever I think 'This is mine...' " Because we are conditioned souls, "my," "I," and "mine," this is our disease. "So whatever I am thinking 'It is mine'... First of all, 'This body's mine,' or 'The home, the family, that is mine.' " So mānasa deho geho, jo kichu... "Whatever I have got in my possession, now I am surrendering unto You." Arpiluṅ tuwā pade nanda-kiśora. This is surrender. "So I am giving unto You my family, my home, my body, my mind, everything." Arpiluṅ tuwā pade nanda... "Now, whatever You like, You do." That is very nice song. So we have to do that. Then Kṛṣṇa will take care. That's all. The same example: you simply have to capture the rope. Then you'll be lifted immediately.

So, so here it is said that a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, even if he is fallen down, he is not so degraded. Śrīdhara Svāmī, here, herewith quotes a verse from Bhagavad-gītā. It is nice.

yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ

saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana



pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva

hriyate hy avaśo 'pi saḥ



Just like so many boys and girls come to our association just like somebody forcing him, forcing him, "You just remain in this association." That is Kṛṣṇa's grace. That means in their past life they had been Kṛṣṇa conscious. Some way or other, it was not being fulfilled. Now again the chance is being given. That is stated in Bhagavad-gītā, that yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ saṁsiddhau. The percentage up to which he finished in his last birth, that is not lost. That is there, fifty percent or forty percent, thirty percent, whatever one executed in the last birth. Now next, this birth, unwillingly or by force, by Kṛṣṇa's force, he'll have to accept again Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



Just like Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura. I think I have several times spoken about Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura. So Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura, he raised himself in his previous life to the bhāva-bhakti. Bhāva-bhakti means always feeling for Kṛṣṇa. That is the prior stage of loving Kṛṣṇa, bhāva-bhakti. So he, in his previous life he was raised, but somehow or other, he fell down. But it is assured, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate: [Bg. 6.41] "Even such Kṛṣṇa consciousness person falls down, he is given chance to take birth in nice brāhmaṇa family or śuci, pure family, and rich family." So Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura was very rich man. He was born in a very rich brāhmaṇa family. And he was addicted to prostitute. By some way or other, he had some inclination like that. So he could not finish Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He fallen down. But at a opportune moment he got again the Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

How is that? The incidence is that he was performing the śrāddha ceremony of his father, but he had a girlfriend, prostitute. So he wanted to go there very quickly. So somehow or other he finished. And he wanted to go there. But on the road he found that it was very heavily raining and he had to cross the river. So he did everything. And he... The prostitute was... She thought that "Bilvamaṅgala is not coming today. It is very..., so much raining." So when she saw that Bilvamaṅgala is at the door, she was astonished. She said, "Bilvamaṅgala, how did you come here in this rainy, torrents of rainy...?" So he disclosed everything that how he catched one dead body in the river, then he crossed the river, then he jumped over the wall. So she was astonished, and she simply said, "Oh, this much affection if you would have with Kṛṣṇa, how you would have been... Your life would have been nice." Immediately it was... "Oh, Kṛṣṇa...?" Immediately, he left everything. Immediately he left everything and went to Vṛndāvana. He is... So Kṛṣṇa is so nice. Just at the right point He will remind. Yatate ca tataḥ. Here, in the Bhagavad-gītā, yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana, pūrvābhyāsena. He was accustomed, so immediately reminded, immediately.

So these are the, I mean to say, facilities for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And this is the only business one should take. All other things, simply waste of time. That is the instruction of Nārada. Nārada is the spiritual master within, spiritual master of the whole Vaiṣṇava sect. So he's giving the right direction, that "Don't try for anything else. Don't think that you'll be happy this way or that way. Never... Whatever happiness or distress..." (coughing) Where is water? So example is given here that tal labhyate duḥkhavat. Nobody expects a calamity or distress, but sometimes calamity overcomes us. Similarly, you should not, I mean to say, try for any artificial happiness. Whatever Kṛṣṇa gives you, be satisfied. That was the basic principle of Vedic civilization. Nobody was trying to make any artificial economic development. No. The whole history of India is like that. They were satisfied, "All right..." Even now the mass of people... In 1942 there was famine. People were dying. Still, they were..., "All right. Kṛṣṇa has given us. God has given us." That was the mentality.

So our main business is how to improve Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We should not divert our attention in any other material condition of improvement. That is actually not improvement. It is simply illusion, that "I am making improvement." What improvement? Suppose you are earning now, say, five hundred dollars per month. If you earn, say, five million dollars, so then what? Will you eat more than four cāpāṭis? (laughter) You'll eat the same four cāpāṭis. And you'll occupy the same six feet bed. You may acquire the whole property of West Virginia, (laughter) but you'll have to lie down on six feet. (laughter) That's all. And you'll have to eat four cāpāṭis. So this is māyā. This is māyā, "I am improving." What you are improving? You'll not be taller. You'll not be great eater, nothing of the sort. Whatever you have already, you'll have so the same thing. You see?

So tad eva bhagavad-līlā pradhanarena anuvarṇaya; ity uktam bhakti-bhāvam ka ca kasya līlā iti apekṣama ilam bhagavān eva satu asmad iti araha.(?) So Nārada Ṛṣi, Nārada Muni says, "You just try to describe the glories of Kṛṣṇa." And what is that? The question may be, "Then how shall I glorify Him?" He says, idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān ivetaraḥ: "You study everything and dovetail with Kṛṣṇa." Idam: "This world, this cosmic manifestation..." Idaṁ jagat. Jagat means this cosmic manifestation, idam, this, bhagavān... "It is Kṛṣṇa." That means, "Try to preach or try to teach the people in general that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, everything is manifestation of Kṛṣṇa's energy." But not impersonalism. If... The impersonalists' view is that if everything is Kṛṣṇa... That is the... That is their material way of thinking. Just like if you take a big paper and, I mean to say, cut into pieces and the pieces are distributed, strewn over, then the original paper is lost. So their theory is, "If Kṛṣṇa is everything-Kṛṣṇa has expanded in this world, in cosmic manifestation-then Kṛṣṇa has no form, separate form." That is their theory. But the Vedic injunction is: "No, it is not like that." Pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate: [Īśo Invocation] Kṛṣṇa is so full that even Kṛṣṇa expands million times, still, He's the same thing, Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is person. And even He expands, Kṛṣṇa, in many ways... Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. This is the fine philosophy. One has to understand how Kṛṣṇa, in spite of His being a person-He's person, without any doubt-He has expanded in so many universes, so many manifestations. Yes.

So I was... This morning, while I was walking, I was talking with Devānanda that how Kṛṣṇa expands. It is commonsense affair. Just like a small seed in a fruit-that seed you sow, it becomes a big tree. And from that big tree, again millions of fruits come out. And again from that, each fruit, there are millions of trees. We can see the potency. Even in our material existence we see so much potencies in everything. Why not Kṛṣṇa's potencies? We see the sunshine, the potency of the sun. The sunshine is spread all over, and everything is existing on the sunshine. Even the sunshine has got the so much potency. That we can experience. And how much potential is Kṛṣṇa, who is the creator of the sun also. Yac cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ. So we have to study like that everything. Everything is Kṛṣṇa's expansion. Just like the fire. Fire is situated in one place, but here... Just like here there is a fireplace. But if there is fire, the heat will be experienced up, up, upstair, and here and that other side. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa, although He's person, He's situated... Goloka eva nivasati. He's enjoying there in Goloka Vṛndāvana. By His energy, He is expanded. This is simple truth. Anyone, any man with common sense, he can experience.

So Vyāsadeva is teaching Nārada Muni, idaṁ viśvaṁ bhagavān. Īśvarad prapañca na pṛthak.(?) This world is not different from Kṛṣṇa, na pṛthak. Pṛthak means different. The world is not... But that does not mean Kṛṣṇa has lost His personality. This is the difference between Māyāvāda philosophy and Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Māyāvāda philosophy is: "If the whole cosmic creation is God, then where is God again separately?" That is their poor fund of knowledge. That is God who, expanding Himself in so many ways, still He remains as He is. That is God. Otherwise, how He is God? It is material thing. If by expanding, He loses His identity, then it is material. In the material sense, that we experience. The same example: you take one big paper and cut into pieces and throw it. The original paper is lost. That is material. But in the Īśopaniṣad we hear that pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇaṁ pūrṇāt udacyate, pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam eva avaśiṣyate [Īśo Invocation]. Just like when Kṛṣṇa was sporting on this earth as cowherd boy, Brahmā became doubtful, "How is that? Kṛṣṇa has become a cowherds boy here?" So he wanted to test whether He's Kṛṣṇa. So he, he sifted all the cows and cowherds boys from the pasturing ground, and again he saw that millions times the same cows, boys and cowherd, cows and cowherd boys, are present there. So that is Kṛṣṇa. He can expand. Bṛhatvad bṛhannatvad. Brahman means He can expand unlimitedly. And He can shrink also to the minute. Just like we are very minute. We are also part and parcel. And this cosmic manifestation is also part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore He's called paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12].

So in this way we have to study to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. The, everything is there. Simply we have to become little serious. Then we can understand what is this world, what is Kṛṣṇa, what we are, how they have expanded, how this world is created, everything. All answers are there. It is not a sentiment, that we are accepting something by sentiment. All reasons, all philosophy, arguments, are there. We shall discuss by and by.

Thank you very much. (end)



740803SB.VRN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.22

-

Vṛndāvana, August 3, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "Learned circles have positively concluded that the infallible purpose of the advancement of knowledge, namely austerities, study of the Vedas, sacrifice, chanting of hymns and charity, culminates in the transcendental descriptions of the Lord, who is defined in choice poetry."



Devotee: Would you like the stand to be lower?



Prabhupāda: No.



idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

[SB 1.5.22]



So this is our mission, that find out the original cause. That is scientific research. All the scientists, they are trying to find out the original cause. That is advancement of education. They are analyzing one after another. But till now, they could not find it out. Big, big scientists have tried. But they could not... Only theory: "This is the original cause. This is the original cause."



But we do not depend on the theories. We depend on the Vedic conclusion. We do not require to make any research. Just like ordinarily we say there are 900,000 forms of body in the water. We get it from Vedic knowledge. Jalajā nava-lakṣāṇi. Now, the biologists, let them confirm it. Or deny it. Because... They cannot confirm it because their knowledge is experimental. Unless they find it actually, by actual experience, that there are so many living forms within the water, they cannot say yes. Neither they are able to find it out. Is it not the position? First of all, if we say to the biologists that "There are 900,000 different forms of life or species within the water," they will say, "How it is you are affirming in, so positively, without experiment, without research?" They'll say. Then we'll ask, "Then you say." That they cannot say. This is their position. They'll say, "In future..." Future, there is no question. You do not know now. Admit this. So this is their position. Therefore this experimental knowledge is always imperfect. Always imperfect. It cannot be perfect. Because our experience, our power of perception, advancement of knowledge, they are imperfect. They are deficiency.

Therefore, for perfect knowledge, you have to approach the perfect. We accept Lord Kṛṣṇa as the perfect, and His bona fide representative is also perfect. How he is perfect? Kṛṣṇa may be perfect, one may admit, but how his bona fide representative is also perfect? So the answer is the bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa, he does not say anything beyond Kṛṣṇa. That is perfect. He may be imperfect. It doesn't matter. But he is receiving knowledge from the perfect, and he's simply repeating that knowledge. That is the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Yāre dekha tāre kaha, kaha kṛṣṇa-kathā. Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-kathā.

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



You don't speak your upadeśa, your instruction. That is nonsense. What you are? That is the defect of the modern civilization. They simply want to instruct by his experience. But what is your experience? They're all imperfect. But they are persisting, "No, we cannot accept any knowledge without experiment." Is it not the position. Eh?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Experiments.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: They're after.



Prabhupāda: Now, that the scientists will say, "Why we shall accept Kṛṣṇa's version as perfect?" Do they not say like that?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes, they ask.



Prabhupāda: But they cannot give any perfect information, their theories. So our process is to take Kṛṣṇa... Not only our, this is the paramparā system. All the ācāryas-Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya-they take Kṛṣṇa's version as perfect. And Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, therefore, that "You do not instruct anything which is manufactured by you. Do not instruct all these..." Because you are imperfect. You have manufactured all your theories. They are imperfect. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore says, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. This is perfection. If you say Kṛṣṇa's upadeśa, instruction, then it is perfect. And if you say your experimental instruction, that is imperfect.



Here it is said that idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ... Every knowledge... Just like here is our Dr. Svarūpa Dāmodara. He has got the doctorate title. We have seen your book. It is a learned scholarship, research work. So that is nice. But he has admitted the original cause is Kṛṣṇa. So we are asking everyone that "Whatever knowledge you have got..." It doesn't matter whether you are a chemist or physicist or an engineer or medical man... Any... There are so many. Lawyer, politician. So many departmental knowledge. So one becomes doctor and expert by high research work. For the last... How many years you were in USA?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: I think five years.



Prabhupāda: Five years. After five years hard work and placing the theses among the learned scholars, they admitted, "Yes, it is very nice research work." Now they have offered him a Ph.D. So it is tapasya. Tapasya. Without tapasya, you cannot get any credit. That is not possible. If one wants to get credit immediately, without tapasya, that is bogus. Therefore it is said, tapasaḥ, and śrutasya. Śrutasya means hearing from the authorities. By attending lectures of the professors, of the scientific scholars, hearing. Or Vedic knowledge.



So anyway, everyone is getting knowledge, perfection, by tapasya, by austerity, by learned scholarship. So here it is said that, that these things are required for describing Kṛṣṇa. These things are required for describing Kṛṣṇa. Not only on the theory, but actually to prove that this knowledge is there, Kṛṣṇa is full of all opulences, and... It is said... Jñāna, jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva śaṇṇāṁ bhaga itīṅganā. Eh? What is the beginning? Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47). Kṛṣṇa means He's the full opulent Personality of Godhead with all riches, all reputation, all beauty, all knowledge. That you have to prove. Any department of knowledge, you have to prove that it..., this knowledge is coming from Kṛṣṇa. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1].

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. (aside:) Let him sit down properly. That is scholarship. You make research work, but... In the śāstra it is said that Kṛṣṇa is the original person of this departmental knowledge. Suppose you are a lawyer. So Kṛṣṇa gives the law. This is research work. Just actually Kṛṣṇa gives. What is Kṛṣṇa gives? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is law. The first giver of law is Kṛṣṇa, that "You give up all nonsense. Surrender unto Me." This is law. Then you'll understand everything. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Religion means the law given by Kṛṣṇa, or God. That is religion. Otherwise, it is not religion. That is cheating. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. This is cheating religion. If you do not follow Kṛṣṇa, that is cheating.



"Kṛṣṇa" means... When I say "Kṛṣṇa," Kṛṣṇa means God. God is one. That is Kṛṣṇa. Others, they admit that God is one. But they do not know who is that one God. That is their defect. That is the difference between us and others. They do not know... Just like if I say that "Have you got any father?" So he'll say, "Yes, I have got my father." "Now, who is your father?" "I do not know." That's not a very good credit. Because without father, mother, there is no existence. So everyone knows I have got a father. But who is my father, that I do not know. At least, in India, one who cannot say his father's name, immediately he becomes degraded. Just like the Jābāla Satyakāma. Jābāla Satyakāma, he, he was... He went to Gautama Muni, "Please initiate me." And according to Vedic conclu..., initiation is meant for the brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and vaiśya. Not for the śūdras. Śūdras are not initiated. And in the Kali-yuga, because everyone is a śūdra, therefore he's first of all given training to become a brāhmaṇa. Then the sacred thread is offered. This is the process. Because actually, initiation cannot be given to anyone except a brāhmaṇa. So kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ: "In the Kali-yuga, everyone is śūdra." That is to be accepted without any disagreement. Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. Because they have no saṁskāra. Asaṁskṛtāḥ kriyā-hīnā mlecchāḥ. One who is not undergone the reformatory processes, garbhādhāna-saṁskāra, upanayana-saṁskāra... There are ten kinds of saṁskāras, reformatory. One who has not gone, or one who is not permitted to undergo the saṁskāra, he's śūdra. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. Everyone is born śūdra. By reformatory method, he becomes twice-born-by the spiritual master and Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is the mother, and spiritual master is the father.

In this way, the Jābāla Upaniṣad... He was asked by his, by Gautama Muni, "Who is your father?" So he said that "I do not know." "Then go to your mother. Ask her." The mother could not say, that "I do not know who is your father. I have connection with so many men." So he came back to Gautama Muni, "Sir, my mother also does not know." She said that she had many connections, 'I do not who is particularly your father.' " But Gautama Muni immediately accepted him, "Yes, you are brāhmaṇa, because you are truthful. Nobody dares to say like that, that 'I do not know my father's name. My mother said that she had many connections.' " Because he was truthful, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā, so by the quality, he was accepted immediately, and he was initiated, that "You have the qualities of brāhmaṇa." A brāhmaṇa will speak truth, even to his enemy. If the enemy comes, if a rogue comes, "How much money you have got in your box?" a brāhmaṇa will say, "Sir, I have got one hundred dollars." (laughs) Just like the other day, in the Customs examination in Bombay, so our Brahmānanda Mahārāja was asked, "What is the value?" "No, I have purchased it." "What is the value?" "Two hundred dollars." He did not say that "I am using it for long time." No. "It is new. I have purchased." That's all right. Yes. But Kali-yuga is so implicated that sometimes we have to speak the untruth. But it is the business of the brāhmaṇa to speak the truth. No untruth.

So, so in this way our proposition is that if we want perfection, then in whatever position we are, either I am a brāhmaṇa, or I am a kṣatriya, or I am a vaiśya, or I am a śūdra-it doesn't matter, if we simply take this vow, that Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of everything... A śūdra is also a, the original cause is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that He is the cause of the śūdras. You should not hate anyone, because everyone is born of Kṛṣṇa. Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]. Kṛṣṇa says. Sarva-yoniṣu. It doesn't matter in what form the living entity is there, but Kṛṣṇa claims that He is the father, He is the father. So either brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya or vaiśya or śūdra or mleccha, yavana, or white, black, European, American-anyone-he should know that the original cause is Kṛṣṇa. This is perfection of life.

idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

[SB 1.5.22]



So if everyone says that "Original cause of my existence is Kṛṣṇa," this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It doesn't matter. Not that a brāhmaṇa... Brāhmaṇa is the mouth of Kṛṣṇa, and kṣatriya is the arm of Kṛṣṇa, and vaiśya is the belly of Kṛṣṇa, and śūdra is the leg of Kṛṣṇa. But do we distinguish that "Here is Kṛṣṇa's mouth, or head; all the flowers should be offered here, not to the leg"? Do we make any such distinction? When we worship Kṛṣṇa, rather, our first duty is to offer to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa says that śūdra, in Bhāgavata says, śūdra is the leg. So there may be distinction of profession, occupation, caste, creed, color... It doesn't matter. But if everyone tries to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, that "The original cause of my existence is Kṛṣṇa," then there is life... Life is perfect. This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Not blindly, but by research work, that how the original cause is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]: "I am the original cause of everything. Everything emanates from Me." How can I deny that Kṛṣṇa is not cause? This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore, those who are advanced devotee, he does not see anything else but Kṛṣṇa. Because Kṛṣṇa is the cause of everything. That is required. Therefore he's Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So we should not take anything neglectfully. Neither we should be careless to take care of Kṛṣṇa's property, Kṛṣṇa's living being, Kṛṣṇa's house, Kṛṣṇa's temple, Kṛṣṇa's business, Kṛṣṇa's... Everything Kṛṣṇa's. Kṛṣṇa. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat [Īśo mantra 1]. If we think like that, then that is perfect Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ [Bg. 9.34]. We may think, see varieties of things. It doesn't matter. But if we know that the original cause of this thing is Kṛṣṇa, that is perfection. We are seeing this table. It is wood. But if we know... It is a fact. You know or not know, that doesn't matter. The original cause is Kṛṣṇa. The microphone, the original cause is Kṛṣṇa. These karatālas, the original cause is Kṛṣṇa. This pitcher, original cause is Kṛṣṇa. Everything. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And it is fact. Not that we are imagining. Just like... Take, for example, these material things. Material things, this table. It is... How it is caused by Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa says, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca [Bg. 7.4]. Bhūmi, this earth... Bhinnā prakṛtir me aṣṭadhā: "That is My energy." So, so bhūmi, the earth, is the cause of the tree, wood, and the wood is the cause of this table. Therefore, originally, Kṛṣṇa is the cause of the table. There is no doubt about it. Anything you take. Either you take this wood or you take this water or this ether or chemical, the original cause is Kṛṣṇa.

Now, to be ascertained, education, that why it is called Kṛṣṇa is the origin. That is research work. How it has been...? Just like I give you the hint of research work that, Kṛṣṇa says that "The earth is my energy, separated energy." And earth is the cause of the wood. And wood is the cause of the fire. Fire is the cause of melting... So many, so many. You can go. So idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ...kavibhir nirūpitaḥ. Describe the attributes of Kṛṣṇa. You can write. Just like you can write volumes of books on this table. If you are intelligent enough, you can make research work on the table. But in that research work, conclude that Kṛṣṇa is the origin. A carpenter can, he can write about Kṛṣṇa, if he's thoughtful. Anyone. Therefore it is said, yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam. Whatever your profession is there, you know that the original cause is Kṛṣṇa. Now make research work and find out how Kṛṣṇa is the original cause. That is education. That is wanted. Am I right?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes, Śrīla Prabhupāda.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So everyone can write books. Everyone wants to write books, wants to show some scholarship. Do it. But the conclusion should be that "Here is the original cause." And it is already said in the śāstra... Kṛṣṇa personally says that



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



This is budhāḥ. Those who are actually educated, they're called budhāḥ, in full knowledge.



So there are departmental knowledge. So by research work, when one understands that Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of everything, then that is siddhānta. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā says that

siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

[Ādi 2.117]



Siddhānta, conclusion, try to study. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the origin of everything." So whatever subject matter you have got, you study. Then when you come to this conclusion, "Yes, actually Kṛṣṇa is the original cause," then your devotion of Kṛṣṇa immediately increases. If you accept blindly Kṛṣṇa, that is one thing, another one thing. And if you study, make research work, and find out Kṛṣṇa is the original cause, then your love for Kṛṣṇa will increase. So this is required. This is required.



So this verse is very important thing. And everyone should make research work. But a devotee, one who has concluded, one who has perfectly known that Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of everything, he hasn't got to do anything. His business is finished. He doesn't require any more to go, undergo severe austerities to find out whether Kṛṣṇa is cause or not cause. Because he has already known. He has already known. Ārādhito yadi haris tapasā tataḥ kim [Nārada-pañcarātra]. No more tapasya. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. But if you have got doubt, make research work. You'll have to come to the conclusion. But if you have concluded it, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of everything," then your business is finished. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. But if you have got doubt, then do it. That is your business. Don't be blind. Either you accept here the words of Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the original cause of everything." That's all right. If you believe that "Kṛṣṇa says," it is all right. If you do not believe, then make the research and find out. That is perfection. In both ways you'll have to come to the...

Because the fact is fact. Either... Suppose somebody says, "Don't touch fire. It will burn your hand." If you accept it, your father's advice or your teacher's advice, "Don't touch fire," it is as good. And if you want to make research, "No, why shall I believe my father, my teacher. Let me experiment, touch," the result will be the same. Result will be the same. But if you want to make experiment, do it. But come to this conclusion, that Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of everything. Then your life is perfect.

Thank you very much.



Devotees: Jaya, Śrīla Prabhupāda. [break]



Puṣṭa-kṛṣṇa(?): ...translation... [break] ...Bhagavad-gītā... [break]



Dayānanda: ...Prabhupāda...



Prabhupāda: Hm.



Dayānanda: What is that... [break]



Prabhupāda: ...nice. I don't exactly... We have heard from authorities. There is no question of inquiring. What is the... Even if you don't quote, you can assert firmly that everyone is a śūdra. How? Now, guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Bhagavad-gītā says this classification is made, guṇa-karma. So what is the karma at the present moment? They're seeking service. The so-called education means seeking service, master. Paricaryātmakaṁ karma śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. This is śāstra. Anyone who is attached to give service to others or, without giving service to others, he cannot live, that is, he's śūdra. He has no independent existence. Just like I was showing, the dog. Unemployed. Lean and thin and... Because he has no master. The same dog, when he has got a master, he'll be stout and strong, and he'll, as soon as you... "Owf! Owf! Bow! (laughter) I have got my master." So this is śūdra. Śūdra is compared with the dog. A dog is never happy without a master. Then it is a street dog. That is the difference between household dog and a street dog. So in this age practically you see, unless there is employment, he's a street dog. That is the proof that everyone is a śūdra. That is the proof.



Brahmānanda: Brāhmaṇa is not to accept any employment.



Prabhupāda: No. He'll die of starvation. He'll not accept any employment. That is brāhmaṇa. Kṣatriya also that, and vaiśya also. Only śūdra. A vaiśya will find out some business. He'll find out some business. So there is a practical story. One Mr. Nandi, long, long ago, in the Calcutta, he went to some friend that, "If you can give me a little capital, I can start some business." So he said, "You are vaiśya? Mercantile?" "Yes." "Oh, you are asking money from me? Money's on the street. You can find out." So he said, "I don't find." "You don't find? What is that?" "That, that is a dead mouse." "That is your capital." Just see.



So in those days plague in Calcutta, plague was going on. So municipal declaration was any dead mouse brought to the municipal office, he'll be paid two annas. So he took that dead body of the mouse and took to the municipal office. He was paid two annas. So he purchased some rotten betel nuts with two annas, and washed it and sold it at four annas, or five annas. In this way, again, again, again, that man became so rich man. One of their family members was our Godbrother. Nandi family. That Nandi family still, they have got four hundred, five hundred men to eat daily. A big, aristocratic family. And their family's regulation is as soon as one son or daughter is born, five thousand rupees deposited in the bank, and at the time of his marriage, that five thousand rupees with interest, he can take it. Otherwise there is no more share in the capital. And everyone who lives in the family, he gets eating and shelter. This is their... But the original, I mean to say, establisher of this family, Nandi, he started his business with a red, a dead rat, or mouse.

That is actually fact, actually fact, that if one wants to live independently... In Calcutta I have seen. Even poor class vaiśyas, and in the morning they'll take some ḍāl, bag of ḍāl, and go door to door. Ḍāl is required everywhere. So in morning he makes ḍāl business, and in evening he takes one canister of kerosene oil. So in the evening everyone will require. Still you'll find in India, they... Nobody was seeking for employment. A little, whatever he has got, selling some ground nuts or that peanuts. Something he's doing. After all, Kṛṣṇa is giving maintenance to everyone. It is a mistake to think that "This man is giving me maintenance." No. Śāstra says, eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. It is confidence in Kṛṣṇa, that "Kṛṣṇa has given me life, Kṛṣṇa has sent me here. So He'll give me my maintenance. So according to my capacity, let me do something, and through that source, Kṛṣṇa's maintenance will come." Just like we are maintaining so many people in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. So what business we are doing? But we are confident that Kṛṣṇa will send us our maintenance. That confidence required. A śūdra means he becomes disturbed. He becomes disturbed. "Oh, I have no employment. How shall I eat? Where shall I go? Where shall I live?" He has no faith in Kṛṣṇa. The brāhmaṇa has got full faith. The kṣatriya has got little less faith, the vaiśya, little less faith, and the śūdra has no faith. This is the difference.

So your question was that how we can know a śūdra? That because everyone is now faithless and everyone is seeking after employment. Therefore... We may discuss in so many ways. Because people have become śūdra, therefore the capitalists are exploiting them. If everyone denies to be, serve, then these so-called industries will fail. Immediately. That is Gandhi's proposal. "Noncooperate with the British government, and it will wind up." And actually so happened. Because people are now śūdras, they depend for their bread to others, the others exploit them: "Come here. You work and I shall give you bread." They do not believe any more, "O God, give us our daily bread." They think that "This, our master give us daily bread." That is śūdra. Śūdra means one who is dependent on others. Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam. This is the description, definition of śūdra. And vaiśya: kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. The vaiśya is doing the kṛṣi, agriculture. Why he should depend on...? Take some land from the government. You produce your food. Where is the difficulty? Keep some cows. You get milk. Vaiśya-karma svabhāva... Go-rakṣya. If you have got excess, then make trade. Why you should depend on others?

But they do not know. They want that "I shall go at ten o'clock in the office, and I shall do nothing. Simply I shall take the pen and make like this and take my salary." That's all. Cheating. This is going on. Therefore the whole system is polluted. Nobody's doing his duty. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma... [Bg. 4.13]. According to one's quality, one must work. But nobody wants to work. So therefore they are śūdras. They are working, but at the care of somebody else. Not independently. Now the school, college, the teacher is also depending on salary. So they are śūdras. So what teaching they will give? Teaching is the business of the brāhmaṇa. No salary. Formerly, all the brāhmaṇas, they used to have that... It is called ṭola, catuṣpāṭhī. Catuṣpāṭhī. Brāhmaṇa, he'll sit down anywhere and invite that "If you like, you can come and take some teachings from me."

Brahmānanda: Caitanya Mahāprabhu did that.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So still in villages you'll find, the brāhmaṇa is sitting somewhere, and the small children are coming, and they're bringing some presentation. Somebody's bringing rice, somebody ... And brāhmaṇa was satisfied, satisfied. "Whatever Kṛṣṇa sends, that's all right." This is brahminical qualification. He doesn't want more. There was a brāhmaṇa teacher in Kṛṣṇanagara. So the zamindar of Kṛṣṇa..., Rāja-kṛṣṇa-candra, he went that "Brāhmaṇa, what can I help you?" "No, I don't want your help." "No, you are... Your house is not very good, and your..." "No, I am quite satisfied." "How you are pulling on?" "No, I have got my students. They bring some rice. And here is a tamarind tree. My wife collects some leaves and boils it, and that becomes nice soup. And these boys bring some rice. I am quite satisfied."



[break] "...as your production is there, give me twenty-five percent. I'll give you protection." That is kṣatriya business. Brāhmaṇa's business, teaching. And vaiśya: till the field, agriculture, get your food. Now, where is dependence? Only a śūdra, he cannot take up all these things. "Give me some service, sir. Give me some service." In the modern education, they... The more and more industries increasing, there śūdras are being trained up. Technology. Technology means he must get some service. Otherwise, useless. Simple life, teaching, brāhmaṇa; and kṣatriya, give protection; and vaiśya, till the ground. This is... Where is the question of scarcity? The scarcity is that nobody's doing his real duty. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. And people are exploiting. There is competition, dissatisfaction, fight. So many things, sinful activities. The whole society is polluted. Actually, the whole human society is now conducted by the śūdras. But śūdras cannot run on government. That is not possible. Because that śūdra, your Nixon, is a śūdra, he is exalted post, therefore everything is not in order.

Brahmānanda: Kṣatriyas should run the government?



Prabhupāda: Oh, yes.



Brahmānanda: And the brāhmaṇas should give advice.



Prabhupāda: Yes. That is Vedic system. The brāhmaṇas would never take part in administration. They would give advice according to śāstra.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: I have a comment on that research.



Prabhupāda: Hm.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: You said that researches are all right, but there has to be a standard.



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: It has to be standardized.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Research.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So that is the business of the research scholar, how to make it standardized. Everything is standardized. Just like you have found the molecules, protons, and... They are working in a standardized way. They are not working whimsically there. There is standard process.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: And what is that standard? What is that standard of research?



Prabhupāda: The standard is already there. Is not that?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes, but...



Prabhupāda: Standard is already there. Kṛṣṇa has already made the standard. Our intelligence is to know how the standard has come.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: So we say that brahma-jijñāsā is a standard. Is that, is that...? Is that okay?



Prabhupāda: Brahma-jijñāsā means... Anything you take, it is working in a standard way. Just like the sun is rising. So the brahma-jijñāsā means how the sun is rising exactly in time? Who has made this rule? And in astronomy there is very fine calculation, one ten-thousandth part of a minute or something like that? I have heard from you scientists. They, they make calculation of the movement of the sun, that. In astrology also, the moment is calculated like that. If the exact moment is there, by mathematical calculation, he can give you the exact history of your whole life. This is standard, all standard. Niyamitaḥ. Yasyājñayā bhramati kāla-cakraḥ. There is, Brahma-saṁhitā says:



yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



How exactly the sun and the moon and the planets, they are rotating? How? Yasyājñayā, by whose order? That Govinda, ādi-puruṣa, I offer my respectful... Everywhere you'll find the research.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: But the difference between the transcendentalists and the scientists is that they do not know the standard of research.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Therefore we say they are fools. Why do we say mūḍhāḥ? Because they do not know. And our business is easy. We take Vedic version, Kṛṣṇa's version, Brahmā's version, Vyāsadeva's version, and accept. That's all. Which one is easiest? Our business is very simple. You ask your father... A child asks his father, "Father, what is this?" The father says, "This is microphone, my dear child." And he will, "Mother, this is microphone." So when he says this "Mother, this is microphone," is he correct or not?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes, he is.



Prabhupāda: He's correct. He may be child. But because he has accepted the words of his father, the statement is correct. So our process is that. Take the version of the authority, Kṛṣṇa, and you repeat it. Your version is perfect. This is our policy. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, "You rascal scholar, philosopher, scientist, don't manufacture anything. Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. That's all. You become master." Yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. You become master. You can teach others. A spiritual master. That's all. And if, whatever little success I have got-only for this reason. I have never said anything which is not spoken by Kṛṣṇa. I never said, "In my opinion." I never said. You are so many students. I never said that to you. What is my opinion? One should know, "What is the value of my opinion? I am imperfect being." This is called tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā. If one thinks, "Oh, I am big scholar. I am this. I am that," you are rascal. You have to simply carry the message of Kṛṣṇa. But for your understanding you can make research work.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: That is the secret.



Prabhupāda: Yes, that is the secret.



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



If one has got unflinching faith in Kṛṣṇa and his representative, guru, then all the knowledge will be revealed to him automatically. Just like yourself. You are a big scientist. You have talked with me, you have studied with me, and you have examined me in so many ways. And I have also spoken whatever I had knowledge. Unless you are convinced, how you can say that "You are my spiritual master"? So what is the secret? I am not a scientist. I am not M.A., C.A How do you agree to accept me as spiritual master? Because I stick to this principle, Kṛṣṇa and guru, that's all. This is the secret of guru.



So today is Baladeva āvirbhāva. Baladeva, in the strength. Nāyam ātmā bala-hīnena labhyaḥ. You cannot understand, realize yourself without the help of Baladeva. Therefore in the Vedic literatures: nāyam ātmā bala-hīnena labhyaḥ. You cannot become self-realized without the help of, without the mercy of Baladeva. Now, our Vivekananda Swami, he interpreted that "Unless you become stout and strong like the bulls and the buffalo, you cannot realize self." He interpreted like that. So he engaged people to make gymnastics, exercise. "You become very stout and strong, eat meat, and..." This is going on. This philosophy is going on. Bala-hīnena... "Unless you become as strong as a tiger, you cannot realize yourself." This interpretation is going on. Bala-hīnena labhyaḥ. Therefore they are... Always they put this argument, that "Our countrymen is suffering. There is no food. First of all we must give them food, make them strong, stout. Then we shall talk about Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Do they not say like that?

Brahmānanda: Yes.



Prabhupāda: This is another nonsense. Bala-hīnena does not mean this physical strength. Bala-hīn... Bala, bala means spiritual strength, Baladeva. Baladeva is spiritual strength. Nityānanda. Balarāma haila nitāi.



Brahmānanda: Hīna, hīna. Bala-hīna?



Prabhupāda: Hīna means without. And bala means strength. So śāstra says, nāyam ātmā bala-hīnena labhyaḥ: "One who is less strong, or one who has no support of the strength, then he cannot make any progress in spiritual self-realization." This is the Vedic injunction. So they interpret that unless you become physically strong, you cannot make any spiritual advancement. So...? But in the Western countries we have seen, so many people physically very strong, stout and strong. Practically everyone. But what is their self..., advancement in self-realization? So these things are going on. So bala means spiritual strength, not material strength. Nāyam ātmā bala-hīnena labhyaḥ. That means one must be spiritually strong. And that spiritually strong means to have good faith in Kṛṣṇa and guru. That is spiritual strength. Therefore Baladeva means guru, spiritual strength. Balarāma haila nitāi. Nitāiyer karuṇā habe... What is that song? Nitāiyer karuṇā habe vraje rādha-kṛṣṇa pābe. He is... "If there is mercy of Nitāi, then..." That Visansena(?), call him. (calls out to someone who is apparently leaving) Serji, aiye na? (Hindi)



Indian: (Hindi)



Prabhupāda: Aiye, sāheb.



Indian: (Hindi)



Prabhupāda: Aiye.



Indian: (Hindi) What is... What shall I do, coming?



Prabhupāda: Sit down. You can make some space. Aiye.



Indian: (Hindi)



Prabhupāda: [break] ...the verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,



idam hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

[SB 1.5.22]



That everyone is situated in some business, occupation. So it is the duty of the person, never mind in whatever occupation he is engaged, uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam, to glorify the Supreme Lord. It doesn't matter whether he is a medical man or he is an engineer or a lawyer, or whatever he may be, politician... His only business is by his occupational duties to glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the basic principle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We do not advise that you change your place. There is no need of changing place. Sthāne sthitāḥ. This is the Brahmā's version. Sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhiḥ. You remain your, in your occupation, your position, but kindly hear. Therefore we have got so many śāstras, Vedic... Therefore the Vedic literature is known as śruti. One has to hear. But that education is lacking. Nobody is hearing the Vedic literatures. They are hearing so many other things, but not... Therefore Bhāgavata says, śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ. Śrotavyādīni. The business is to hear.



But,

śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



Gṛheṣu. We are now compact in our home. You take universal home or your house home or this body home, we are within. So gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. Because we have taken that the home business is everything. Gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām. And who has taken like this? Apaśyatām ātma-tattvam [SB 2.1.2], one who cannot see the, "What is the value of my existence," ātma-tattvam. So for them, śrotavyādīni rājendra nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ [SB 2.1.2], they have got many things to hear. Here, of course, in India, we have got newspaper, four pages, five pages, but in the foreign countries, especially in America, they'll present newspaper, so big. Therefore there is paper scarcity. You see? Unnecessarily printing so much, huge quantity of newspapers. And people... Sometimes they do not touch it. The newspaper man throws in everyone's bungalow, and it is lying for three days. So who is going to read? But they are making their business because they get advertisement. In the... Many news. So they have got to hear or understand so many news, but not this Bhāgavatam. They'll devote the whole day for reading this newspaper or some fiction or some novels, for this and that. Some political talks and... But they have no time to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā. Apaśyatām ātma... Because they have no, no interest in self-realization. There is no interest. People have lost all interest. This is the position. Therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is essential at the present moment.



Now, these European and Americans, they have enough heard about all these nonsense. Therefore they are anxious to hear about self-realization.

śrotavyādīni rājendra

nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ

apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām

[SB 2.1.2]



(Hindi) He was punishable. It was the duty of the government to see that "You are posing yourself as brāhmaṇa. Whether you are doing the duty of a brāhmaṇa?" If he's not doing, then he was punished. Therefore nobody was unemployed. A brāhmaṇa is doing his duty, kṣatriya's doing his duty, vaiśya his duty. We get this information from Mahārāja Pṛthu's kingdom. He, he was very strict, that whether one is doing his duty. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. If the brāhmaṇa is doing his duty, the kṣatriya is doing his duty, and vaiśya is doing his duty, then where is the unemployment? And it is the duty of the government to see that everyone is doing his duty.



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: No, no. Society means this combination of all these men. So if everyone is doing his duty, then it is quite all right. That is perfect society. Society means some combination of men. So if every man perfectly does his duty, then there is no question of imperfect...



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Yes. That is the difficulty. That is the difficulty. That I was explaining, that at the present moment mostly persons, they are śūdras. Just like in your body there are four divisions. Your head division, your arm division, your belly division, and your leg division. And if you cut off everything, simply you keep the legs, then what will be done? So at the present moment there is no brāhmaṇa, no kṣatriya. Maybe some vaiśyas only. Only śūdras. Therefore there is chaos. If the division is made, kept, as it is advised in the Bhagavad-gītā, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13], according to guṇa and karma, then the society is maintained very nicely, properly. If your head is working nicely, if your arms are working nicely, if your stomach is working nicely, leg is working..., then you are fit. But if you have got only legs, and head, there is no head, there is no arm, then what is the...? Dead society.



So we are giving education at the present moment to become śūdras. Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. To serve others. A brāhmaṇa will not serve anyone else. A kṣatriya will not serve anyone else. A vaiśya will not serve anyone else. Only the śūdras. So at the present moment we are giving śūdra education. Everyone is taking one application: "Give me some service." "No vacancy, sir." Therefore it is said, kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In the Kali-yuga everyone is śūdra. And how you can have good government by the śūdras? Kṣatriya required. Just like Mahārāja Parīkṣit. He was touring. As soon as he saw one man is killing cow, "Who are you, rascal, killing cow in my kingdom?" Kṣatriya. Give protection. Even to the cows. Prajā means one who has taken birth in that land. Why he should not be given protection? But because they are śūdras, they do not know what is the kṣatriya's duty, what is the government's duty. This is the position. Am I right or wrong?

Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: No, I am speaking according to our śāstras.



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: No, no. In those days the whole planet was Bhāratavarṣa. Therefore it is called Mahābhārata.



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: That was not small. That was very big. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going on tour because he was the emperor of the whole planet.



Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Now it is divided.
