

730501SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.39

-

Los Angeles, May 1, 1973



Devotee:



neyaṁ śobhiṣyate tatra

yathedānīṁ gadādhara

tvat-padair aṅkitā bhāti

sva-lakṣaṇa-vilakṣitaiḥ

[SB 1.8.39]



"O Gadādhara [Kṛṣṇa], our kingdom is now being marked by the impressions of Your feet, and therefore it appears beautiful. But when You leave, it will no longer be so."



Prabhupāda: So in the Cāṇakya śloka there is a very nice verse:



śarvarī-bhūṣaṇaṁ candro

nārīṇāṁ bhūṣaṇaṁ patiḥ

pṛthivī-bhūṣaṇaṁ rājā

vidyā sarvasya bhūṣaṇam



Everything looks beautiful when one is related with something in very intimate relation. Just like at night the sky becomes beautiful when there is moon. Everyone can understand. The sky becomes... The sky is there. Vast sky, at night. But on the full-moon night, when the moon is there and the stars are there brilliantly, it looks very nice. Similarly, the state looks very nice if there is good government, good king, good president. Then everyone is happy, everything going on nicely. Similarly, nārīṇāṁ bhūṣaṇaṁ patiḥ. A girl looks very beautiful... Girls are naturally beautiful. But she looks very beautiful when she has got a husband. Nārīṇāṁ bhūṣaṇaṁ patiḥ. And vidyā sarvasya bhūṣaṇam. But if a person, however ugly he may be, if he's a learned scholar, that is his beauty. Similarly there are kokilānāṁ svaro rūpaṁ strīṇāṁ rūpaṁ pati-vratam. These are there. Similarly everything will look very beautiful when Kṛṣṇa is there, when Kṛṣṇa is there. So Kuntīdevī is thinking that "When Kṛṣṇa will be absent, our, this kingdom will not be beautiful. So long Kṛṣṇa is with us, we Pāṇḍavas, our kingdom, Hastināpura, everything beautiful." It is said, tvat-padair aṅkitā bhāti. "Kṛṣṇa, You are now in our kingdom. You are walking. So by the impression of Your footprints, everything is beautiful. There is sufficient supply of food, fruits, water. Everything looks beautiful. But when You leave us, then it will not look beautiful." That is being described. Neyaṁ śobhiṣyate. Śobhiṣyate. "It will not look beautiful."



So it is not only applicable when Kṛṣṇa was present and Kuntī was speaking. It is not that the truth was there. It is always. With the advancement of our civilization, if we don't bring..., we cannot..., if we cannot bring Kṛṣṇa in the center, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then it will never become beautiful. This is the philosophy. You bring Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Practically anyone can appreciate that this... You are all boys and girls. When you were outside this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, just think over, your beauty was there, but, at the present moment, because you are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you look very, very beautiful. That's a fact. Nobody can deny. You compare with other boys and girls and the boys and girls here. Anyone... In your country, they have given you the name "bright-faced." Do you know? The newspapers... Yes. In Philadelphia, one lady was inquiring that "Are you Americans?" Perhaps you know all these things. So actually your countrymen, those who are sober, they are seeing that "How these boys and girls are becoming so nice and jolly, beautiful." Because at the present moment in your country all young generation mostly they are confused, hopeless. We see every day-morose, black-faced. Why? Because they're missing the point. There is no aim of life. But these devotees, Krsnized, they look so beautiful. Why? Because Kṛṣṇa is there. That's all. It is a fact. Any sane man will admit.

So what is fact now, what is, what was fact before, during five thousand years ago when Pāṇḍavas were there, that Kṛṣṇa in the center, everything becomes beautiful-that can be done at any time. Kṛṣṇa is always there. Simply you have to invite Him, "My Lord, please come and be in the center." That's all. Everything will be beautiful. The same example, sometimes as I give you, that there are zero... Zero has no value. But you bring one by the side of zero, it becomes ten times beautiful, immediately. So our point is that you do whatever you are doing. We don't stop you. We never say that "Stop everything of material..." But we have to stop anything which is against Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because we do not stop, it doesn't mean that we shall not stop meat-eating. We must stop. This is against advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You cannot commit sinful activities. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa says that "You surrender unto Me and I shall rescue you, make you liberated from all kinds of sinful reactions."

Every one of us, life after life, we are committing simple sinful activities, knowingly or unknowingly. Knowingly, I may kill one animal. That is sinful certainly. Even we do it unknowingly, that is also sinful. Just like while we are walking on the street, we are killing so many ants, unknowingly. So in our ordinary dealings, while cooking, while taking water, while using pestle and mortar for smashing spices, we are killing so many animals. So unless we remain Kṛṣṇa conscious, we are liable to be punished for all these unknowingly committing sinful activities. Knowingly, of course, you'll be... That's a fact. Unknowingly. Knowingly or unknowingly. Just like fire. A child unknowingly touches the fire. Does it mean that the fire will excuse the child? No. The nature's law is so strict, so stringent, that there is no question of excuse. In the ordinary law also, ignorance is no excuse for legal obligation. If you go to the court, and if you say, "My lord, I did not know that the result of this action is this, criminal," that is not pleading that you'll be excused. So therefore Kṛṣṇa consciousness must be there. If we actually want to be free from the reaction of sinful life, that we are doing, knowingly or unknowingly, then Kṛṣṇa consciousness must be there. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. Therefore it is recommended, kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. Always we have to be engaged in chanting: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma..., so that Kṛṣṇa will save us. Knowingly we cannot commit any sinful activities. That is one thing. Unknowingly also we cannot do it. Then we'll be liable.

Therefore if you remain in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if you always keep Kṛṣṇa within your mind, then... Just like when the sun is there, there cannot be any darkness. Similarly, if you keep kṛṣṇa sūrya, the Kṛṣṇa sun... That is our motto in the Back to Godhead: kṛṣṇa sūrya sama māyā andhakāra. Kṛṣṇa is just like brilliant sunshine, and the māyā, ignorance, is just like darkness. But when or while or where the sun is there, there cannot be any darkness. Similarly, you keep Kṛṣṇa in consciousness always, there cannot be any ignorance; there cannot be any darkness. You'll be walking very freely in bright sunshine of Kṛṣṇa. Don't try to make Kṛṣṇa absent. That is Kuntī's prayer. "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are going to Dvārakā..." This is an example. They are not going. Kṛṣṇa is not going from the Pāṇḍavas. Just like in Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, when Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā... So in the śāstra it is said: vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya padam ekaṁ na gacchati, Kṛṣṇa goes not go even one step from Vṛndāvana. He doesn't go. He's so much attached to Vṛndāvana. Then we see that Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, went to Mathurā. So how is that, He went so far away? And did not return for many years? No. Kṛṣṇa actually did not leave Vṛndāvana. Because since Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana, all the inhabitants of gopī, they were simply thinking of Kṛṣṇa and crying. That was their business. Mother Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja, Rādhārāṇī, all the gopīs, all the cows, all the calves, all the cowherd boys, their only business was to think of Kṛṣṇa and cry. Absence, separation.

So Kṛṣṇa can be felt, Kṛṣṇa can be present more acutely in separation. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching: to love Kṛṣṇa in separation. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu in separation: govinda-viraheṇa me. Śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. He was thinking that "Everything is vacant without Govinda, without Kṛṣṇa." So everything is vacant, but Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there. That is the highest perfectional... When we'll see everything is nothing, simply Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there, that is the highest. That is the gopīs. Therefore gopīs are so exalted. Not for a single moment they could forget Kṛṣṇa. Not for a single moment. Kṛṣṇa was going in the forest with His cows and calves, and gopīs at home, they were disturbed in the mind, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is walking bare-footed. There are so many stones and nails. There is pricking Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, which is so soft that we think our breast as hard when Kṛṣṇa puts His lotus feet. Still He's walking." They are absorbed in this thought. And they are crying. So they are so anxious to see Kṛṣṇa back home in the evening that they are standing on the way, on the roof, "Now Kṛṣṇa is coming back with His..." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is... Kṛṣṇa cannot be absent from a devotee when he's too much absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought. This is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So here Kuntīdevī is very much anxious that Kṛṣṇa will be absent. But the effect will be, when Kṛṣṇa will be absent physically, He will be more, I mean to say, accurately present within the mind of the devotee. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching is that vipralambha-sevā. By His practical life. He's finding out Kṛṣṇa. Govinda-viraheṇa me. Śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. What is that verse? Cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam, cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam, śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. He's crying like torrents of rain coming out of the eyes, and He's feeling everything vacant for want of Kṛṣṇa, separation. Vipralambha. So sambhoga and vipralambha. There are two stages of meeting Kṛṣṇa. Sambhoga means when He's personally present. That is called sambhoga. Personally talking, personally meeting, personally embracing, that is called sambhoga. And there is another, vipralambha. The two ways a devotee can be benefited.

At the present moment, when we are in this material world, we do not see directly Kṛṣṇa. We see Kṛṣṇa... Just like I was explaining in the sea beach. We see Kṛṣṇa indirectly. Just like if you see the Pacific Ocean, you can remember Kṛṣṇa immediately if you are advanced. How you can remember Kṛṣṇa? You can think of... That is called meditation. Not some rascaldom. This is meditation. Now you can think of the Pacific Ocean, that "Such a vast mass of water, and so many big, big waves. I am standing a few yards from it, but I am safe. I am safe. Because I am confident that this ocean, however powerful it may be, however its waves are very fearful, I am sure it will not come up to this." How it is happening? Now yasyājñayā. By the order of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has ordered: "My dear Pacific Ocean, you may be very big and powerful, but you cannot come beyond this line." You can remember immediately Kṛṣṇa, God. God is so powerful that even this Pacific Ocean is abiding the order, obeying the order of Kṛṣṇa. In this way you can think of Kṛṣṇa.

That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You see the sunrise, immediately you can remember Kṛṣṇa. If you have read Bhagavad-gītā, it is stated there, prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ: "I am the shining of the sun. I am the shining of the moon." So if you have learned how to see Kṛṣṇa, you can see in the sunshine Kṛṣṇa. You have not created the sunshine. You have not created the sun, you so-called scientists. You can talk all jugglery of words only. But it is beyond your capacity to know what is the sun. It is beyond your capacity. You cannot know. But you can know śāstra-yonitvāt. The Vedānta-sūtra says, through the śāstra. Just like in the Brahma-saṁhitā, about the sun it is stated,

yac cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Now you study this Vedic literature, what is this sun. The sun is described as the eyes of all the planets. Now you think over, meditate. Yes, it is a fact. Because unless there is sunrise, then you cannot see at night. That is not possible. And what is the sun? Sun is the eyes of the Lord. This is one... Moon is one eye, and the sun is one eye. And in Veda, in the Upaniṣad, it is said when Kṛṣṇa sees, then you can see. When Kṛṣṇa sees.



So Kṛṣṇa is seeing with His eyes the sun. Then you can see. This is fact. You cannot see anything if Kṛṣṇa does not see. So you think over of the sun. Then what is the sun? Now it is the king of all planets, rāja. Rāja means king. Samasta-sura-mūrtiḥ. And what is the nature? Aśeṣa-tejāḥ. Unlimitedly hot. Unlimitedly. Aśeṣa-tejāḥ. Then what is his function? Yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ. Sun has got his orbit. So God has ordered that "You just travel within this orbit. Not here, not there." The scientists says that if the sun is moved a little this side the whole universe will be ablaze, and if it moves this side the whole universe will be frozen. But by the order of the Supreme, it is neither going even, even one ten-thousandth part of an inch, this side or this side. Exactly in the line. Exactly during, in the time, fixed time, at 5:30 it must rise. So there must be some discipline. There must be some obedience. There is some order. In this way the śāstra says: yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ. By whose order the sun is moving in the orbit? Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **: "I worship that original person who is giving direction even to the sun, even to the ocean, even to the moon. Everything is going on under His order."

So where is the difficulty to understand God? There is no difficulty. If actually one is sane man, if he has got some brain substance, not stool substance, then he can understand God in every step, every step. Every step. Raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ śabdaḥ khe... [Bg. 7.8]. Everything is explained there. Why they speak lies, that "I have not seen God." Why don't you see God as God directs you to see? Why do you manufacture your own way? You cannot see God by your own way. That is not possible. Then you will remain always blind. That is happening at the present moment. The so-called philosophers and scientists, they are trying to see God in their own way. And it is being supported by rascals that "You can find out in your own way to see God." That is not possible. You cannot see God in your own way. You have to see God by God's way. Then you can see Him. It is not possible to see God in you... What you are? Just like if I want to see President Nixon, can I see him in my own way? So how you can expect to see God in your own way? Is it not rascaldom? I cannot see even an ordinary man in big position in my own way. I have to apply, I have to take the sanction of the secretary, appoint some time, and so on, so on, and I am expecting to see God in my own way. And these rascals are supporting this view that "You can see God in your own way. As many ways you invent, they're all bona fide." This is rascaldom.

So the world is full of rascals and fools. Therefore God consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, has become a vague idea. Otherwise, if one wants to see God as Kuntīdevī is requesting, that "You remain always...," one can keep God always within his heart. He's always there. Therefore we have to apply as it was done by Mahārāja Ambarīṣa: sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. We can use our senses in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. First thing is that we have to fix up our mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Then... Mind is the center of all sensual activities. If your mind is absent, in spite of having your eyes, you cannot see; in spite of having your ears, you cannot hear. Therefore mind is considered the eleventh sense. There are ten senses-five working and five knowledge-acquiring-and the mind is the center. So indriyāṇi parāṇy āhuḥ. Everything is there in the Bhagavad-gītā. Indriyāṇi parāṇy āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ [Bg. 3.42]. Kṛṣṇa is explaining that we take the senses are very prominent. But beyond the senses there is another, superior thing. That is mind. Beyond this mind, there is intelligence. And beyond this intelligence, there is soul. So how they can appreciate existence of soul if they cannot understand the psychological movement of the mind? Behind that mind there is intelligence. They... Ultimate, utmost, they can approach to the intellectual platform. But one has to go beyond the intellectual platform to understand what is soul, or what is God. Otherwise, it is not possible.

So everything is there, but we have to understand through the right channel. Therefore Vedic information is tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham [MU 1.2.12]. This is Vedic injunction, that if you are actually serious about understanding that supernatural transcendental subject matter, you must approach a bona fide spiritual master.

Thank you very much. (end)



741019SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.39

-

Māyāpura, October 19, 1974



Pradyumna: "O Gadādhara, Kṛṣṇa, our kingdom is now being marked by the impressions of Your feet, and therefore it appears beautiful. But when You leave, it will no longer be so."



Prabhupāda: Those who have got books, there should be one correction. It is written "how." It should be "now," n-o-w, not "how."



neyaṁ śobhiṣyate tatra

yathedānīṁ gadādhara

tvat-padair aṅkitā bhāti

sva-lakṣaṇa-vilakṣitaiḥ

[SB 1.8.39]



So Kuntī... Kṛṣṇa was in Hastināpura, the capital of the Kurus. So wherever He was walking, that impression of His lotus feet was there, and on account of this, everywhere-full of opulence. Full of opulence. So Kṛṣṇa was leaving Hastināpura. Therefore Kuntīdevī was regretting that "If You go away, then it will be not so beautiful as it is now on account of Your presence."



So, taking this instruction from Kuntīdevī, if we try to keep Kṛṣṇa, so everything will be opulent. There will be no scarcity. On account of Kṛṣṇa's presence... But how Kṛṣṇa will be present? Kṛṣṇa is already present. But His presence will be more and more appreciated by this kīrtana. Tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ. This is the statement by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says that "I do not live generally in Vaikuṇṭha." Kṛṣṇa lives everywhere. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ.

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.37]



Kṛṣṇa lives in Goloka Vṛndāvana. That is His... Goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni. That is His own abode, nija-dhāma. But still, Kṛṣṇa is akhilātma-bhūtaḥ. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ. Expanding Himself in many, many forms... Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta: There is no limitation. So Kṛṣṇa is present everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Just like government is everywhere. Here we are sitting in this open field. Here is also government, but when the governor comes, it becomes a special feature. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is present everywhere. He's everywhere. But still, He personally comes. He personally comes. So not only that Kṛṣṇa personally was present five thousand years ago, but if we are sincere devotee of Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa is present as soon as we glorify Him. Tatra tiṣṭhāmi yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ. Those who are pure devotees... Caitanya Mahāprabhu also becomes present when there is real, offenseless kīrtana.



So Kuntī wants to keep Kṛṣṇa in her kingdom because on account of His presence, everything is victorious. Yatra... In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, yatra kṛṣṇo yogeśvaraḥ. Yatra... "Wherever Kṛṣṇa is there, and wherever His devotee, Arjuna, is there," Sañjaya said, "all victory, all opulence, everything is there." He assured, he informed Dhṛtarāṣṭra, that "This combination of Pārtha and Kṛṣṇa means all opulence, all victory." In other words, he assured Dhṛtarāṣṭra that "You are expecting victory by the superior strength of your sons, Duryodhana and others, but don't hope like that. It is not possible, because victory will be there where there is Kṛṣṇa and where there is His pure devotee."

So if we remain pure devotee What is that pure devotee?

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttama

[Brs. 1.1.11]



This is pure devotion: no other desire. Other desire means material desire. Because we are spirit soul, our desires should be spiritual. Just like human being should desire like a human being, not like a dog. The... To desire like the dog, that is other desire, and to desire like a human being, that is real desire. Our philosophy does not teach to become desireless. That is not possible. Desire must be there. But it should not be other desire. "Other desire" means... Then what is the real desire? Real desire is how to become a sincere servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is real desire. Except this desire, anything-all "other desire." Or how to become servant of Kṛṣṇa, the means and the way, the process-that is also pure, devotional desire.



So wherever Kṛṣṇa's pure devotees are there and when the pure devotees chant, Kṛṣṇa is there. This is the secret. Tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ. So we, if we keep ourself pure devotee, without any other desire, material desire, then you should know that Kṛṣṇa is present there. And as soon as Kṛṣṇa is present there, then, on account of His presence, all opulences are there. Kṛṣṇa is Mādhava. Mādhava means the husband of the goddess of fortune, Rādhā-Mādhava. So try to keep Kṛṣṇa always. Then all opulence is automatically there. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. If you can gain Kṛṣṇa... This is intelligence. The devotees, they don't want to become very powerful yogi, mystic yogi by practicing gymnastic. No, they don't require it. Simply peacefully, if we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, then everything is there.

Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He did not visit Jagannātha Temple. He considered himself... Or there was some agitation that "This man belonged to the Muhammadan family, and now he is trying to enter the Jagannātha Temple. There will be some roar." So he did not like to agitate things. Vaiṣṇava is peaceful. Even Sanātana Gosvāmī, because he almost turned to become a Muhammadan... His name was changed-Sākara Mallika-because he was servant of the Muhammadan government. So he was also rejected by the brāhmaṇa community. Actually he belonged to a very respectable brāhmaṇa family, Sārasvata brāhmaṇa. So he also did not go even near the temple. This is humbleness. Actually they are better than thousand times to become brāhmaṇa. But every Vaiṣṇava thinks himself tṛṇād api sunīcena, that he is very, very lower, down. That is Vaiṣṇava humbleness.

Just like Yadu (?) Ṭhākura. We are discussing this in Caitanya-caritāmṛta. He belonged to the caste bhuṅi-mālī. Bhuṅi-mālī means the sweeper, baṅgi. He became a great Vaiṣṇava. And Kālidāsa, one of the relative, uncle, of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he was also very great Vaiṣṇava, mahā-bhāgavata. His business was to eat the remnants of foodstuff left by Vaiṣṇava. He did not care whether he's a brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava or śūdra-vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava is not śūdra. But a Vaiṣṇava coming from śūdra family, sometimes they are called śūdra-vaiṣṇava. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He's sometimes called, Yavana-Haridāsa. He's not yavana. He is hundred times, thousand, million times better than brāhmaṇa. But because he is born in a Muhammadan family, he was, another name... The Vaiṣṇava never says, "Yavana-Haridāsa." He is "Nāmācārya Haridāsa." Vaiṣṇava... Why he should be yavana? Vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhiḥ. Nobody should consider a Vaiṣṇava belonging to this caste, that caste, no. Just like here. The Deity is there. Everyone knows that Deity is made of brass metal. But that is not metal. Because we cannot see Kṛṣṇa in any other way at present, therefore Kṛṣṇa has appeared as made of metal. But He is not metal. Or even if He is metal, still He's Kṛṣṇa because everything is Kṛṣṇa. So arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matir vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhiḥ. We should not consider like that.

So that Yadu (?) Ṭhākura declined to give his remnants. So when Kālidāsa wanted, "Sir, give me little your prasāda." "No, no," he said. "No, no, I... You are respectable gentleman, very rich. I am coming from low, low grade family, and how can I...? No, no, no. This is not possible." Then Kālidāsa Ṭhākura, Kālidāsa recited some shastric pramāṇa that "Why you are thinking that you are low caste?" Śva-paco 'to garīyān yaj-jivāghre nāma tubhyam. "You are better than..." Viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha. So even a caṇḍāla, he is better than a brāhmaṇa who is a devotee. When he quoted all these verses to prove... There are many other verses-in Mahābhārata, in Padma Purāṇa, in Bhāgavatam. A Vaiṣṇava is never to be considered as lower caste, no. But he was thinking... So what was his reply? His reply was "Yes, this is correct. The quotation you have given from the śāstra, it is quite correct. But it is meant for a person who has become devotee. But I am not a devotee. So it is not applicable to me. I am the lower caste." That was his reply. That is his humbleness.

So Vaiṣṇava... Just like Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, he says that,

jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha

purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha

[Cc. Ādi 5.205]



Caitanya-caritāmṛta author, such an exalted person, practically the most exalted personality in Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava... His Caitanya-caritāmṛta, there is no comparison. It is postgraduate study. So the author of the book, he's presenting himself, that "My position is lower than the worm in the stool." Purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭha. And jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭha. Jagāi-Mādhāi was the example of pāpī, sinful. Caitanya Mahāprabhu... Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings, pāpī-tāpī jata chilo hari-nāme uddhārilo, brajendra-nandana jei śacī-suta hailo sei balarāma hailo nitāi. "Two brothers who were formerly the sons of..., Vrajendra-nandana, the Mahārāja Nanda, his son, Kṛṣṇa, and Balarāma, so Balarāma has become Nitāi, and Kṛṣṇa has become Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu." But... Why they have become Nitāi, and Caitanya Mahā...? Now, pāpī-tāpī jata chilo: "Just to deliver all the sinful persons." So "Did He? Did They do actually so?" "Yes." "Then where is the evidence?" Tāra sākṣī jagāi and mādhāi: "Here is evidence. They delivered Jagāi and Mādhāi."



So Cai... Jagāi-Mādhāi in those days were taken as very, very sinful, although they were born of brāhmaṇa family. But by bad association, they became thieves, rogues, guṇḍā and drunkards, meat-eaters, woman-hunters. These are all good qualification now, very good qualification. If one is woman-hunter and drunkard and meat-eater, oh, his social position is very nice, up-to-date. Up-to-date. This is modern civilization. But formerly, especially a gentleman-gentleman means born of high caste: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya-if they would be woman-hunter, drunkards, meat-eaters, immediately they'll be rejected from the position. Immediately. That was Hindu society. No gentleman could... Still now, in some provinces, the high caste men, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriyas, they'll never take, touch these things. This is sinful. So Jagāi-Mādhāi, they were zamindars, very rich men, and brāhmaṇa. But because they were addicted to these habits, they were taken as the most sinful. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu delivered them: pāpī-tāpī jata chilo, hari-nāme uddhārilo.

So the same principle is being followed at the present moment. And by the grace of Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the result is also same, because Jagāi-Mādhāi was delivered by Them. By the same Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, thousands of Jagāi-Mādhāi are coming to be purified. The process is the same. This is called paramparā system. If we follow the paramparā system strictly, then the effect will be the same. As it was five thousand years ago, five hundred years ago, the same effect will be now also.

So here, as Kuntīdevī says, that during the time of the Pāṇḍavas, five thousand years ago, when Kṛṣṇa was present, so everything was very nice in Hastināpura... Śobhi. Śobhiṣyate. Śobhiṣyate. Everything was very beautiful. Śobhā. Śobhā means beautiful. So Kuntī is requesting Kṛṣṇa that "Don't go. Please don't go." It is, of course, Kṛṣṇa's duty. He was going to Dvārakā. But Kṛṣṇa, Kuntīdevī was desiring like that, that "If You go away, then the beautiful Hastināpura will..." Na śobhiṣyate. Na ayaṁ śobhiṣyate tatra yathā idānīm: "As it is now beautiful, it will not be so beautiful." Yathā idānīṁ gadādhara. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Gadādhara. Tvat-padair aṅkitā bhāti. Why it is beautiful? "Because You are walking, and the impression..." Kṛṣṇa has got special impression under the feet, in the sole, and that is being impressed. Simply by impression. Because Kṛṣṇa is absolute, by Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet impression by vibration of His name, by glorifying Him-everything is Kṛṣṇa. Everything is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. Either Kṛṣṇa's impression of the lotus feet, or chanting of His name, or His personal presence, or glorifying Him-it is the same; there is no difference. Therefore it will be our duty to keep..., keep Kṛṣṇa always present by chanting His holy name:

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



So if we keep this principle in this temple, as it is now being appreciated... This is the most opulent temple in this district. That is being admitted. People are coming here to see this temple. It is being advertised. The other day, one gentleman, that Gopāla, he said that "In Navadvīpa, they simply inquire, 'Where is that American temple?' " They inquire. It is already nicely advertised, and it will be more and more advertised provided you keep Kṛṣṇa here by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.



Thank you very much. [break] ...taste only Kṛṣṇa prasādam. This advantage we want to give to the whole world. Therefore we are opening so many centers all over the world, giving them chance: "Come here. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and take prasādam. Go home."

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. That's all right. (end)



730502SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.40

-

Los Angeles, May 2, 1973





Devotee:



ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ

supakvauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ

vanādri-nady-udanvanto

hy edhante tava vīkṣitaiḥ

[SB 1.8.40]



"All these cities and villages are flourishing in all respects because the herbs and grains are in abundance, the trees are full of fruits, the rivers are flowing, the hills are full of minerals and the oceans full of wealth. And this is all due to Your glancing over them."



Prabhupāda: This is Vedic civilization. There is mention of so many things, that "The grains are in abundance and the trees are full of fruits. The rivers are flowing nicely. The hills are full of minerals and the ocean full of wealth." So where is the scarcity? There is no mention that slaughterhouse is flourishing, industry is flourishing. No such mention. There are all nonsense things they have created. Therefore problems are there. If you depend on God's creation, then there is no scarcity, simply ānanda. If the trees are full of fruits, if you have got sufficient grains and... Because there is sufficient grains, there is sufficient grass also. The animals, the cows, they will eat the grass. You'll eat the grains, the fruits. And the animal will help you, the bulls will help you to produce grains. And he will partake little, what you throw away. The animal will be satisfied. You take the fruits, inside of the fruits; you throw away the skin, the animal will be satisfied. You take the grains and throw away the grass. The animals will be satisfied. From the trees, you take the fruits. They are satisfied with the vegetables.



So there is full cooperation between trees, animals, human beings when there is Kṛṣṇa is in the center. This is civilization. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if it is there, tava vīkṣitaiḥ... Tava vīkṣitaiḥ means "This is due to Your glancing over them." Just like we are sitting here. Kṛṣṇa is glancing over us. Everything is nice, first-class. Kṛṣṇa has come very kindly. Because you are trying to become Kṛṣṇa's devotee, He has come before you in His full opulence, and He's glancing over you, and you become happy and beautiful. Therefore we want... This whole material creation is due to Kṛṣṇa's glancing. Sa aikṣata. In the Vedas, he glanced over this matter and the matter become agitated. Just like there is man and woman. When the woman is agitated, there is fruit, there is fruit. Similarly, the whole creation is in the same process. The nature, matter, has to be agitated. That agitation comes from the life, not from the matter.

So this is the Vedic information. Sa aikṣata sa asṛjata. Kṛṣṇa also says ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Simply by Kṛṣṇa's glancing, seeing, the matter becomes agitated and becomes pregnant, and the living entities come out. The trees, the fruits and everything comes out. Simply by His glancing. How it is possible? We have no experience that "Simply by glancing over my wife, I can make her pregnant." No. That is for you, not for Kṛṣṇa. Not for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā, aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti. Each and every part, limb of Kṛṣṇa, has got the capacity of other parts. We, by our eyes part of our body, we can simply see. But Kṛṣṇa, by seeing, can make others pregnant. That is Kṛṣṇa. There is no need, use of sex life. There is no... Simply by Kṛṣṇa's glancing... Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Adhyakṣeṇa, adhi-akṣeṇa. Akṣa means eyes. "By My glancing," mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ, "the material nature..." These things are there in the Bhagavad-gītā. You study. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate: "gives birth." What kind of birth? Carācaram: "moving and nonmoving."

There are two living entities: moving and nonmoving. The nonmoving are the trees and the plants. They cannot move. They stand in one place. And we, human beings, animals, insects, flies, we move. So there are two kinds of living entities. Stāvara-jaṅgama. In Sanskrit it is called sthāvara-jaṅgama. So the sthāvara-jaṅgama, they're coming out of this material nature. Not the life is coming, but the body. When we say coming, coming means birth. So if you say, now, matter, from matter-no. The living entities, they are accepting a type of body from material nature. Not that actually coming. Just like a child is coming... A child is coming, taking the body from the mother. It takes ten months to prepare the body from the blood and secretion of the mother. But the child is not matter. The child is a living entity. That living entity takes shelter into the womb of the mother, and the mother supplies from the body. By nature's way, it is going on. The mother does not know how she's supplying, but from her body, another body is created, and when it is fit, it comes out to work. This is birth. Not that the living entity is taking birth. Because that is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: na jāyate na mriyate vā. The living entity does not take birth, neither he dies. Anything which does not take birth does not die also. Death is for such thing which is created. Which is not created, it has no death. Na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit. Kadācit, at any time. Kṛṣṇa says kadācit. It is not that now it is not taking birth; formerly it took birth. No. Na kadācit. "Oh, I see this is, this is child is now born." No, it is not born. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ purāṇaḥ: that living entity is eternal; śāśvataḥ, always existing; purāṇaḥ, very, very old. Very, very old. Then? Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Don't think that when this body will be destroyed that living entity will be destroyed. No, it will continue.

So our scientist friend was asking that "What is the proof of eternity?" The proof is there. Kṛṣṇa says, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. That is the proof. Śruti. This is hearing, disciplic succession hearing from the Supreme. This is one proof. One proof is by logic, nyāya-pramāṇa. You can get your knowledge by logic, argument, philosophical research. This is all right also. But another, śruti, by hearing from the authorities. That is also knowledge. And smṛti. Smṛti means statement derived from śruti. Just like Bhagavad-gītā is called smṛti, the Purāṇas are called smṛti. But Upaniṣad is called śruti, and Vedānta is called nyāya. So three ways, nyāya-pramāṇa, śruti-pramāṇa and smṛti-pramāṇa. So of all these, the śruti-pramāṇa, or the evidence by the śruti, is very important. Pratyakṣa, anumāna and śruti. Pratyakṣa: direct perception. Direct perception has no value because our senses are all imperfect. So what is the value of direct perception? Just like we are seeing every day the sun just like a disc, say, about twelve inches or eleven inches. But it is fourteen hundred thousand times bigger than this earth. So therefore our direct perception with the experience of these eyes has no value. Similarly all the senses, either eyes or nose, by smelling, by touching, by tasting, by hearing... There are so many senses we can experience knowledge. But because the senses are imperfect, whatever knowledge you are getting by exercising your senses, they're all imperfect. Just like the so-called scientists. Because they're trying to understand by exercising their, this imperfect senses, they always remain imperfect. Just like our Svarūpa Dāmodara inquired, that "If I give you the ingredients to produce life, will you be able to produce life?" He questioned one scientist. He said, "That I do not know." Imperfect knowledge. If you do not know, then your knowledge is imperfect. Why you have become teacher? That is cheating. When you have got imperfect knowledge, why you take the position of the teacher? That should, you should not have done that. Therefore our position, to become perfect, is to take lesson from the perfect. Kṛṣṇa is the perfect. Kṛṣṇa says, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. So we take the knowledge from the perfect. Therefore this understanding, that soul is eternal, that is perfect.

So ultimately Kṛṣṇa, without Kṛṣṇa... Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained when He was explaining dhātu... Dhātu, the forms of verb, "activity." So He used to explain ultimately Kṛṣṇa is the dhātu. So Kuntīdevī says, ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ supakvauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ. Everything is sufficient. Now whatever mentioned here, that "The grains are in abundance, the trees are in full of fruits, the rivers are flowing, the hills are full of minerals, and the ocean full of wealth..." What do you want more? You can take from the ocean that, what is called, that...? Oyster? Boyster? What is called?

Devotee: Crab? Oyster?



Prabhupāda: Oyster. Oyster. The oyster produces pearls, very valuable. If you can collect the oysters you'll get valuable pearls. One pearl, ten thousand dollars. The wealth is there. So formerly people used these pearls, the valuable stones, silk, gold, silver, and decorated the body with nice manufactured ornaments. The beautiful for body.(?) But where are those things gone? Those things are now gone. Now plastic bangles. Advancement of civilization. All these beautiful girls without any ornament of gold, pearls and nice jewels, they have got plastic bangles. Just see the fun!



So what is the use of this industry, slaughterhouse? You get these, all these things. Have enough food grains, enough milk, enough fruits, enough vegetables, clear, nice river water. There is, there is no need of constructing water works. Why? I have traveled in Europe. Each and every river has become nasty. In Russia I saw the river, in Germany I saw the river, in France, also, I saw the river-nasty. And also in your country I have seen that... What is that river in New York?

Devotees: East Side, Hudson.



Prabhupāda: Hudson and another?



Devotees: East Side.



Prabhupāda: They have created nasty. By nature's way such... Just like you see in the ocean, how the water is clear and crystal. By nature's way, it is kept very nice clear and crystal, and from the ocean the water is diverted by the process to come into the river, the same water, but it is crystalized without any salt. By nature's way. By nature's way means Kṛṣṇa's way. So you take nice water from the river. What is the use of constructing huge waterworks supplying water? Nature has already given you. You take fruits, nice fruits. You take grains. You take milk products. You take silk. You take pearls. You take jewels. Everything is... You want richness, you collect the pearls-you become rich. There is no question of to become rich by starting some huge factory, producing these motor bodies. You see.



So we have created troubles. Otherwise, if we depend on Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's mercy... Because by Kṛṣṇa's glancing, everything is all right. Here it is said,

ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ

supakvauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ

vanādri-nady-udanvanto

hy edhante tava vīkṣitaiḥ

[SB 1.8.40]



So simply by Kṛṣṇa's glancing, Kuntī is expressing that so many beautiful things are there. "Simply by Your glance." So if you simply plead for Kṛṣṇa's glancing, so there is no question of scarcity, there is no question of need. Everything will be complete. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. You depend on nature's gift. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa... They are... Our opinion, that the population has increased. Everywhere they say the population has increased, and they're checking the population by artificial means, by rascal method. Why? The birds and bees, they have no checking. They are increasing their population without any contraceptive. But are they in need of food? Have you seen any bird that is dying for want of food? Never. Any animal? It may be, animal in the city, they may be dying for want of food. That is also not very seen. But in the jungle you go, you see all the animals, big, big animals like elephant, they are very stout and strong. Who is supplying them food? The tiger, the lions, everyone-everyone is living. Some of them are vegetarians, some of them are nonvegetarian, but nobody is in want of food. The tiger... By nature's way, the tiger do not get every day food. Naturally, because he is nonvegetarian. So he gets his food with a little difficulty. Because who is going to face the tiger to become its food? Nobody's going, "Sir, I am very philanthropist, I have come to you to give you food. Take my body." Nobody's going. Therefore he has got difficulty to find out its food. Because in the jungle the... There is jungle's laws also, nature's law. As soon as the tiger is out, there is one animal that is called fayo(?). I do not know what is the name in English. It will follow the tiger and it will sound "fayo, fayo," so the other animals will know: "Now the tiger is out."



So it has got difficulty. It has got difficulty, by nature's way. But still Kṛṣṇa supplies him food. Say after one week he gets the chance of catching one animal. Therefore he doesn't get fresh food daily. He stocks the animal in some bush and takes little, little. So he has become very powerful. People wants, "I want to become like tiger" or "I want to become like lion." But that is not very good position, because you won't get food daily. That's a fact. And you have to search out food with great labor. But if you become a vegetarian, you get daily. Anywhere there are grass, you can eat. The animals are eating. Now, in every city, there are slaughterhouses. Does it mean the slaughterhouse can supply all the meat? Suppose you don't take any other food, grains or vegetables. Can you live simply by eating meat? There is no supply, sufficient supply. Here... You have to eat the grains and the fruits and the vegetables along with a slice of meat, you take. Still, for that slice of meat, you are killing so many poor animals. How much sinful it is.

So it is not to be done. It is not to be done. Therefore people are not happy. They are committing simply sinful activities. How they can become happy? But if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, simply depend on Kṛṣṇa's glancing, tava vīkṣitaiḥ, if you depend on Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will supply you everything. There is no question of scarcity. It is a question of production. And sometimes we find that the grains and fruits are produced in huge quantity. One cannot finish. So it is a question of Kṛṣṇa's glance. If Kṛṣṇa likes, He can produce huge quantity of grains and fruits and vegetables. And if He, Kṛṣṇa controls, then what your meat will do? You can eat me, I shall eat you. That will go on, but that will not solve the problem. Therefore for real peace of life, tranquillity and everything, sufficient supply of foodstuffs, sufficient supply of milk and water, everything, arrangement is there. Simply we have to depend on Kṛṣṇa.

Just like Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is teaching us: so, "I depend on You." Mārobi rākhobi jo icchā tohārā. "My dear Lord, I simply surrender unto You, depend on You. Now, if You like, You can kill me or You can give me protection." This is wanted. And Kṛṣṇa says in reply, "Yes." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Ekam. He does not say, "Yes, you depend on Me and depend on your slaughterhouse and factory also." No. He says, "Simply depend on Me, one." Mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. So "I will rescue you from the resultant action of your sinful activities." Because you have lived so many years without being Kṛṣṇa conscious, you have lived sinful life only. So Kṛṣṇa gives, gives assurance that, as soon as one surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, He immediately squares up all account. All your sinful activities finished now. Finished. Now you begin new life. That is called initiation. But don't commit anymore.

Therefore we take promise from our disciples that "Now the account is squared up. Whatever sinful life you led, that is closed now. Without any payment, I close. Now don't commit any more." That is nāma-aparādha. If you, if we think that kṛṣṇa-nāma, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, can, I mean to say nullify so many sinful activities, so if I commit little sinful activity and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, it will be nullified. No, don't think like that. That is the greatest sin. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ. Anyone who is thinking like that, that "Let me commit some sinful activities, and in the evening I shall chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. It will be all right," no. No. no, that is the greatest offense. Out of ten kinds of offenses, that is the greatest offense. Nāmno balād yasya hi. Don't take to that process, confession. Just like the Christians do. They go to the church and confess. Suppose one confesses-"That's all right"-and again does the same sinful activities. Then what is the value? Accept... Why accept? It is fact. If you confess before the Lord, just as, "My Lord, out of my ignorance..." The sinful activities are done out of ignorance. Not that by planning that "I shall commit sinful activities, go to the church and confess. Then everything is nullified. Again begin, new chapter, sinful activities." That is not ignorance. That is by knowingly, knowingly taking advantage of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

So we should be very careful. We promise before taking initiation no illicit sex, no intoxicants, no gambling, no meat eating. We should strictly follow. We should strictly follow. Then we are clean. No more. And keeping oneself clean and keeping oneself always engaged in devotional service, his life is success and there is no need, there is no scarcity of anything he wants.

Thank you very much. (end)



741020SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.40

-

Māyāpura, October 20, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "All these cities and villages are flourishing in all respects because the herbs and grains are in abundance, the trees are full of fruits, the rivers are flowing, the hills are full of minerals and the oceans full of wealth. And this is all due to Your glancing over them."



Prabhupāda:



ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ

supakvauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ

vanādri-nady-udanvanto

hy edhante tava vīkṣitaiḥ

[SB 1.8.40]



So here is very nice description how we can materially become happy. These are all description of material happiness, svṛddhāḥ, very flourished cities and towns. So how it is flourished? Now, supakvauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ. The herbs and plants and trees and creepers, they are all luxuriously grown and sufficiently supply the needs of the human being. Every plant and creeper is useful for human being. We do not know how to use them. Experienced men, they collect so many auṣadhi. Vanauṣadhi, latā loke jāyate paramaṁ hitam. We are neglecting these herbs and vegetables, but because we do not know how to use them, we have to meet so much bill of the doctors. But there are everything complete.



Kṛṣṇa's arrangement is very complete. Pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. Kṛṣṇa has given us everything in complete. There is no question... Although we have come to this material world for undergoing some tribulation on account of our rebellious attitude towards Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa, we are meant for serving Kṛṣṇa, but we have rebelled: "Why shall I serve Kṛṣṇa? I shall serve my senses. I shall remain independent without Kṛṣṇa." This is our folly. That is not possible. We have discussed already that without Kṛṣṇa there is no question of happiness. There is no question of happiness. It is our... This is called ignorance.

kṛṣṇa bhuli' sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

[Cc. Madhya 20.117]



There is something like... Our only fault is that we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa and we have come to enjoy this material world. Material enjoyment means sense gratification. That's all. That is the material world. And spiritual world means there is no sense gratification, only activities for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. That is spiritual world. The so-called material world can be converted into spiritual world when this Kṛṣṇa consciousness is there, that everything should be used for Kṛṣṇa's pleasure. That is spiritual world. Otherwise, it is material world.



In the higher sense there is no material world at all. Sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Everything-Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's energy. So Kṛṣṇa's energy is not different from Kṛṣṇa. Just like the sunshine is not different from the sun. Although sun is millions and millions of miles away, still, we can feel what is the sun by feeling the energy of the sun, the sunshine. We can understand that sun is complete heat and light. Although we cannot go to sun, but by the sunshine, we can understand. Similarly, we can understand Kṛṣṇa by His different energies. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. He has got multi-energies. So these plants and creepers, they are also produced out of Kṛṣṇa's energy, and we take advantage of them.

So if we want to be happy, these things are required. What is that? Ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ. Jana-padāḥ, cities and towns, we require. Because we are human beings, we cannot live in the forest. There are certain uncivilized human beings, they are meant for living in the forest because they are not civilized. But civilized men, they require nice towns, cities, full of gardens, parks, and nice roads and paths, nice building. They're all described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam about the Dvārakā City, Mathurā City, in the, those days. Still there are some samples. In Mathurā you'll find that outside the city there are many gardens. The gardens... Formerly the guests, kings and big, big men, when they became guests, these garden houses were meant for them. We get this information from many literatures, Vedic literatures.

So anyway, we should be eager to become happy even in the cities and towns with the help of these things: auṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ, then forests, adri, nadī. Nadī means not dirty nadī. Very clear water and waves are flowing. By the modern civilization I have seen so many rivers in Europe, in Paris, in Moscow and in Germany. All rivers are very, very dirty. Very, very dirty. You cannot take bath, what to speak of drinking water. So dirty due to this rascal industry. Even in our New York, the bays and the seas they're also polluted. All dirty things are there. How long the water will be clear? No. The rivers, at least the rivers, in the city, they should be kept very clean. But they cannot keep clean because they have got so many dirty activities, enterprises, mills and factories. So in Calcutta also, the... There are so many jute mills and factories on the riverside. All the night soil, they are thrown into the Ganges. So still the Ganges is so powerful that it keeps clear. Hundreds and thousands people, still they take bath in the Ganges, and they keep very good health, those who are taking bath regularly in the Ganges. And cities and towns, there must be a river. In India, you'll find, all the important cities in India, they are on the bank of the Ganges, on the bank of the Yamunā, on the bank of the Narmadā, Kṛṣṇā, Kāverī, like that, all the important cities. And Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that "Don't go to a town and city where there is no river and where there is no friend and there is no temple. Don't go to that city. If there is no river, no friend and no temple, then that is... A great city is a great forest." So that is forbidden.

So we should be happy with these things. Cities and towns does not mean big, big slaughterhouse, cinema, brothel, and factories and all dirty things. Here it is not mentioned. Here Kuntīdevī says, ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ supakvauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ [SB 1.8.40]. He never... She never said that "These towns and cities are flourishing on account of having so many industries, slaughterhouse, brothels, cinema, clubs, nightclubs." Not like that. There was no such thing in those days. These are modern inventions to make the whole world hellish. Otherwise people would be... If you want to be rich, then you can get riches... Wherefrom? Vanādri-nady-udanvantaḥ. From seas, from river, from hills. You can get valuable jewels, gems, pearls, from these natural sources. So India's wealth, formerly, it was depending on these things: gold, silver, jewels, pearls, silk-not industry. And from the forest, from the herbs, from food grains-all natural products. So from the river... The saintly persons, they depended mostly on the riverside. Anywhere they will put a cottage on the river... Still that is going on. A saintly person, if he wants to remain in a secluded place, so they select any place on the riverside, have a small cottage. Still you'll find in many places, especially on the bank of the Ganges, Narmadā, Godāvarī, Kāverī. There are many saintly persons, especially on the bank of Yamunā and Ganges. If you go to Allahabad, you'll find they are living very peacefully, a small cottage on the bank of the Ganges.

When Nārada Muni made the hunter a disciple, so he dragged him to the riverside, Ganges, and gave him a tulasī plant, that: "You sit down here and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. And the tulasī plant is here. You offer obeisances." Then he was very much anxious because he was hunter. He has been stopped, his main business, killing business. So he was thinking that "My Guru Mahārāja may not cheat me. He has stopped my business. He has broken my bows and arrows. And now he has dragged me here to sit down and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Then he asked, "What about my food, sir? I'll sit down here or..." Nārada Muni assured him that "Don't bother. I'll send you your food. You sit down here. You chant, and I will send your food." So he was little doubtful. Anyway, this news, as soon as the news spread in the neighboring places that "A hunter has become a Vaiṣṇava," so out of curiosity, people used to come to see the hunter-Vaiṣṇava. The hunter... When one is Vaiṣṇava, he's no longer a hunter or belonging to the any caste. But people used to say "the hunter-Vaiṣṇava."

So it is the custom of gṛhasthas that when a gṛhastha goes to see a saintly person, he should bring some gifts. Never mind however insignificant is. At least one palmful of rice or ḍāl or ātara, put there. Give something. If one comes to the temple... Here are many temples in India still. People come there with... One who hasn't got many things, but he brings one palmful of ātara or rice or ḍāl. This is useful. And in the temple there are three pots. They put ḍāl in the ḍāl, ātara in the ātara, and rice in the rice. So in this way the inmates of the temple, they can live without going outside. But people have lost such habit. They come empty-handed-"darśana"-that "I'll not give you anything, but you are a saintly person. Give me darśana, and give me your āśirvāda, and then I enjoy my senses. That's all. Nothing to give you, but you give me your āśirvāda. You give me the dust of your feet. I become benefited. You starve." But (chuckling) that is not the process. So the hunter, he was following the instruction of his Guru Mahārāja, Nārada Muni, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and sitting very peacefully. So people would come, and they were surprised. So, so many people came-heaps of ātara, heaps of rice, heaps of vegetables. So he became little agitated: "What shall I do with so many, so much quantity? Why he's sending so much? We are simply two, husband and wife. So why he's sending this?"

So actually, for Vaiṣṇava, who is dependent on Kṛṣṇa, there is no want. There cannot be. Yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham, teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānām [Bg. 9.22]. If one is actually dependent on Kṛṣṇa, there is no question of scarcity. That is the Śukadeva Gosvāmī's instruction, kasmād bhajanti kavayo dhana-durmadāndhān [SB 2.2.5]. He says to the saintly persons to become independent. So he advises that "Why you are anxious for bedding? There is very nice grass. And you have got pillows, this hand, arms. You can lie down here. And where is... What is the necessity of keeping a waterpot?" Because a sannyāsī, even giving up everything, he keeps one waterpot. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī criticizes, "What is the use of keeping waterpot? You have your palms. You can take water from the river and drink." Cirāṇi kiṁ san..., pathi na santi. And old cloth, thrown away... Formerly, gṛhasthas, in different ceremonies, after taking bath, they would throw away their garments, their..., so that poor people, they can take it and use it. And new. Every religious function... In our childhood also we have seen. As soon as there was a new function or pūjā, there was new cloth. Even household pūjā... That takes place practically every month. Lakṣmī-pūjā, Kārttika-pūjā... Bara mase tara upara bhan.(?) The... Actually there are twelve months, but the festivals are thirteen. It was very difficult to adjust where the another festival, in which month it should be observed. So we have got experience-in Lakṣmī-pūjā, all new cloth. The children, at least, at least the children and the housewife will have new cloth for every function. And what was the price of cloth? Very cheap. One rupee, four annas; one rupee, six annas, per pair. So we have seen it.

So festival. So there was no scarcity. Why? People were religiously inclined. Even for a beggar, there was sufficient. The temple, sufficient, everything. That is called ime jana-padāḥ svṛddhāḥ. Svṛddha, svṛddha means opulent. All the cities and towns were opulent; villages, opulent, no want. And they depended on the trees, plants, this river, the mountain, the sea. Those who were... They're expert, they would go underneath the sea and pick up the pearls. That is very valuable. And still there are. So for rich men, the jewelries, the silk, nice food, nice building. And poor man, also, even they do not require jewelries, but they were not hungry. Everything was complete.

So (reading) "Human prosperity flourishes by natural gifts and not by gigantic industrial enterprises." This is the purport. This gigantic enterprise, industrial, they are called ugra-karma. Ugra-karma. Just like now, New Delhi, there is industry. Every town has got industrial area, and big, big industries are flourishing. Especially when you go from Vṛndāvana side to New Delhi, the first big industry we see-that Goodyear Tire, very big factory. So people are being dragged there that "Come here. You'll get good salary. Why you are working in the field so hard? Come here. You'll get good salary, and..." So they go. But the result is that they are not happy. And when they are not happy, they are, I mean, induced to take wine and meat. In this way, whole world... India, it was not there. Gandhi's movement was to stop this wine, flesh, and as we are prohibiting. But at the present moment, the government is encouraging. It is very regrettable.

(reading:) "The gigantic industrial enterprises are products of a godless civilization." Godless civilization, they no more can depend on the natural gifts. They think by industrial enterprises, they will get more money and they'll be happy. And to remain satisfied with the food grains, vegetables and natural gifts, that is primitive idea. They say, "It is primitive." When men were not civilized, they would depend on nature, but when they are advanced in civilization, they must discover industrial enterprises. So instead of eating on metal dishes, the civilized men should eat on, what is that called, plastic. That's all. Now plastic utensils, not even metal. Still, according to Vedic civilization, these Hindus, they would not touch this china, clay utensils, or this plastic utensils. Never they'll... Or glass utensils, they'll never touch. Especially in South India they are very strict. A poor man would prefer to eat on the plantain leaf. And the rich men, they eat on silver utensils. They do not even like to, I mean to say, brass or other base metals.

So this is very good economy also. If you... If you have got metal utensils, if you are in need of money, you can get immediately in exchange some money. There are pawn shops. So they will keep anything, a gold Banarsi sari, or metal utensils or ornaments, if you are need of... Village bankers. Immediately. Poor man... Suppose if you require five rupees, ten rupees. You haven't got, but what..., how to get the money? You take something from your household paraphernalia and go to the pawn-maker. You get money. You are now relieved from the present anxiety. Then again you get back. But what is this china, clay, the china pots and this plastic pot will bring? No, nothing. From economic point of view, this is also very good. So depend on nature.

So (reading:) "The more we go on increasing such troublesome industries to squeeze out the vital energy of the human being, the more there will be unrest and dissatisfaction..."-that is practical-"...of the people in general, although a few only can live lavishly by exploitation." So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is all-round. If people understand that this is a religious movement... No. Religious movement is different thing. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement... Kṛṣṇa. It is not our manufactured ideas. Kṛṣṇa speaks in the Bhagavad-gītā to make people Kṛṣṇa conscious in every way. He's suggesting how to live, annād bhavanti bhūtāni; [Bg. 3.14] how the division of the society should be made, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ; [Bg. 4.13] everything, social, political and... Political also. He is enthusing Arjuna, "You must fight. They are... They have committed so much injustice upon you. So you must fight. Don't consider that he is your brother, he is your..." Even when Arjuna said, "Yes. This is all right. I'll fight with my enemies, but how can I kill Bhīṣmadeva? He is not my enemy. He's my maintainer, my grandfather. We lost our father at early age. He took care. How can I kill? How can I kill my teacher, Droṇācārya?" But Kṛṣṇa supported that "You must kill them." "Why?" "Because they have taken the wrong side. Because Bhīṣmadeva, in spite of his becoming so learned, still, he has gone to the side of the Duryodhana, and simply for matter of getting some money, maintenance."

And actually Bhīṣmadeva went to the side of Duryodhana, considering that "These people are maintaining me. How can I give up their company at times of danger?" That is also another consideration. So similarly, Droṇācārya, although he's guru, teacher of military art, he also went to Duryodhana's side for money. So therefore... Karṇa... Nobody came to this side. So Kṛṣṇa was doing justice, that He was... This is politics, "Tit for tat." This is politics. Śaṭhe śāṭhyamācaret.(?) Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says. "If somebody is śaṭha"-śaṭha means very cunning-"so you should be also cunning." This is politics. You should not be, at that time, a brāhmaṇa, liberal. No. So the idea is that in the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa teaches everything very rightly, properly. The whole Vedic literature is meant for that, not one-sided.

Now here, he's (she's) speaking. Kuntī's speaking to Kṛṣṇa how to live, how, by the association of Kṛṣṇa, people will be happy, how they shall live happily in the towns and cities. These things are described. So we should always remember that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is for all-around development of the human society, not a sentimental religious movement. If people take to this... And it is based on the teachings of Kṛṣṇa, on the teachings of Bhāgavatam. Everything is described there. So the more we grow, or grow strength, rather... Because we are now weak, very... People are not understanding the seriousness of this movement. But the more we grow in strength and volume, we should take part in all-round activities of the human society to make them happy. Sarve sukhino bhavantu. This is the Vedic culture, that Vedic culture wants to see everyone is happy. And especially the Vaiṣṇava... Vaiṣṇavaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Vaiṣṇava has no unhappiness because he has got Kṛṣṇa. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. One who has got Kṛṣṇa, where is unhappiness? And where is want? But he has nothing, such thing as unhappiness. But he's unhappy seeing others, these so-called rascals who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, they are unhappy. Vaiṣṇava is unhappy seeing these peoples' unhappiness, Prahlāda Mahārāja like. Śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ: "I am thinking... I am lamenting only for these rascals who have forgotten You. And forgetting You, they are trying to become happy by so many rubbish activities." Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. They want to be happy by inventing machine for shaving also. You see? The attention is diverted that for shaving they want machine, for brushing the teeth they want a machine...

So that means the intelligence is being misused. Intelligence is being misused. Therefore a Vaiṣṇava's duty is that even whatever they have discovered, that can be used for Kṛṣṇa's service and to teach them how to engage everything in Kṛṣṇa ... Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sam... Anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñ... Anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. Our policy is that we are using this microphone... It is not that if there is no microphone, we shall stop our speaking or preaching work. No. We have no attraction for this microphone. But when there is microphone, we take advantage for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Anāsakta... That is the formula given by Rūpa Gosvāmī.

anāsaktasya viṣayān

yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe

yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate



One may say that "If you are condemning material civilization, why you are using?" It does not mean that we are attached to it. But if there is some advantage for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we can use it. We can use the modern invention, but we are not attached to that. It is not that without it we become collapsed. No, that is not our policy. We can do with it and without it. When we use it, it is for the advantage of the person. His energy is being... Who has invented this microphone, his energy is being utilized for Kṛṣṇa's purpose.



So dovetail everything dovetailed in Kṛṣṇa's service. So without Kṛṣṇa, we cannot be happy. That is the right conclusion. And that is stated here, that "Everything is flourished on account of Your presence." And as we have repeatedly said, we can keep Kṛṣṇa always present by Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then everything will be nice; we shall be happy, either in the town or in the forest, everywhere.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730503SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.41

-

Los Angeles, May 3, 1973





Devotee:



atha viśveśa viśvātman

viśva-mūrte sva-keṣu me

sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi

dṛḍhaṁ pāṇḍuṣu vṛṣṇiṣu

[SB 1.8.41]



"O Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O Personality of the form of the universe, please, therefore, sever my tie of affection for my kinsmen, the Pāṇḍavas and the Vṛṣṇis."



Prabhupāda: So, Pāṇḍava and Vṛṣṇi dynasty, Kuntī belongs to both families. She is the daughter of the Vṛṣṇi family and the wife and mother of the Pāṇḍava family. So generally a woman has got affection both for the father's family and husband's family. So he is, she is asking Kṛṣṇa that "I am woman. Generally, I am attached to my family. So kindly cut off my, this attachment so that thoroughly I can be attached unto You. This is the purpose. Because without You, either my this family or that family, opulence, everything, that is all zero. So falsely I am attached to these families. My business is to be attached unto You."



This is bhakti. Bhakti means to be free from the attachment of this material world and to become attached to Kṛṣṇa. Because you have to attach to something. You cannot become unattached. That is not possible. So, in order to become attached to Kṛṣṇa or to enter into the devotional service of the Lord, one has to become detached from this material affection. That is wanted. Ordinarily, they go to Kṛṣṇa for maintaining the attachment with this material world. Just like, "O God, give us our daily bread." That means I have got attachment of this material world, and to live in this material world, I must have supplies of material things so that I can maintain my status quo. This is called material attachment. People go to God for securing the material position. That is, one sense, it is good; but that is not wanted. To become free from material attachment, that is required. Not that I worship God to increase my opulence in the material world. That is not wanted.

So bhakti means detachment. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Bhakti-yoga means detachment. Our suffering is due to our attachment. Because we are materially attached, I am desiring so many things materially. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa is giving me opportunity to enjoy that material facility. Whatever I want, whatever I desire... Of course, I must deserve. First deserve, then desire. Suppose if I want to become king. So I must have pious activities behind me so that I can become king. But Kṛṣṇa can fulfill. Whatever you want, Kṛṣṇa can give you. Kṛṣṇa can give you even mukti, liberation, the Māyāvādīs' mukti. But He does not give very easily bhakti. That He does not give. Kṛṣṇa can give you all material gifts, even up to mukti if you want. But when He gives bhakti, oh, that is special consideration. Because when He gives somebody bhakti, He becomes purchased by the bhakta. So therefore He considers, considers. Become... Kṛṣṇa becomes a tool in the hands of bhakta. Although He's so..., the supreme powerful. Just like Rādhārāṇī, the symbol of the topmost bhakti, Rādhārāṇī. So She has purchased Kṛṣṇa. She has purchased Kṛṣṇa, She's so powerful. Therefore Vaiṣṇavas, they take shelter of the lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī so that if She recommends, "Oh, here is a nice devotee," Kṛṣṇa has to accept.

So to become a devotee of the Lord, we have to be completely cleansed of all material attachment. That is the qualification. Vairāgya. That is... Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya wrote one hundred verses praising Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu when he became a student of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So out of that, one or two verses are mentioned in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. One of them is, this is the statement:

vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga-

śikṣārtham ekaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-śarīra-dhārī

kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye

[Cc. Madhya 6.254]



Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya is offering his prayer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has now assumed the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga-śikṣārtham [Cc. Madhya 6.254], just to teach people how to become a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. A pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So vairāgya-vidyā. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was only twenty-five, twenty-four years old. His lovable wife, beautiful wife, very serving; mother, so affectionate mother; but He gave up everything, took sannyāsa. So much honor... Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was gṛhastha, He was so much honored that by His only direction of His finger, lakhs of people would immediately join Him as He started the civil disobedience movement against Kazi. So His position was very respectable in Nadia. Young man, beautiful, His body. Nobody can compare with His beautiful body. Young wife, faithful wife, beautiful wife; mother, affectionate;, position; everything. But He gave up everything. Vairāgya. This is called vairāgya, renouncement. If somebody has nothing to possess, if he says, "I have renounced everything," what is the meaning of renouncement? If you have something then you renounce, then there is meaning.



So Caitanya Mahāprabhu's renouncement is unique. Nobody can give up such happy home, his honor, his position, his affection from mother, wife, friends, students, everywhere. Advaita Prabhu, although He was His father's age, He was honoring Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So still He gave up everything. Why? Just to teach us. Āpani ācari prabhu jīvere śikṣāya. He is teaching the whole world how one has to become detached. That is His personal teaching. How, how one can become devotee of Kṛṣṇa, He's personally teaching. That, that was detected by Rūpa Gosvāmī. Therefore when he first saw Caitanya Mahāprabhu... Not first, second time. After resigning his post as minister, when he met Caitanya Mahāprabhu at Prayāga, so he offered his obeisances, falling flat: namo mahā-vadānyāya. He first addressed, "Most magnanimous," most magnanimous. Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. "Oh, You are distributing love of Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te. Love of Kṛṣṇa is not very easy thing. By love, you can purchase Kṛṣṇa. So love of Kṛṣṇa is not an easy thing obtainable, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu distributed this love of Kṛṣṇa to anyone, to everyone, even to Jagāi and Mādhāi. So Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore has sung in his song, pāpī tāpī jata chilo, hari-nāme uddhārilo, tāra sākṣī jagāi mādhāi. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is so magnanimous that He delivered all kinds of sinful men. Jata chilo. And simply allowing them to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, delivered. Tāra sākṣī jagāi mādhāi.

Now, at that time, there was two Jagāis and Mādhāis. But at the present moment, by the grace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His process of teaching, how many Jagāi and Mādhāis are being delivered. You see. So it is possible. If Caitanya Mahāprabhu is pleased, then He can give kṛṣṇa-prema, love of Kṛṣṇa, to anyone, doesn't matter what is his qualification. He gives. If a person who is giving in charity, he can select any man: "You take." That is power of Śrī Caitanya Mahā... Otherwise, kṛṣṇa-prema, to understand Kṛṣṇa is very, very difficult job. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Out of many millions of people, they are trying to make life successful... Nobody knows. They are simply working like animals. They do not know how to make the human life successful. The human life is successful when he understands Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise he remains an animal. That's all. Anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, one who does not know what is Kṛṣṇa, he's no better than animal. He's animal. So this is going on.

So Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave this concession to the fallen souls of this age, that "You simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, you'll be delivered." Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's special concession. Otherwise, a devotee... Kuntī is not ordinary devotee. She has become one of the relatives of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa has come to offer her respects. So Kuntī's not an ordinary devotee. Still, she says that "Kṛṣṇa, kindly help me to become detached from my, this family attachment. I am attached to two families, my father's family and my husband's family, vṛṣṇiṣu and pāṇḍuṣu." So the purpose is that one has to become detached from this so-called society, friendship, love. This will entangle us. One has to become free from this attachment. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. So long I shall think that "I belong to this family, I belong to this nation, I belong to this religion, I belong to this color, I belong to..." So many things we have created, there is no possibility of become Kṛṣṇa conscious. No. So long I shall think, "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am African," then we are attached. So long I am thinking that "I belong to this family, that family," then I'm attached. So long I'm thinking, "I'm father of this, mother of this, husband of this, wife of this," that is attachment.

So we have... These are designations. Because I am spirit soul. All these attachments, they belong to the body. But I am not this body. That is the essence of understanding. If I am not this body, then I am whose father? If I am not this body, then I am whose mother? The supreme father, mother is Kṛṣṇa. We are simply playing the part of father, mother, sister, this, that. They're on the stage. The māyā, the material nature, is causing to dance like this, that "You are father of this, you are mother of this, you are member of this family, member of this nation." This is our dancing, monkey's dancing. Yes.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said prakṛti, the nature, because that living entity has associated with this certain quality of nature, the nature is making him dance in that quality. I am thinking I am this, I am that, I am that, I am that. This is the basic principle of understanding. One should know... That is freedom, that "I do not belong to anything of this bodily connection." Because to conceive in the bodily concept of life, sa eva go-kharaḥ. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. I am not this.



This is most essential education. Unfortunately, the so-called scientists are making more and more attached to this body, How much misleading they are. Therefore I am speaking to our scientist friend that "Now it is the time for making propaganda amongst the so-called scientists, philosophers, leaders, politicians." Because they are misleading the whole people of the world under the bodily concept of life. They are fighting. So the opportunity of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, this is the human life, they are checking that, stopping that. Greatest enemy of the human civilization, these rascals. These rascals who is checking Kṛṣṇa consciousness or God consciousness, and alluring them in different concept of life by designation, they're the greatest enemy of the human society. They are checking the progress of human life. If we accept evolutionary theory, by evolution we have come to... Actually, we have come from aquatics to plants and trees and then insects. Then beasts, birds. In this way we have come to this human form of life. Now what is next evolution? That they do not know.

Next evolution is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. You read carefully. What is that evolution? Yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25]. Now the next evolution is, if you want to go to the higher planetary system, you can go. But they cannot know, they do not know what are these higher planetary systems. They, we see, every night, there are so many planets, stars, but from the śāstra we can understand that the higher planetary system means the material comforts available there, many, many times more than in this planet. You live in this planet, at most, for one hundred years. But in the higher planetary system you can live which you cannot calculate. Just like Brahmā's life, as stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. Brahmā's twelve hours even you cannot calculate with your mathematical figures. But one has to die. Nobody can live permanently within this..., even if you have got a long duration of life.

So these facilities you can get in higher planetary systems, if you prepare yourself. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. Similarly, you can go to the Pitṛlokas. You can meet there your forefathers if they are, of course, eligible. And bhūtejyā... If you want, you can remain here. And mad-yājino 'pi mām: "And if you become a devotee of Me, then you can come to Me." This is the position. If you like, you can go to hell, you can go to the heaven, you can go to, back to home, back to Godhead. This is your position. Therefore intelligent person should think over that "If I am, I have to prepare for my life, why not prepare for going back to home, back to Godhead? This is intelligence. If I have to work to go to the higher planetary systems or lower planetary system... Because this body will be finished; next body I'll have to accept."

So what kind of body I shall accept, that is stated in the śāstras. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Read Bhagavad-gītā. These things are there. Those who are in the modes of goodness... Goodness means avoiding these four principles of sinful life. Even if you do not become a pure devotee of the Lord, if you follow the principles, the regulative principles, then you remain in goodness. And if you remain in goodness, then your next life is in the higher planetary systems, even not going back to home, back to... You'll get that opportunity. So everything is there. We have to utilize our intelligence. Then... This life is meant for that. But if we waste our life, misuse this opportunity of human life just to live like the cats and dogs, āhāra-nidrā, eating, sleeping, mating and defending, then we are spoiling.

But these rascals, they do not know, they do not believe that there is next life. As I have told you many times, that Professor Kotovsky in Russia, he said, "Swamiji, after this body's finished, everything's finished." Just see. He's a big professor. He's saying like that. Our scientists also... They have no knowledge. Still they're passing as scientists, philosophers, and misleading persons. This is our greatest grief. Therefore I am requesting you all: just make a plan to face these rascals and defeat them. They are misleading the whole human society. Now the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should take this turn. They may not think that these boys and girls, so-called Kṛṣṇas, they are sentimentalists, chanting and dancing. That is, of course, the ultimate goal. But they do not understand. They think that we are simply sentimental. We are the greatest scientist. We are the greatest philosopher. We are the greatest humanitarian. They should know that. (aside:) Who is standing there? Hmmm.

So Kṛṣṇa, as Kṛṣṇa has got two businesses, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. Two business. He is giving protection to the sādhus, to the devotees. Just like Kṛṣṇa is giving protection to the Pāṇḍavas, to the Vṛṣṇis, because they are devotees. And similarly He's killing Kaṁsa, Aghāsura, Bakāsura. I think His killing business was a major business than protection. From the life of Kṛṣṇa we see in the Kṛṣṇa book... So if you take statistics how much time He devoted for killing and how much time He devoted for protecting, we shall see He devoted more time for killing. You see. So that is also Kṛṣṇa's business. So those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious... Killing, we don't mean that you take weapon. That is not possible in this age. Neither you have got the strength. If you kill, then you will be killed also. Not that. But there are two kinds of victory. By logic, by reason, by education you can kill their demonic propensities. That is also killing. If one is demon, and if you can turn into a devotee by your logic, by your arguments, then that is also, he's killed, his demonic principle is killed-now he's a saintly person. That is also killing. Not that... Kali-yuga, they're already very poverty-stricken, poor. So this physical killing is too much for them. They should be killed by argument, reason, scientific proposition.

This should be one of the propaganda of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Because these people, the so-called scientists and philosophers, is misleading-misleading in this sense that they have no information that everything is coming out from life. They are proposing that everything is coming from matter. Their basic principle, the original cause, original cause, they are find out some material adjustment. The other day our, in the California University, one big man came. He's proposing same thing. So our Svarūpa Dāmodara proposed that "If we supply you all the ingredients, can you produce life?" He said, "I do not know." You see. He's in the category of "I do not know," and he's still a professor, he's a scientist. How he can be scientist if he do not know? If he's in the list of "I do not know," how he can be teacher. This is cheating. A teacher can be in the list of teacher if he does know: "Yes, I know." That is teacher. If he says, "I do not know," then what kind of teacher he is? He's a rascal, cheater. One must teach on the seat of a teacher if he knows things as they are. So that is going... One does not know things as they are; still, they have become teacher. That is the defect of the modern civilization.

So by ... Here, Kuntī's addressing Kṛṣṇa: Viśveśa. Viśva means the universe. Īśa, īśa means the Lord, the controller. So viśveśa, He is controlling. He's controlling. So nicely the universal affairs are going on. The sun is rising just in due time. Everything is going on nicely. There is no mismanagement. Everyone can understand. The seasons are changing; the seasonal fruits and flowers, they are coming out. Everything is going nicely. But how things are going nicely if there is no controller? But they have no common sense. If we see any establishment very nicely going on, we immediately understand the manager or the director or the controller of this institution is very nice. Similarly, if we see things of these universal affairs are going on very nicely, then we must know that there is a good controller. Who is that controller? That controller is Kṛṣṇa. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. Therefore He is addressed, "Viśveśa, O the controller of the universe."

So a devotee should know what is Kṛṣṇa. They picture simply Kṛṣṇa as if simply embracing Rādhārāṇī. That's all. That is also very, in a obnoxious way. These rascals, they take it, the dealings of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa as ordinary boys and girls dealing. They don't understand. Such pictures should be avoided. Kṛṣṇa is the controller. Let there be one picture how Kṛṣṇa is controlling the whole universe. That picture wanted, not these cheap pictures, imitating our rubbish behavior with boys and girls. These pictures we do not want. We want picture how Kṛṣṇa is controller, how He is controlling the universal affairs. Viśveśa. Viśveśa viśvātman. Ātman, the living force. The living force must be there. Unless there is living force within this body, as this body cannot move, cannot work nicely, similarly, within this universe, cosmic manifestation, there is the living force, Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, or Paramātmā. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe arjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Therefore He's viśvātman. We should know that, how this world is moving, how this universe is acting. But these rascals do not know. They should learn from this Bhāgavata. Viśvātman viśveśa, viśva-mūrte. And His manifestation, universal form. Just like Kṛṣṇa exhibited before Arjuna. Arjuna wanted to see His universal form, and Kṛṣṇa immediately showed him.

So this viśvātman, viśveśa, these are Kṛṣṇa's opulences, vibhūti. But in His original form, He is Kṛṣṇa, two hands, playing on the flute. That is His original form. The universal form is causal, because Arjuna wanted to see. Arjuna was a devotee, so He showed him. That is not actual form. Just like a person, he, he may dress himself as a king or something, but that is not his real appearance, his appearance at home. So Kṛṣṇa's real form is Vṛndāvana, at home. That is real form. And all other forms are expansion of His plenary portions. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33], in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Ananta-rūpam. He can expand Himself in millions and millions of forms, ananta-rūpam. But advaita, but He's one. Advaita, acyuta. Acyuta means who never falls. Infallible. So Kṛṣṇa's infallible, not infallible, Kṛṣṇa's real form... In any form, He's not fallible. He's acyuta. But His real form is the dvi-bhuja-muralīdhara. Dvi-bhuja, two hands, having a flute in the hand. That is real form. Therefore, Kuntīdevī's addressing that "You are, You have got universal form. But the form in which You are standing before me, that is Your real form."

So atha viśveśa viśvātman viśva-mūrte sva-keṣu me. Sva-ka. Sva-ka means kinsmen, own. We are thinking, "This is my own, this is my own." Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. This is moha, illusion. How this illusion come into existence? The illusion comes... First of all, there is natural affinity, attraction, for man and woman. A man is seeking after woman, woman is seeking after man. That is in human society, in bird society, beast society, everywhere. Even flies, insects, you'll see that one female is attached to the male, male is attached. So this is beginning of material attachment. Then by attachment, when one male finds out another woman, or one finds out another man, they unite. So this attachment becomes fixed up again. Already there is attachment, and as soon as they are united, that attachment becomes more firm. Tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ. I have already got attachment, but when I am again united actually, that attachment increases. Now, after the attachment increases to some degree, then next degree is find out nice apartment to live together. That is another increase of attachment. Then we have got an apartment. Find out some means of earning money. Formerly, they were earning..., there were no factories. Everyone has to earn his livelihood by agriculture, kṣetra. Ato gṛha-kṣetra. First of all, apartment must be maintained by working, by earning something, gṛha-kṣetra. Then when we, everything is settled up, now we must have a son, children. Yes. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta. Then we shall, we must have some friends, who will come and eulogize me: "Oh, you have such nice apartment, nice wife." Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittaiḥ [SB 5.5.8]. Then to maintain all this, we must have money. Money, money, money, money, sweeter than honey. In this way, our attachment increases, attachment increases.

Therefore the first education is, the students, to teach them brahmacarya. Brahmacārī means don't be attached. If you can, you avoid all this nonsense. That is brahmacārī. Try to avoid, better. If not, enter. Then after sometimes, vānaprastha: "Now I have enjoyed so much the..., to this attachment. Now leave the home." That is called vānaprastha. At that time, the wife goes as assistant, and the man travels all over the pilgrimages to become detached. Then after two months, three months, he again comes home, sees the children are doing nice, again go away. This is called beginning of detachment. When the detachment is complete, then the man asks his wife, "Now you go, live with your children. I am, I am taking sannyāsa." This is final detachment.

So the whole thing is for detachment. Therefore, Kuntī is asking, "Kindly help me to detach from this family attraction." This is the instruction of Kuntīdevī.

Thank you very much. (end)



741021SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.41

-

Māyāpura, October 21, 1974



Nitāi: "O Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O personality of the form of the universe, please, therefore, sever my tie of affection for my kinsmen, the Pāṇḍavas and the Vṛṣṇis."



Prabhupāda:



atha viśveśa viśvātman

viśva-mūrte svakeṣu me

sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi

dṛḍhaṁ pāṇḍuṣu vṛṣṇiṣu

[SB 1.8.41]



Kuntīdevī is woman. So as a man has got one family, the woman has got two families. Affection... A man has got affection for one family, but a woman has got affection for two families: father's family and husband's family. Therefore he (she) specifically mentions, pāṇḍuṣu. Pāṇḍuṣu means husband's family, and vṛṣṇiṣu, that is father's family. Kṛṣṇa's father, Vasudeva... And Vasudeva's sister is Kuntīdevi. Therefore she belonged to the Vṛṣṇi family, Yadu family, from the father's side. And from the husband's side she belongs to the Kuru family. Actually the pāṇḍuṣu, later on, they became Pāṇḍus because Dhṛtarāṣṭra wanted to separate them from the Kuru family. Both of them, the Dhṛtarāṣṭra's family and Pāṇḍu's family, both of them belonged to the Kuru's family. But because Dhṛtarāṣṭra was very much anxious to separate the Pāṇḍavas, or the sons of his younger brother, Pāṇḍu, from the family, so they were known as Pāṇḍavas, and his own sons were known as Kurus.



So Kuntī is praying. The prayer is very peculiar. What is that peculiar prayer? The prayer is sneha-pāśam imam. Pāśam means "rope." We are bound up by the ropes of affection to the family. This family or that family, everyone is bound up. Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam [SB 5.5.8]. This family combination is māyā because we all, living entities, we are being washed away by the waves of material nature. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. So just like the waves of the river carry so many straws scattered here and there, and sometimes by whirlwind, all the straws meet together in the water, so our meeting-"I am the father. You are the son. She is the wife. He is the grandson," or "He is father," or "She is..."-in this way, our mixing up in a group of family is exactly like the assembly of some straws in the waves of the river. It has no meaning. Just like the straws, they gather together by the movement of the waves, and again, by the movements of waves, the straws are scattered here and there, here and there, here and... Nowadays it is very practical. Just like I am an Indian. I have my family. You are European, you are American. You have got family. But now where we are from, the family, we scattered. This is practical. We have no more any connection with our father, mother or children. No. We are now gathered in another group, Kṛṣṇa conscious society.

So this is māyā. Janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. We gather exactly like the straws, and on account of māyā's influence, we become very much attached: "Oh, here is my son. Here is my wife. Here is my family. Here is my..." And this is the, what is called, entanglement. Our main business is in the human form of life how to get out of this material world. They do not know. They not only create family but also society, community, nation, In this way we are embarrassed. The so-called nationalism, socialism and communism-simply moha, moha, exactly the same way as the small, that insects, under some illusion, moha, they come to the light and sacrifice their life. I have told you many times. We have seen in 1947, partition days, Hindu-Muslim fighting. One party was Hindu, other party was Muslim. They fought and so many died. And after death, there was no distinction who is Hindu or who is Muslim. The municipal men, they gathered together in piles and to throw them somewhere. Exactly the same way, the same insects, they come to the light and die in the morning, and we gather them together and throw in the street.

So long the life is there, everyone is thinking, "I have got this responsibility. I have got this responsibility. I have got this responsibility," and they are working very, very hard and doing all nonsense. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Now, somebody's stealing for the sake of family maintenance, doing so many sinful activities, but when they are scattered again by the laws of nature, nobody will be sympathetic to me if I suffer for my own sinful activities. But they do by the so-..., for the so-called family. They get money, and they... Due to affection... First of all, whatever he earns, by hook or by crook, first of all he wants to see that his wife, children, are fed up very nicely. And, at last, if there is some remnants, he can eat, out of affection. You see?

So therefore this affection is the very hard knot for being bound up in this material world, this affection. Therefore the Vedic civilization is that the affection is to be cut off compulsory at a certain age, not that the affection should continue. If the affection continues, then there is no chance of my becoming free from this material world. There is no chance. Therefore vānaprastha. Because the wife's..., affection with the wife, is very, very strong. So vānaprastha means the husband and wife, they give up the affection. Not give up, go away from home, and they travel in the holy places just to purify, and again, when the affection draws, they come to the family. Again remain for one or two months, then again go away. So the wife, there is no sex connection, but wife remains as assistant to the man to be accustomed how to remain aloof from the family. And then, when he is practiced to remain aloof from the..., then wife is also sent back to the family, to the care of elderly children, and the man takes sannyāsa, compulsory. It is called "civil suicide." My Guru Mahārāja used to say, "Commit civil suicide." Mean... If you commit suicide it is criminal. It is also suicide, no more connection with family. This is also suicide, but it is civil. There is no criminal action against... But it is also voluntarily committing suicide-no more connection with anyone.

Ata saba hari āra varṇāśrama-dharma, niṣkiñcana haya laya kṛṣṇaika śaraṇa.(?) This is the... Varṇāśrama-dharma, that is material. Varṇāśrama is planned for material life in a systematic way so that, in due course of time, one may give up the family relationship and take sannyāsa and completely devote for Kṛṣṇa's service. This is the plan of varṇāśrama-dharma. Varṇāśrama-dharma is not meant for planning something, and you remain in the family. No. The Varṇāśrama... Varṇa means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Guṇa, not everyone is qualified in the same way. Therefore you... The ācārya will pick up that "They are meant for becoming brāhmaṇas. They are meant for kṣatriyas." Or for coming from kṣatriya family, or the brāhmaṇa family... So first of all, these varṇas, then āśrama. The brāhmaṇa, one who is qualified as a brāhmaṇa, he has to observe the four āśramas, a brāhmaṇa: the brahmacārī-āśrama, the gṛhastha-āśrama, the vānaprastha-āśrama and sannyāsa-āśrama. The kṣatriya, they'll have to observe three āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha and vānaprastha. And the vaiśyas, two āśramas: brahmacārī and gṛhastha. And śūdra, only one āśrama, only gṛhastha. A śūdra is never offered sannyāsa. A... Only the brāhmaṇa is offered.

So in Śaṅkara-sampradāya, strictly, unless one is born in brāhmaṇa family, he's not offered sannyāsa. He's not given sannyāsa. So far we are concerned, we also offer sannyāsa to the brāhmaṇa, not to the śūdras. But according to quality we create brāhmaṇa, not that we are offering sannyāsa to the śūdras, No. The principle is: sannyāsa can be offered only to the brāhmaṇas. So one may not mistake that we are offering to the..., offering sannyāsa to the mlecchas, yavanas, as they complain. Some of my Godbrothers, they criticize like that, that I am offering sannyāsa to the mlecchas, yavanas. This is wrong idea. This is nārakī-buddhi. Actually, a Vaiṣṇava is above this varṇāśrama-dharma. But we don't claim that we have become perfect Vaiṣṇava. We are not so impudent. We want to remain under the Vaiṣṇava. Under the Vaiṣṇava. Otherwise Vaiṣṇava means... In Caitanya-caritāmṛta you'll find the Vaiṣṇava is paramahaṁsa. Vaiṣṇava has no saffron cloth. Vaiṣṇava is white cloth because Vaiṣṇava is paramahaṁsa, above. But we don't claim the position of Vaiṣṇava. We want to remain servant of Vaiṣṇava. Therefore sannyāsa order is below the position of Vaiṣṇava. Sannyāsa order means still in the material classification. But this Vaiṣṇava is paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satām. Dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra paramo nirmat... [SB 1.1.2]. This Vaiṣṇavism is meant for paramo nirmatsarāṇām, paramahaṁsa. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26].

So Vaiṣṇava position is not very easy thing, above all qualities. Therefore Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura introduced not to become an imitation of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana, the Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana, they are paramahaṁsas. And in Vṛndāvana you'll find so-called bābājīs, they have imitated the dress of Rūpa Gosvāmī-half loincloth-but a biḍi in the mouth. What is this nonsense? Rūpa Gosvāmī used to smoke biḍi? (laughter) Not only that. You'll find in Vṛndāvana so many Rūpa Gosvāmīs are making biḍi. Have you seen in the Gopīnātha Bazaar? They're making trade, biḍis, and shameless. Therefore my Guru Mahārāja introduced this. Of course, sannyāsa is there in the Vaiṣṇava... All the ācāryas, they were sannyāsa, but later on, it so degraded that these biḍi-smoker, gāñjā-smoker, they imitated Rūpa Gosvāmī. Therefore to purify, Guru Mahārāja introduced this sannyāsa system, below the paramahaṁsas, not that artificial means I become a paramahaṁsa, No. When one is...

The sannyāsa stage has got four stages: kuṭīcaka, bahūdaka, parivrājakācārya and paramahaṁsa. Kuṭīcaka. When one takes sannyāsa... These are the processes. He is not practiced to beg from door to door. Therefore in the beginning he makes a cottage outside the village, and the foodstuff comes from his home. But he has no connection because by vānaprastha he has already left home, and by sannyāsa, completely... But takes prasādam from home. That is called kuṭīcaka. Then when he's practiced, he goes from door to door, and that is called bahūdaka. And then, when he's still more practiced, he becomes a preacher, parivrājakācārya, goes from country to country, state to state, for preaching. And after preaching, when the preaching is advanced to some extent, then he sits down in a place as paramahaṁsa. That is called paramahaṁsa. Different stages. Not that all of a sudden one becomes paramahaṁsa and biḍi also, not like that. Paramahaṁsa stage is not to be imitation. So to stop this imitation, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura introduced this system, sannyāsa. He personally became sannyāsa, and to many of his disciples, he gave sannyāsa.

So the whole process is how to get out of the affection of this family, community, nationalism. This is the process. This is illusion. But at the present moment, this illusion is being increased. They criticize the..., that "What is this nonsense? So many people, they have been entrapped by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and they are nothing, they are doing nothing for the society, nothing for the nation, nothing for the family. So they are useless parasite." They are thinking like that. Even Subhash Chandra Bose, he was a politician. He came to my Guru Mahārāja that "So many people, you have captured them. They are doing nothing for nationalism." So Guru Mahārāja said, "Well, for your national propaganda you require very strong men, but these people are very weak. You can see. They are very skinny. So don't put your glance upon them. Let them eat something and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." He avoided like that.

And then there were many others. That was a philanthropy, to give food to the daridra-nārāyaṇa. These things are going on. Nobody is interested that..., or they know it, that human life is only meant for God realization; there is no other business. Otherwise Caitanya Mahāprabhu is not so fool that at the age of twenty-four years He took sannyāsa and preached this cult:

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



He was not such a fool because that is the only business. That is the only business, how one should develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the verdict of all Vedic śāstras. What is the meaning of Vedic..., studying Vedas? Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is the only necessity. To become educated, learned scholar and learned in Vedas, catur-vedi, tri-vedi, dvi-vedi, four-vedi... The brāhmaṇas were divided according to education. Ordinarily they must study, vedi, Vedas. Veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipraḥ. Without Vedic knowledge, nobody can become a brāhmaṇa. Veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipro brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. And by Vedic knowledge, when one understands Brahman, the Absolute Truth, he becomes brāhmaṇa.



So there are four Vedas: Sāma, Yajur, Ṛk, Atharva. Generally they read one Veda, Sāma-vedi, Ṛg-vedi, Yajur-vedi, vedi. But one who studies two Vedas, he is called dvi-vedi, and the apabhraṁśa is du-veda. And one who studies three Vedas, he's called tri-vedi. In... And I mean to say up-country, these titles are still there: vedis, dvi-vedis, tri-vedis, and catur-vedis or co-veda.(?) In Mathurā you'll find the co-vedas. But they have no connection with Vedas now; simply with the name, and begging in the name of dvi, dvi-vedi or tri-vedi, catur-vedi. That...

The purpose is how to become disentangled with this family relationship. Family or society, that is the increase or expansion of the same affection. So the so-called nationalism is also materialism. There is the simply expansion. Just like you have got a party of rogues. And a big party or small party, the business is plundering. That's all. Because you have got a very big party of thieves, it does not mean that you are immune from criminal activities. Therefore these things are not required. People have become accustomed, but we discourage them. We do not approve this so-called nationalism. Therefore we have named "Internationalism." "International," no distinction between this nation or that nation, this religion or that religion. Religion is one. There cannot be two religions. If God is one... And what is religion? Religion means the law given by God. That is religion. This is a simple definition. "What is religion?" If somebody says... They will say, "Religion means this; religion means that." No. The simple definition of religion is "the law of God." Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Just like law. Law means the order given by the state. That is law. Your order is not law, or my order is not law. But when the state orders, state orders, "Keep to the right," you must keep your car to the right side. Or the state orders that "Keep your car to the left side." In Europe, and some, somewhere, it right side coming to left side. So, so, the, according to the state... You cannot say, "Why sometimes it is left side, sometimes right side?" No. It may be whatever it is, but because it is the state order, you have to abide by it. You cannot say that "I was driving my car in India to the left side. Why shall I drive on the right side?" Sometimes they feel inconvenienced. But no, you have to because that is the state order.

So similarly, as the law means state order, similarly, religion means God's order. That's all, simple definition. Dharmaṁ tu... It is not that we have manufactured... It is stated, dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Nobody knows what is dharma, neither the human being, nor the demigods, nor big, big sages, saintly person, and whatever you say, philosopher. No, nobody knows what is religion. Dharmasya tattvaṁ nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Mahājana means those who are authorized person by God, one who knows what is the law of God, he's mahājana. He mahājana. So a guru is mahājana because he knows what is religion and what is the law given by God. Therefore he's mahājana. How he has become mahājana? Because he is following the previous mahājana. That's all. It is not difficult. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. So mahājana... So therefore sampradāya. Just like we are Mādhva-Gauḍīya-sampradāya. Madhvācārya. Or Brahma-sampradāya. We are following... Brahmā is mahājana. Or there are twelve, twelve mahājanas stated in the śāstras, and Brahmā is one of them. Svayambhū. Brahmā's name is Svayambhū. The other day we were discussing Svayambhū. Or Ātmabhū. Ātmabhū. Because he is born out of the abdomen of the father, not of the mother. Not... The other... Father is the seed-giving, life-giving agent. So this life was not transferred to anyone else to take the body. The life-giver, father, gave him the body. Therefore Brahmā is called Svayambhū. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ [SB 6.3.20]. They are all mahājanas.

So dharma means the codes or the law given by God. That is dharma. And our life is meant for dharma. Dharma. But unfortunately we have created so many dharmas. But there cannot be so many dharmas. There cannot be. Suppose if gold... Gold is gold, pure gold. There cannot be... Just like they have made twenty-carat gold, fourteen-carat gold, sixteen-carat gold. That is mixture. That is not pure gold. We are preaching, "If you say it is religion, it is pure religion, not carat." "Fourteen-carat religions" or "Twenty-carat religion," no. Real, pure religion. What is that pure religion? Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... [Bg. 18.66]. We are teaching, "Just surrender to Kṛṣṇa," Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is pure religion, original gold, no carat gold. Therefore our Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura has said very clearly, pṛthivīte yāhā kichu dharma nāme cale: "Whatever is going on, all over the world, in the name of dharma," bhāgavata kahe tāhā paripūrṇa cale,(?) "according to the opinion of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, all this rascaldom is simply cheating." Now, if you say that, everyone will be rebellious. But that is the fact, because if dharma means the order of God, then what is God's order? That "You become My devotee." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namas... [Bg. 18.65]. Four things: "You always think of Me, and you become My devotee, you offer your obeisances," man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, "and worship Me."

So we are teaching this real religion. Here is Deity, Kṛṣṇa. So we are thinking of Kṛṣṇa, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." We are worshiping Deity, Kṛṣṇa. There is no difference between Lord Kṛṣṇa and Deity. He's Kṛṣṇa. And we are offering obeisances. So the same... This... Therefore it is real religion because we are strictly following the laws of God. Anyābhilāṣitā... We have no other business. So therefore this is real religion, if you take, or real culture, real society-everything real. Because God is real, anything in connection with God, according to His instruction, that is real. All other things are imitation. So always remember that if somebody takes us as religionists, yes, we are religionists, but pure religionists. If somebody says socialist, we are pure socialist. If somebody says we are diplomats, poli..., yes, we are pure politicians. What is pure politicians? Politics requires violence. So annihilate the demons and give protection. The politics means two things. The state, government, what is that? Government gives protection to the good citizen, and those who are rogues, punish them. Law and order. Two things are there: maintenance and law and order. So similarly, our Kṛṣṇa consciousness is also the same thing. But so far we are concerned, because we are not in political power... Otherwise we have, would have followed the principles of Kṛṣṇa.

But Caitanya Mahāprabhu has shown us the way, that we kill the demons in a different way. We kill the demons in this way: By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, we purify him so that his demonic activities are stopped. That is also another way of killing. He stops his demonic activities. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mercy, that He did not kill Jagāi-Mādhāi. Although He wanted to kill them because they insulted Vaiṣṇava, but still, Nityānanda Prabhu reminded Him that "In this incarnation, You promised that You'll not kill. So have mercy upon them." So their demonic activities were killed. That is also killing. Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted Jagāi-Mādhāi on this condition, that "You have to stop your sinful activities. Whatever you have done, that is done." So we make this condition. The demonic activities, we say, you have to stop. Whatever is done is done. Strictly following Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there is no consideration. Because one, you were previously a demon; therefore you cannot become a Vaiṣṇava-no. Anyone can become Vaiṣṇava provided he stops his demonic activities. Anyone. Anyone is welcome provided he accepts this philosophy, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66].

So this is the way that Kuntī is praying, that sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi dṛḍham . So in this way we can get rid of the so-called affection for society, friendship, love, country, nationalism... No. Our sneha, affection, is completely transferred to Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



730504SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.42

-

Los Angeles, May 4, 1973





Devotee:



tvayi me 'nanya-viṣayā

matir madhu-pate 'sakṛt

ratim udvahatād addhā

gaṅgevaugham udanvati

[SB 1.8.42]



"O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You without being diverted to anyone else."



Prabhupāda: In the previous verse, Kuntī prayed that sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi dṛḍhaṁ pāṇḍuṣu vṛṣṇiṣu. She prayed, "My dear Lord, kindly cut off my attraction for the Pāṇḍu, Pāṇḍava family and Vṛṣṇi family." So by cutting off or giving up the attraction for material things, that is not sufficient. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they say, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "This world is false and Brahman is truth." We also say the same thing. But what is the difference? The difference is that you are living entity. You want enjoyment. Enjoyment means varieties. Without varieties you cannot enjoy. Just like here is a flower vase. There are so many flowers. Why has God created so many colors, so many forms? They create enjoyment, variety. Variety is the mother of enjoyment. That's a common saying. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they spoil the varieties, impersonalists. So what the result is? The result is āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Bhāgavata says. They labor hard. They undergo severe penances. Just like our sannyāsīs, they can sit down here although there are many women. So Māyāvādī sannyāsī will not sit down. Where there are women, they will not sit down. They are very strict. And if some, some of the Māyāvādī sannyāsīs, if, by chance, they touch one woman someway or other, then he has to undergo some penances. Of course, a sannyāsī should be very cautious about intermingling with woman. For a sannyāsī... Not for a sannyāsī; even for a person who is desiring to go back to home, back to Godhead...



This is our ultimate goal of life. Human form of life is meant for that purpose, that in this life we have to understand our relationship with God, sambandha, and, according to that relationship, we have to chalk our plan of working. Because we must fulfill that relationship. This is called in Sanskrit sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana. Sambandha, abhidheya, prayojana. Just like in ordinary dealings, one businessman is going to do business with another man. So, first of all, the relationship is established by some agreement. Then the transaction takes place. One is supplier, one is purchaser. Then the result is profit. Three things are there. In husband and wife, the same thing. First of all sambandha, the relationship, who will I marry, which girl, which boy. First of all plan... In the beginning... Formerly it was settled up by the parents. Still in India it is settled up by the parents. That is called sambandha. Then the marriage takes place. Then husband and wife relationship, they live together. Then there is the profit, a child. Similarly the human life is meant for reestablishing our relationship with God. In this material world... Material world means forgetfulness, forgetting our relationship with God. That is called material world. No Kṛṣṇa consciousness-that is material world. As soon as there is Kṛṣṇa consciousness and acting on the basis of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is no more material world; it is spiritual world.

So here Kuntīdevī first of all desired, "Let my so much affection, love for my two families, my father's families and my father-in-law's family..." In India it is called Bāper bāṛi śvaśura-bāṛi. Bāper bāṛi means father's house, and śvaśura-bāṛi means father-in-law's house. So Kuntī is woman, she has got relationship with two families. A man may have so many relationship, but woman, she has not, she has no facility for making more relations. That is not allowed. But at least she has got two relationships with two families. And that is her attachment. So she prays to Kṛṣṇa, "Please cut off this relationship. Let me be free." Now after becoming free, then what are you going to do? That is the question. Suppose one is employed in a firm. He feels inconvenience: "This service is not very good. Let me resign it." You resign. But if you get a better service, then that resignation is all right. And if by resigning you become unemployed, no engagement, then what is the value of such resignation? What is the value of such resignation? Similarly, those who are frustrated, confused, they don't want this material world. Just like in your country, the hippies, they are frustrated, confused. You don't want... This is don't, but what you want? That is, that they do not know. That point is missing. You say, "I don't want this." But what you want? That you do not know. That want, what you want actually, that is explained by Kuntī. Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate asakṛt: "Unto You... Let my, this family relationship affection be nil, but my relationship with You become conformed, be confirmed." Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā. "No more attraction for anything else. Only attraction for You, Kṛṣṇa."

So this is wanted. This is perfection. Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā. Ananya-viṣayā. No more attraction for anything else. Only attraction for You, Kṛṣṇa. So this is wanted. This is perfection. Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā. Ananya-viṣayā means ananya-bhakti, without any deviation. Twenty-four hours simply attachment for Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. Then your renouncement is perfect. If you think that this attachment and that attachment both may be made-no. That cannot go. That will be nice, not nice. Just like you ignite fire, at the same time pour water on it. Then what will be the result? The fire will not act. Similarly, if you want to renounce... Just like the Māyāvādī sannyāsī says that brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "Renounce this world." They take a luṅgi,(?) a loincloth, and preach, "Who is your wife? Who is your children? Who is your country?" So many things, negative way. Bhaja govindaṁ bhaja govindaṁ bhaja govindaṁ mūḍhā mate. This is very good, to preach renouncement of this world. But side by side we must have attachment for something. Otherwise, it will be..., it will not stay. Therefore we see so many sannyāsīs, they say brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. They give up, take sannyāsa, but after taking sannyāsa, after a few days or few years, they come back again to this material world to open hospital, philanthropic work, school. Why? If you have left this world as mithyā, as false, why you are again coming to politics, to philanthropy, sociology and so on? Why you are coming again? That is bound to be. Because we are living entity, we are active. If we simply become inactive out of frustration, then it will be failure. We must engage with activities. That activity is devotional service. This is Brahman activity. The Māyāvādīs, they do not know.

Just like we were discussing in this beach morning about the spiritual world. Spiritual world is exactly like the material world, varieties. There is also house. There is also tree. There is also road. There is also chariot. There is... Everything is there-but without inebriety, without inebriety. There, cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. For example, just like there is tree also. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa. But they, those trees are not like this tree. Suppose you, here, you want some fruit, say mango. You go to the mango tree, you taking mango, at the same time desire, "Why not little grapes?" But this mango tree cannot supply you grapes. But in the spiritual world you are eating mango, at the same time, if you desire grapes, the same tree will supply you. This is called desire tree. And... Some ideas of the spiritual world are there in the... Just like here, for light, you require sunlight, moonlight. But in the spiritual world, there is no need of sunlight, moonlight, because everyone is effulgent. By his own light he can see everything.

Just like in kṛṣṇa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa was stealing butter. So the neighboring friends of Yaśodā-mātā, was complaining... It is not complain; it was just to see the fun of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was sitting, and they were complaining. They were seeing the bodily feature, how Kṛṣṇa is feeling. So other ladies complaining, "Mother Yaśodā, your son comes to our house and steals butter. You see. We try to conceal them in a darkness so that this boy cannot see. But still He finds out. So better you take away all His ornaments because the jewel, light of the jewel, helps Him to find out the butter pot." So Yaśodā said, "Yes, I'll do that. I'll take away all these ornaments. Yes." Then they say, "No, no, it is useless. Oh, this boy has got some effulgence of Himself. Without ornaments He can, He can also find out."

So this is the position. The transcendental body is effulgent. On account of effulgence of the transcendental body of Kṛṣṇa, the whole light is there. Whatever light you are seeing, it is all borrowing light from Kṛṣṇa's effulgence. That is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā: yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam [Bs. 5.40]. In the light, bodily effulgence light of Kṛṣṇa, generating millions of universes. Yasya prabhā... [Bs. 5.40]. Just like this sunshine. Everything is there. You have to study. The sunshine is producing these planets, other planets. That is scientifically true. And due to sunshine, the planets becoming warm. Then the seasons are changing and there are trees, there are green foliage, there are fruits, flowers. It is all due to sunshine. Similarly, whatever creation we see, it is due to Kṛṣṇa's bodily effulgence. Kṛṣṇa's bodily effulgence.

So the Māyāvādīs, they simply see the effulgence, something impersonal, effulgence. They cannot see anything more. Just like the sunshine. In the sunshine, there are so many things. Suppose in bright sunshine, you saw one airplane is gone up, but after some time you cannot see. You cannot see. You cannot see because due to the dazzling sunshine, although the airplane is there you cannot see. Similarly, simply if we try to see the effulgence, brahmajyoti, we are unable to see inside. The Īśopaniṣad, there is this statement that a devotee is praying to the Lord that "You wind up Your, this effulgence so that I can see You properly." So the Māyāvādī philosophers, they cannot see the personal activities or the planets where Kṛṣṇa is personally active. That they cannot see. Therefore Bhāgavata says anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ. Because they neglected to see the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, therefore, despite their severe penances and austerities, on account of not seeing the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, they come back again to this material world. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ [SB 10.2.32].

So if we simply become renouncer, that will not help us. Then again we shall become enjoyer, so-called enjoyer. That is like pendulum, balancing, tak, tak, this way, this way. If you simply become this side, renouncer, then again we go to that side, enjoyer... So here is the remedy. If you want really detachment from this material world, you must increase your attachment for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise this kind of so-called renouncement will not help you. That is a fact. Therefore Kuntīdevī is praying, tvayi me ananya-viṣayā, "without any diversion." That is the definition given by Rūpa Gosvāmī of bhakti. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam: [Brs. 1.1.11] no other desire. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam. Here in this material world, some of them are jñānīs, and some of them are karmīs. Karmīs means fools, unnecessarily working very, very hard-they are karmīs. And jñānīs, when he's little elevated, he thinks, "So what for I am working so hard? I don't require so many things. Still why am I accumulating so much money, so much food, so much prestige?" when he becomes jñānī. That is jñānī.

So therefore bhakti is beyond karma and jñāna. Anyābhilāṣitā. The karma, jñāna, if there is another, other desires also, that should be also nil, no desire. That is called desirelessness. But desirelessness can be possible when you desire to serve Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, that is not possible. Therefore, bhakti means we should be desireless in the matter of jñāna, karma, or any other thing. Attach... Without any attachment. But we must have attachment for Kṛṣṇa. Then it will stay. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. That attachment, anuśīlanam, cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, ānukūlyena... Ānukūlyena means favorably: "How Kṛṣṇa will be satisfied?" That is favorable Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Simply always thinking of Kṛṣṇa... Just like the gopīs. Their Kṛṣṇa consciousness is perfect because they had no other desire except trying to please Kṛṣṇa. That is perfection. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended: ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā. There is no better process of worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead than the method adopted by the gopīs.

The gopīs had no other desire. Simply their desire was how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, all the gopīs. The elderly gopīs, Yaśodā-mātā and her friends, elderly gopas, Nanda Mahārāja, his brother, his friends, and of the same age, the boys and girls of Vṛndāvana who were of the same age-everyone, even the cows, even the flowers even the fruits, even the water in Vṛndāvana... Because everything is spiritual there. Nothing is material. That we should understand, spiritual and material. Material means they have no living symptoms, and spiritual means have all the living symptoms. So here, although a tree is also a living entity, and there also the tree is living entity, but here the living symptoms are absent. Or why the tree? Even a human being. A human being is also a living entity, and they're also devotees, they're also living entities. But here, the real symptoms of life-means Kṛṣṇa consciousness-is absent. And there, the real symptoms of living condition-Kṛṣṇa consciousness-is very, very much. There is no other consciousness except Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And that is spiritual.

So similarly, even in this material world, if you simply increase your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you are also in the spiritual world. Just like in this temple. In this temple we are living, we are living in the spiritual world. Because here there is no other business than Kṛṣṇa consciousness. There is no other engagement. Although it is practiced just like apprentice... This Deity worship, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyam [SB 7.5.23], so many engagements. But it is on account of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore those who are strictly following the regulations of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he's living in the spiritual world. He's not in the material world. Just like we are not living in Los Angeles; we are living in Vaikuṇṭha. Yes. That's a fact. It is consciousness. The consciousness... I can give you another example. Just like in this seat there is a bug. But the bug and myself sitting on the same place, but because the bug has no consciousness, therefore he is bug, and I have got consciousness, I am your spiritual master. But we are sitting in the same place. Sitting in the same place. Because the bug has not developed his consciousness, he remains a bug, and one who has developed the consciousness, therefore he becomes spiritual master. But the position is the... Similarly either you remain in the material world or, spiritual, there is no question, if your Kṛṣṇa consciousness is very strong, then you are not in the material world. You are not in the material world.

Therefore simply renunciation, that "I give up attachment for worldly things," that is not sufficient. Simply renouncement will not help you. It may be a helping process, but that will not help you absolutely. When you increase attachment for Kṛṣṇa, then this renouncement will be perfect. So make renouncement perfect, or, if you increase attachment for Kṛṣṇa, automatically your attachment for this world will diminish. Two things cannot go. Our attachment... Just like a woman, if she is attached to two men, one husband, another paramour-so two things cannot go. The attachment increases for the paramour; otherwise why she accepts a paramour? These are examples there. Although she's working at the husband's place very nicely, but the mind is there to the paramour. Because "When I shall meet him at night, this and that," you see.

So if we increase our attachment for Kṛṣṇa, then the detachment or renouncement of this material world will automatically come. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra syāt [SB 11.2.42]. If we increase our attachment, then that... Kuntīdevī is praying... That is also Kṛṣṇa's mercy. You cannot increase your attachment for Kṛṣṇa without Kṛṣṇa's mercy. You cannot become devotee... Therefore we have to simply serve Kṛṣṇa, sevonmukhe. By service Kṛṣṇa is very satisfied. Kṛṣṇa does not require anyone's service; He's perfect Himself. But if you give Him service wholeheartedly, sincerely, then by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, you'll make advancement. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. God will reveal. You cannot see God by your these blunt eyes. That is not possible. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva [Bs. 5.38]. You have to smear your eyes with the ointment of love. Then Kṛṣṇa will reveal. Kṛṣṇa will come in front of you. Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. Dhruva Mahārāja was undergoing tapasya and he was meditating upon Viṣṇumūrti within his heart. All of a sudden the Viṣṇumūrti disappeared. So his meditation broke, and immediately opened his eyes. He saw the Viṣṇumūrti in his front. He's there. So similarly, you think of Kṛṣṇa always, always think of, when you will be perfect, you'll see Kṛṣṇa in your front, talking with you. This is the process. You'll see one day. But you should not be very much hasty. Oh..., of course, that is good: "Why I am not seeing Kṛṣṇa? Why I am not Kṛṣṇa, seeing, seeing...?"

So we should not be very much hasty. We must wait for the mature time. The example is given that generally a woman wants a child. Now she's married, and if she thinks, "Let me have immediately a child," that is not possible. You wait. Now you are married, you have got husband, you must get a child. That's a fact. Similarly, because you have engaged yourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, avyarthe kalatvaṁ nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. This is called firm faith, that "Now, because I am engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness business, so I must be able to face Kṛṣṇa, face to face, see Kṛṣṇa, face to face." That I must have. So don't be disappointed. Go on with your Kṛṣṇa consciousness activities. Time will come when you'll see Kṛṣṇa, just like Kuntī is seeing, face to face. There is no doubt about it.

So here it is said, tvayi me ananya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Madhu-pati. He has got thousands name. Madhu-pati means He killed the demon Madhu. From that, Madhu-pate. What is it there here? Madhu-pate?

Devotee: "O Lord of Madhu."



Prabhupāda: Madhu-pate. "O Lord of Madhu." So madhu-pate ratim, ratim udvahatād addhā. The example is given very nicely. Just like river. Especially... The Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not ordinary river, but it is just like Ganges. Ganges is very pure, directly connected with Kṛṣṇa. So "As the river flows down towards the seas, similarly my attraction will go down incessantly to touch Your lotus feet like the Ganges." This is the prayer of our Kuntīdevī. So incessantly, without any deviation, ananya-bhakti... This is called ananya-bhakti. Ananya, in the ananya-bhakti... In the Bhagavad-gītā it is stated ananya-bhāva, "without any deviation." Even such person is found to be little misbehaved, still he's to be considered as sādhu. That is stated by Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad...



api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

[Bg. 9.30]



Just like sometimes our Indian friends criticize our European, American, "Oh, they are not very," I mean, what is called, "acute in the service of the Deity. There is so much mistakes, so many..." So Kṛṣṇa says, "Never mind. But because his attention is to serve Me, even there is some discrepancies, he's sādhu." Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ [Bg. 9.30].



So Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. You try to execute it to your best capacity, that's all. Even there is some mistake... Don't commit mistake intentionally. But due to my habit, past habit, I may commit some mistake. That is excused. If we fix up our mind in serving Kṛṣṇa severely and seriously, then even there is some mistake... Rūpa Gosvāmī also says that yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe... First of all fix up your mind to Kṛṣṇa. And the other rules and regulation... Of course, they are to be followed, but in the beginning we shall try our best how to fix up our mind to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Other things will automatically come corrected.

Thank you very much. (end)



741022SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.42

-

Māyāpura, October 22, 1974



Pradyumna: "O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You, without being diverted to anyone else."



Prabhupāda:



tvayi me 'nanya-viṣayā

matir madhu-pate 'sakṛt

ratim udvahatād addhā

gaṅgevaugham udanvati

[SB 1.8.42]



So in the previous verse, Kuntīdevī prayed to Kṛṣṇa, sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi: "Please cut off my attraction, the rope..." Just like rope is cut. If your hands and legs are tied up with rope, and if you want to be free, then the knot is cut into pieces.



So our affection for this material world has to be cut into pieces. That is the aim of human life. The living being, nobody knows when he dropped into this ocean of material existence. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung, anādi karama-phale, paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale. Anādi. Ādi means the beginning of creation, and anādi means before that. This creation, this material world, it is created and annihilated, as is the nature of anything material. We have got experience from our body, or any body. Everything here is created and annihilated. Even big, big empires like the Roman Empire, the Carthagian Empire, the Moghul Empire, and so many empires-they came, and they were annihilated. This is the nature. Therefore Vidyāpati has sung, kata caturānanam, mari mari yavat, na tuyā ādi avasana. Caturānana means the Brahmā. Brahmā, his life, duration of life, is very, very long. We know from Bhagavad-gītā that sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. He's not also immortal. He's mortal. Although his one day is equal to our forty-three lakhs of years multiplied by one thousand, but still, he's not immortal. When Hiraṇyakaśipu pleased Brahmā and he wanted to give him the benediction, so Hiraṇyakaśipu wanted that "Please make me immortal." So Brahmā said, "That is not possible because I am, myself, is not immortal."

So nobody is immortal within this material world. And still, we are attached. We want to be immortal. That is the psychology. Just like last night, when the snake... We became disturbed. Why this psychology? Because we don't want to be dead, because we are eternal. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Neither we wish to take the trouble of being changed of the body. Otherwise why we became disturbed? We know... Others may not know that we shall not be killed, even bitten by the snake. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. So why we became disturbed? What is the psychology? The basic principle is that we don't want to be killed. We don't want to change the body even. We have got attraction for the body. Even an animal or insect, living very wretched condition of life, still, if you want to kill it, it will protest. It will protest, "No, no. I don't want to be killed." This is the psychology.

So the, our real business is how to attain that eternal life. That is real business. Other business, they are not important. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ [1.5.18]. This is the instruction, that we should try how to become again immortal. We are immortal by nature, but we have covered by another nature, external nature, bahiraṅga-śakti And because we have been entangled with this material body, we have to die. Otherwise there is no death. Na jāyate na mriyate vā. The living entity does not take birth, neither it dies. Then why we are taking birth and dying? The..., this question does not arise to the fools and rascals of this materialist world. I was talking with one very big man in London, Lord Fenner-Brockway. He came to see me. So I asked him this question. He was old man. He was a, I think, older than me. He was eighty-four. So he said, "Yes, I'll die peacefully." You see? This question does not bother even any man. And I talked with that Professor Kotovsky in Moscow. He also said, "Swamiji, after death, everything is finished." You see? Big, big men in Europe, very exalted position, they do not know even that there is life after death. They do not know. And in India, I think, when I spoke in Calcutta, the American Consulate... There is a club, Indo-American Cultural. They invited. So they gave me the subject matter for speaking: "East and West." So in that meeting I said that "We don't make any such distinction, 'East' and 'West.' Because everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. But there is little difference between East and West. What is that difference? Here even an ordinary man, a cultivator, uneducated villager, he believes in the next birth. He believes. He's afraid of committing sin-'Oh, I'll have to suffer in my next life." And in the Western world, the big, big men like Lord Fenner-Brockway and Professor Kotovsky, they do not know that there is life after death."

Therefore to take birth in India is a privilege. It is a privilege because it is not ordinary thing. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,

bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]



This para-upakāra, doing welfare activities to others, that is meant for India. But the Indian should first of all make his life perfect. Bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra, janma sārthaka kari [Cc. Ādi 9.41]'. First of all the Indians are requested to make his life perfect, because how to make life perfect, the process and everything is in India, because here there is varṇāśrama-dharma, the division of the human society: brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and āśrama. Now these things are rejected by the Indians, but this is the most scientific method for making life perfect. This is the most scientific method. This was the answer of Rāmānanda Rāya when he was questioned by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, "What is the aim of perfection of life, and how to accomplish it?" This is the question was given by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So the answer was, immediately,



varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



"The aim of human life, the goal of human life, is to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu." Viṣṇur ārādhyate.



Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. These rascals, they do not know that human life is meant for pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Kuntīdevī therefore requested Kṛṣṇa, sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi. We are, I mean to say, bounded here by the material energy in so-called sneha-pāśa, society, friendship and love. People do not want to leave this material world. Even at the time of death... I have seen so many persons. That is natural. The old man is dying, and he is thinking that "So many of my business remained unfinished." So he calls his dear son, "My dear son, if, if you... You take charge of the family, and so many things I could not finish, you do it." You see? He does not know where he is going. I have seen in Allahabad one big man. He was dying at the age of fifty-four. He was of my age. And he was requesting the physician, "My dear doctor, can you not give me four years more to live so that I could finish my business?" This so much attraction, so much attraction. They sometimes cry, that "What will happen to my this boy, that children, that..."

So therefore the family attraction especially, the family attraction is so strong that life after life one is bound up again in this material world, and he gets one body. To get body means to suffer. To get material body... Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. We are suffering the śītoṣṇa... Sometimes we feel some pleasure, sense pleasure. But actually we are suffering. Just see. We thought on the fourth floor, or third floor, such marble, I mean to say, level... And still, there is a snake. How it gone to such a high floor, and...? That is also surprising. But it has managed to go there. That's a fact. And a snake means death. Sa-sarpe ca gṛhe vāso mṛtyur eva na saṁśayaḥ.(?) So you cannot avoid danger in any condition of life. This is material world. But still, they want to remain here. Death is in every step. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām [SB 10.14.58]. This material world means in every step vipadām, danger. Such is the condition of material world. Still, they are trying to adjust. Mūḍha. Bahir-artha-māninaḥ.

Bahir-artha-māninaḥ means they are thinking, "By utilizing this external energy, material world, we shall be happy." Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know that, especially for the human being, the destination is to know Kṛṣṇa. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. All these Vedic literatures, all these philosophy, science and everything... That is the verdict of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, yad uttama-śloka-guṇānuvarṇanam [SB 1.5.22]. You may be talented in so many ways. You may be very big man, politician or philosopher or chemist or physicist. So many we are; we are occupied. So why you should become big man? What is the purpose? The purpose is to understand Kṛṣṇa. Intelligent. So whatever talent you have got, it doesn't matter. Whatever you may be. You may be engineer. But if you are intelligent actually, through engineering, you'll describe Kṛṣṇa, how Kṛṣṇa is the greatest engineer so that He's keeping all the planets floating in the air. That is engineer. You cannot do it. He is keeping... Gām āviśya [Bg. 15.13]. He has said. Aham ojasā dhārayāmi, Kṛṣṇa says. So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa like that. Kṛṣṇa says like that, "I am keeping all these planets floating." Now, if you are a physicist, then you try to understand how Kṛṣṇa is keeping them floating. That is your perfection. That is your perfection. If you remain a physicist or chemist and don't understand Kṛṣṇa, it is a waste of time. It is waste of time.

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



We are divisioned. Either you take it varṇa, āśrama, or by occupation, anything, there must be some division, not that everyone is the same. Somebody is engineer. Somebody is medical man. Somebody is chemist. Somebody is philosopher. Somebody is brāhmaṇa. Somebody is śūdra. You take. Division must be there. It is not possible to make everyone all the same. That is rascaldom. That is, means, they have no knowledge. Just like the communists. They tried to make one. They failed. That is not possible. Still, they are going on: "Laborer class and the manager class." Why you make two? So if instead of two, if we make four, what is the difference in philosophy? They could not do it. That is not possible. There must be, because Kṛṣṇa says, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam: [Bg. 4.13] "The four divisions is created by Me." How you can nullify Kṛṣṇa's creation? That is not possible. So division may be there. It doesn't matter. That is created by Kṛṣṇa. But still, there can be oneness. What is that? Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. Everyone try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Then it is oneness.



The same story, udarendriyāṇām, that all our parts of limbs, parts of the body, limbs, and senses, they are working hard, very hard. What is the aim? To fill up the stomach. There is no other aim. Everyone is working so hard only for filling up the stomach. Udarendriyāṇām. Similarly, we, being... Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. So our only business is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Then it is perfect life. That we have forgotten. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes and says, "You rascal, you fool, you just surrender unto Me. You'll be happy. Why you are planning so many things, rascal planning? That will not make you happy." Sarva-dharmān pari... "You have planned so many rascaldom. You give up all this. Simply make, take this planning: surrender unto Me." Śaraṇāgati. Śaraṇāgati. That is the beginning of Vaiṣṇava philosophy. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpa.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



This is wanted. Simply try to understand what Kṛṣṇa desires and try to satisfy Him. This is perfection of life.



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



If you want perfection, Caitanya Mahāprabhu said this perfection. Bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra, janma sārthaka kari [Cc. Ādi 9.41]'. What is that janma sārthaka? This is janma sārthaka. What is that? When you learn how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That's all. If you learn this simple art, how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, then your life is perfect. Bas.



Is it very difficult task? No, it is not at all. Kṛṣṇa gives the formula how He'll be satisfied. He says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. These four things: "Always think of Me..." Everyone can think of Kṛṣṇa. He is thinking of so many nonsense things. Why not Kṛṣṇa? Here is Kṛṣṇa. If you simply think of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā-Mādhava, then where... Is very difficult thing? Therefore temple is there so that you see Kṛṣṇa always or at some interval, during ārātrika, during maṅgala-ārātrika, during bhoga. So the impression is always within your heart, and you think of. Where is the difficulty? Where is the difficulty? No difficulty. So Kṛṣṇa says, man-manāḥ. And if you have no time to come to the temple, all right, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. You hear the name of Kṛṣṇa. That is not different from Kṛṣṇa. The... After all, impression, either you hear or see, the experience is there. So you can think of Kṛṣṇa very easily. It doesn't require any university qualification. Anyone, any rascal, can do it. It is so easy. It doesn't require high education to think of Kṛṣṇa. Woman, children, anyone...

So satisfy Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa directly says... If you want to satisfy me, then you ask me, "Prabhupāda, what can I do for you?" If I say, "Do this," then I am satisfied. This is the way of satisfaction, making one... So you ask Kṛṣṇa, "Sir, my business is hari-toṣaṇam. So how can I satisfy You?" Kṛṣṇa directly-"Yes, you can satisfy Me. Think of Me." Where is the difficulty? Why so much philosophy, humbug, to understand God? The rascals, they are thinking, "What is God? Can you show me God?" God is here canvassing. The rascals will avoid this by so-called erudite scholarship and this way, "There is no God..." God is there. Why not God? We are giving you the God's name. God, Himself, giving, giving, presenting Himself. And big, big ācāryas, they are accepting. Especially Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He is simply attached to Kṛṣṇa. So we have to learn from Caitanya Mahāprabhu how to serve Kṛṣṇa, how to become attached. How Caitanya Mahāprabhu is attached to Kṛṣṇa is described so nicely. It will puzzle even the biggest brain of philosopher, how Caitanya Mahāprabhu is attached to Kṛṣṇa. We are now trying to explain in the Antya-līlā.

So, of course, we cannot expect that one day we shall be so much attached as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, but this preliminary attachment, to think of Kṛṣṇa, there is no difficulty, to think of Kṛṣṇa. Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. He'll be satisfied. He'll be sati... Teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham [Bg. 9.22]. And those who are so attached with Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa says, "I'll supply whatever he wants. Yes." So a devotee's opulence does not mean it is due to his karma. It is supplied by Kṛṣṇa. It is never to be diminished because it is supplied by Kṛṣṇa. The karmīs, they get opulence on account of his past karma. But a devotee gets opulence-it is gift of Kṛṣṇa; it cannot be destroyed. It cannot be destroyed. It is gift of Kṛṣṇa. We should always think of like that. And we shall try more and more to please Kṛṣṇa. Dui lage hura huri.(?) Kṛṣṇa is trying to make His devotee more and more opulent and comfortable, and the devotee is trying to please Kṛṣṇa more and more. That is the business between devotee and Kṛṣṇa. It is called, Caitanya-cari...: dui lage hura huri.(?) Just like if I want to please you or if you want to please me, so there is competition. So that competition should be there. But that competition, that realization, is impossible so long you are attached to this rascal material world. Therefore Kṛṣṇa say..., Kuntī's first request is that sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi, "Please destroy this attraction, affection for this material friendship, society, family. Please destroy it."

So the Māyāvādī philosopher, they simply want to destroy. Negative side. They have no information of the positive side, that after destruction... Suppose you are not satisfied with some business or some service. So you want to: "Oh, I want to leave this business. I want..." But you leave... Suppose you are getting, say, five hundred rupees. Then, if you leave, then you'll be zero, no income. If you get another service which will fetch you six hundred rupees, then you are profited. But if you simply give it up, this service, and become zero, then you become unemployed, the miseries will increase. The Māyāvādī, being disgusted with this material world... Brahma..., jagan mithyā. Jagan mithyā. That's, that's all right. Then Brahma satyam. That is theoretical. If you do not engage yourself as Brahman, then again you'll fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. That you give up disgusting-"This is mithyā"-that's all right. But that is zero. And what is your positive engagement? That they do not know. Therefore, after some time they again come to be positively engaged in opening hospital and daridra-nārāyaṇa-sevā and this and that and so many things. Because they could not get any engagement in the positive world.

That positive world, here it is said, tvayi me ananya-viṣayā matiḥ. This is positive. The negative side is to give up. To give up... Because we are living beings... Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12), part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. So we want ānanda. So whatever I possess, now I give up. Then, if I don't get better engagement, then where is my ānanda? There is no ānanda. So as we do not get ānanda, so then I come back again. There is a Bengali hearsay, napad jimane na, na jamai batta.(?) When a widow, old woman, her husband is dead... We have got experience. And she talks very loosely with the grandson-in-law. I have got experience. When we were young, young married, so my grandmother-in-law, my father-in-law's mother, she was talking very loosely, just like husband and wife. So that's a practical... Because she... She is hopeless of getting another husband because she is old enough. So where is the husband? She accepts or talks like husband to the grandson-in-law. So similarly, the Māyāvādī philosophers, they do not accept Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa's līlā. They think it is māyā. They do not accept it. So there is no ānanda. Therefore they come down again. Punar mūṣiko bhava. Again open hospital because there is no engagement. And he has to raise fund. So this is very easy thing: "Sir I am going to open a hospital. Give me some fund." Nowadays, especially, it is very difficult to collect fund. If you say, "I am going to open a temple," nobody will give you. But if you say, "I am going to open a hospital," he'll give you.

So therefore we must have positive engagement. Simply negation, jagan mithyā... Why jagan mithyā? We don't say jagan mithyā. This building, this nice building, is it mithyā? It is not mithyā. It is perfectly true because here Kṛṣṇa is being worshiped, the devotees are chanting... This is life, this, truth. So why shall I say "jagan mithyā"? You have to utilize jagat in such a way that it will become truth. That process is saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13]. Here only business is how Kṛṣṇa will be satisfied. That is the only business. That is perfection. To become perfect means to learn how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is perfection. It doesn't require education and doesn't require big, big titles or... Nothing. You try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam [SB 1.2.13].

Therefore here Kuntīdevī... Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā. Viṣaya means sense gratification. This is viṣaya: āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. These are called viṣaya. Viṣaya means material subject matter for sense gratification. So one cannot be attached to Kṛṣṇa as long as he is attached to viṣaya. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura or Locana dāsa Ṭhākura, he says, viṣaya chāṛiyā, se rase majiyā, mukhe bolo hari hari. Viṣaya chāṛiyā. So long you are attached to sense gratification, there is no question of chanting "Hari Hari." That is not possible. Viṣaya chāṛiyā. So it is not possible to do it immediately, but if we practice the system given by the ācāryas, as we have introduced, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, then one day we'll be able. Viṣaya chāṛiyā. Then paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. When you gradually relish the transcendental mellow of devotional service... That Yāmunācārya said,

yad-avadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravinde

nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt

tad-avadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne

bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca



So this is the process. The more you become attached to Kṛṣṇa... That is very psychological. If you become attached to something, you become detached to something else. Attachment, detachment cannot be. So more you become attached to Kṛṣṇa, then more you become detached to this material world. Just like... You, you, you cannot by artificial means, all of a sudden, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "I take sannyāsa." No, that will not be. First of all, you have to increase your attachment for Kṛṣṇa. Then the sannyāsa order will be durable. Otherwise you'll fall down. Again you'll be attached. Punar mūṣiko bhava. There are so many instances.



So both things should be performed simultaneously, parallel line that you should take up the process how to increase your attachment for Kṛṣṇa, and then automatically detachment will be there. The same example, as given by Rūpa Gosvāmī, that you are hungry. When you take food, that, gradually you become satisfied and your hunger is also satisfied. So when you are fully satisfied... Just like Dhruva Mahārāja said, svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce: [Cc. Madhya 22.42] "My dear Lord, my dear Sir, I am not hankering after any benediction. I am completely benedicted. No more benediction. I have got everything. I have got You, Kṛṣṇa. So what do I want more?" Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. If one gets Kṛṣṇa's favor, if one gets Kṛṣṇa, what does he want more? He has got everything, because Kṛṣṇa is everything.

So try to possess Kṛṣṇa like Kuntīdevī's... Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate asakṛt. Asakṛt means... Sakṛt means once, and asakṛt means continuously. Not that perform Kṛṣṇa consciousness fifteen minutes' meditation, and then do all nonsense things, twenty-four hours. No, no, no, no. Not that kind of... Twenty-four hours engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is wanted. That is called asakṛt. Twenty-four. So you have to make your formula of life in such a way that not a single moment is gone without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]. This is Rūpa Gosvāmī's... A devotee, a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he always sees: "Whether my time is wasted unnecessarily?" He should be very much alert: "Why I'm sleeping so much, wasted so much time?" That is devotees, Kṛṣṇa conscious. "Oh, I am wasting so much time without any engagement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" That is called asakṛt. Matir madhu-pate asakṛt. And directly, addhā. It is said, ratim udvahatād addhā. Addhā means directly, not indirectly.

Indirectly, the so-called demigod worshipers, they say... Because they misuse that verse,

ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te 'pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam



They neglect this word, avidhi-pūrvakam. They simply say that to worship other demigods is also the same. No. It is not the... It is avidhi-pūrvaka. And if you... Suppose you are in trouble. You have to satisfy the police commissioner. But you are trying to satisfy the police commissioner by bribing the constable. That is avidhi-pūrvaka. If it is known, then you'll be punished. So don't try to satisfy Kṛṣṇa-avidhi-pūrvakam. Vidhi-pūrvakam. That vidhi-pūrvakam is direct. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is wanted. That is vidhi-pūrvakam. Otherwise avidhi-pūrvakam. And how? The avidhi... The vidhi-pūrvaka, how? Just as the Ganges water is flowing automatically toward the sea, similarly, your devotional service like that, automatically, without any check... Then your life is perfect.



Thank you very much. (end)



730505SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.43

-

Los Angeles, May 5, 1973



Pradyumna:



śrī-kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-sakha vṛṣṇy-ṛṣabhāvani-dhrug-

rājanya-vaṁśa-dahanānapavarga-vīrya

govinda go-dvija-surārti-harāvatāra

yogeśvarākhila-guro bhagavān namas te

[SB 1.8.43]



"O Kṛṣṇa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief amongst the descendants of Vṛṣṇi, You are the destroyer of those political parties which are disturbing elements on this earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the transcendental abode, and You descend to relieve the distresses of the cows, the brāhmaṇas, and the devotees. You possess all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of the entire universe. You are the Almighty God, and I offer You my respectful obeisances."



Prabhupāda: So Lord Kṛṣṇa is addressed here as kṛṣṇa-sakha. Although Arjuna is Kuntī's son, subordinate, but she knows that Kṛṣṇa is more intimately related with Arjuna than herself. She knows that. Another kṛṣṇa-sakha means Kṛṣṇā. Kṛṣṇā is the name of Draupadī. So Kṛṣṇa saved Draupadī from insult. She was attempted to be naked by Duryodhana and Karṇa, but Kṛṣṇa saved her. So in that sense also Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-sakha. Vṛṣṇy-ṛṣabha. Ṛṣabha, the chief. The best man is called ṛṣabha. So in the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, Kṛṣṇa is the chief. Because Kṛṣṇa appeared in the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, therefore the dynasty became famous. That is already discussed previously. Malaya-candana. Just like sandalwood. Because sandal is produced in the Malaya, Malaysia now, the name, therefore it is called malaya-candana. Or sometimes it is produced in the Malaya Hills. There is hill, another.



So ṛṣabhāvani-dhrug rājanya. Avani-dhruk. Dhruk means rebellious. Actually a, a king should be representative of God. Representative of... The king's honor, in every country, kings, king is honored very gorgeously. Why? He's also human being, and the citizens are also human beings. Why the king is so honored? Just like spiritual master. A spiritual master is honored. Not only honored-in the śāstra it is said, nāvamanyeta karhicit. Ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhicit [SB 11.17.27]. The spiritual master should not be, I mean to say, taken as ordinary human being. And the king also, practically we see, that we do not treat a king or a president like ordinary human being. What is the reason? What is the reason? The reason is that the king... King's another name is naradeva, "God in human form." Naradeva. So king is honored because a king is supposed to be representative of God. Therefore he's honored. His business is... Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is maintainer, eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). God means the supreme living being. Nityo nityānām. We are also living beings. We all living beings in different forms, 8,400,000 forms. We are all living beings. And Kṛṣṇa is also a living being. Kṛṣṇa is not impersonal. God is not impersonal. Just like we are persons, you are person, every one of us sitting here, we have got person, personality. We have got individuality. So the impersonalists, they cannot adjust that we are individual persons and how the Supreme, the original cause of everything, He also can be person. Because we have our experience that my knowledge or any individual persons knowledge, opulence, they're limited. But how the unlimited can be person? Because we are limited and God is unlimited, therefore these Māyāvādīs, with poor fund of knowledge, that, because we being persons, we are limited, therefore God, being unlimited, He must be imperson. He must be. They compare the material things. Just like the sky. We think it unlimited. The sky is impersonal. So their philosophy is because God is unlimited, therefore he must be impersonal.

But that is not the Vedic instruction. Vedic instruction is He is also a person. God is also a person. Just like we see Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is person; we are also person. The difference is this person is worshiped, and we are worshiper. That is the difference. Otherwise, He's person, we are person. But the one person... Just like king. King is also person, and the citizens are also person. The president is also person, and the citizens are also person. But what is the difference? The difference is the president or the king or the spiritual master, they, such persons are, exalted persons, are worshiped. That is the difference. Now why one person should be worshiped by so many persons? Because the one person provides so many persons. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. God is also person. He's one; we are many. God is worshiped because He provides everyone. He gives food, maintenance..., all the necessities of life, God is supplying. Therefore, He should be worshiped. We require water; God has given the oceans of water, stocked. Utilize it. How nicely arranged: clear water, mixed with salt so that it will not decompose. Such arrangement. And when you require drinking water, the same water is distilled. By God's arrangement, the sunshine evaporates the water, took it on the high sky, and then distributes clear, distilled water.

So how God is providing everyone with everything. We require light, we require heat. Just like in ordinary life also, in the state there is heating department, lighting department, plumbing department. Why? These are the amenities we require. So why don't you see that these arrangements are already there. Unless... These arrangements are subordinate. The first arrangement is God's arrangement. God supply you water by rain. You catch up and then you supply in the water-works. Without rain you cannot have any water. Therefore original supplier is God. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. He's person. He has got brain. He knows that all of them will require everything, such and such thing-heat, light, water. Without water you cannot produce foodstuff. Even the animal eaters, without God's arrangement, how he can eat animal? The animal also must be provided with food, with grass; then you can take it to the slaughterhouse by your expert intelligence. God is supplying food. Still you are creating a rebellious condition. That's an avani-dhruk. These rascals who are going against the law of God, they're rebellious. So they're rebellious. The king's duty is to see as representative of Kṛṣṇa, as representative of God. Otherwise he, what right he has got to take so much honor from the citizens? He has no right. And because the kings, formerly every country there were kings, monarchy, they violated, they rebelled against God, they became themselves God, that "I have got so much property, kingdom. I am God. I am the Lord of all I survey." So when they usurped the power of God, the all monarchies in the world is now finished. Because they did not act as representative of God. They thought their personal property, the kingdom. No. That is not actually fact. Fact is everything belongs to God. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1].

So the representative must be very obedient. Then his position will go on. And... Just like so-called spiritual masters. They proclaim, "I am God." So they have no position. They have no position. Because they are rebellious. A spiritual master is supposed to spread God consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, make everyone Kṛṣṇa conscious, as the most confidential servant of God-not as God. Just like Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says: sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktaḥ **. A spiritual master is honored as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Honored. Sākṣād-dharitvena. Haritva means "as God." Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktaḥ: ** "It is stated in all śāstras." It is not bogus that spiritual master is as good as God. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ **. Uktas tathā... Because it is stated in the śāstras, tathā, therefore, those who are advanced, uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ. Sadbhiḥ means those who are actually advanced in spiritual life, they obey the spiritual injunction. Then is spiritual master as good as God? The next line is, kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. A spiritual master is not God. He is... The distinction is sevya-bhagavān, sevaka-bhagavān. Sevya means one who is worshiped, and sevaka means one who is worshiper. The spiritual master is God and Kṛṣṇa is God, but Kṛṣṇa is worshipable God and spiritual master is worshiper God. He's God, but he's worshiper God. That is explained. The Māyāvādīs, they cannot understand it, that "Because a spiritual master has to be accepted as God, therefore I have become a spiritual master-I have become God." This is rebellious. This is rebellious. God gives you a position, and if you want to usurp His power unnecessarily, which you cannot, then you are fool, rascal, you are rebellious. He requires punishment. Punishment. Therefore it is said that avani-dhrug rājanya-vaṁśa-dahana. "Therefore You descend to kill all these rascals who claim Your position, rebellious." That is natural. Just like all subordinate kings. There is one emperor, and there are subordinate kings. Sometimes the subordinate kings claim, "Now we shall not give tax." In India it so happened. Everywhere it so happens. The subordinate kings, zamindars, landholders, sometimes they think, "Oh, why shall I give tax?" Then it is rebellious.

So Kṛṣṇa's one business is to kill these rebellious persons who deny the supremacy of God, who declare himself as God. Therefore it is said: avani-dhruk. In the, on the surface of the globe, those who are rebellious, rājanya-vaṁśa-dahana, so He kills. He burns them. Apavarga-vīrya, anapa, anapavarga-vīrya. Anapa. Apavarga means... It is said anapavarga?

Devotee: "Without deterioration."(?)



Prabhupāda: No, the word is apavarga. Apavarga... Anapavarga. Yes, that's all right. Pavarga and apavarga. So anapavarga means again pavarga. Anapavarga. Pavarga and anapavarga. Pavarga means the path of tribulation, pavarga. Those who are Sanskrit scholars, they know the alphabets: ka, kha, ga, gha, ṅa, ca, cha, ja, jha, ña, ṭa, ṭha, ḍa, ḍha, ṇa, ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. So this is the fifth line, pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. So pa means pariśrama, labor. This world, you have to work very hard to maintain yourself. In the Bhagavad-gītā, it is said, śarīra-yātrāpi ca te na prasiddhyed akarmaṇaḥ. Kṛṣṇa never advised Arjuna that "You sit down. I am your friend. I shall do everything. You sit down and smoke gāñjā." Kṛṣṇa never said that. Kṛṣṇa was doing everything; still he was to fight. He was inducing, "You must fight." Neither Arjuna said, "Kṛṣṇa, You are so, my friend, great friend. Better You do it. I sit down. Let me smoke gāñjā." No. Arjuna also did not say. This is not Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that "God, You please do everything for me and let me smoke gāñjā." This is not God consciousness. God consciousness means you must work, work for God. That is God consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So apav..., this word is meant for this purpose, that without working, you cannot live even. You cannot maintain your body. Therefore it is called pariśrama, pa. Pa means pariśrama, to labor hard. You cannot get your subs... Even if you are a lion, a king, a very powerful, still you have to find out your bread. In the jungle, not that... It is said,

na hi suptasya siṁhasya

praviśanti mukhe mṛgāḥ



Suptasya siṁhasya. Supta means sleeping. Sleeping. A lion, if he thinks that "I am the king of the forest, so let me sleep, and in my mouth, all the animals will come." No, sir, it is not possible. You must find out your food, although you are lion. So everyone has to find out-with great difficulty. The lion, although so powerful, he has to find out his food-another animal to eat-with great difficulty. Not so easily. So ap... Pavarga means labor, and pha means foam, the foam. When you work very hard, from your mouth a kind of foam comes out. Pha. Pa, pha, ba. And in spite of so much hard labor, it is ba. Ba means birth, futile, useless. Pa, pha, ba. And bha, bha means fear. Bhaya, bhaya, fear. Although you are working so hard, there is always some fearfulness: "Now things will be done like this, or not like this," fearful. That is the nature. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna, bhaya. This life, this material body means eating, sleeping and fearing. This is one of the symptom. Although I am eating very nicely, I am thinking whether I am overeating so that I may not feel sick. So bhaya is always there. A bird, you'll see eating, and looking this way, that way. Why? If some enemy is not coming. So, this is bha. Pa, pha, ba, bha, and ma. At last maraṇa, mṛtyu, death. This is called pavarga. Pavarga means pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. Pa means hard labor. Pha means so hard that foam comes out of mouth. And ba means he's still frustrated. And bha means fearfulness. And ma means mṛtyu. This is the call, apavarga.



So pavarga, and just the opposite is apavarga. Just the opposite. There is no labor, there is no foam, there is no frustration, there is no fear, and there is no death. That is spiritual world.

Devotees: Jaya! Haribol!



Prabhupāda: That is spiritual world. Pavarga means accompanied by all these things, and apavarga means just the opposite. Just the opposite. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is anapavarga-vīrya. He shows you the path how you become anapavarga. Nāpavarga, anapavarga. Kṛṣṇa says here, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. Why this pavarga, why these five kinds of tribulation? Because you have got this material body. As soon as you accept a material body-it doesn't matter whether President Nixon's body or a common man's body-you have to pass through these pavargas: pa, pha, ba, bha, ma. Either you are demigod or a human being or an animal or an insect or Brahmā-whatever you may be-as soon as you have got this material body, you have to go through these tribulations. This is called material existence. And apavarga means just the opposite. That... For that purpose Kṛṣṇa comes, to give you the path of anapavarga. Nāpavarga... Anapavarga is the path.



So you have to accept. Kṛṣṇa says, very frankly says, "Surrender unto Me, I give you anapavarga." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66], "I shall give you protection." So He is the power for this purpose, and govindam... Govinda means He is the giver of pleasure to the cows and to the senses. Govinda. Govinda, go-dvija-sura-arti-hara-avatāra. Avatāra means incarnation. Govinda, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **, He's the ādi-puruṣa. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2], He is the original person, even of the demigods, Brahmā, Viṣṇu. People may not misunderstand that Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara, they are original. No. Kṛṣṇa says, "They are not original, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara." Aham ādir hi devānām, "I am the original person, above the..., of these demigods also." Therefore, we repeatedly say that we worship that ādi-puruṣaṁ, the original person, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Not secondary; the first, the first, original person.

So Govinda..., so what is the business of Govinda? Now, go-dvija-surārti-harāvatāra [SB 1.8.43]. Surārti, go. This demonic world is the greatest enemy of cows. Just see how they are maintaining hundreds and thousands of slaughterhouse. Hundreds and thousands of slaughterhouse. Innocent animals, giving you milk, the most important foodstuff. Even after death, it is giving you its skin for your shoes, and you are so rascal that you are killing. And you want to be happy in this world. You see? How sinful they are! They have no consideration that this animal... Why cow protection is so much advocated? Because it is very, very important. Therefore... There is no such injunction that "You don't eat the flesh of the tiger." You can eat. Because those who are meat eaters, those who are meat eaters, they have been recommended to eat the flesh of goats or other lower animals-sometimes dogs also, they eat, or the hogs-you can eat. But never the flesh of cows. So, innocent animal, the most important animal, giving service even after death... While living, giving service, so important service, giving you milk, even after death she is giving service by supplying the skin, the hoof, the horn. You utilize in so many ways. But still, the present human society is so ungrateful and rascal that they are killing cows. So Kṛṣṇa comes to punish them, these rascals. Therefore it is said that go-dvija-surārti-hara. Kṛṣṇa comes to... Therefore we worship Kṛṣṇa, namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. Brāhmaṇa.

So to make a perfect human society, there must be protection of the go-dvija. Dvija means brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa means one who knows Brahman, God. These two classes must be given first protection. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is worshiped with this word,

namo brahmaṇya-devāya

go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca

jagad-dhitāya kṛṣṇāya

govindāya namo namaḥ



See, the same thing is there. Govindāya, go-dvija arti-hara, dvija. Dvija, when the brāhmaṇa class, when the cows, they are too much troubled by this rascal, demon, and Kṛṣṇa comes, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, abhyutthānam adharmasya [Bg. 4.7]. These are all adharmas.



So in this age, Kali-yuga, the people are so sinful, so suffering also, therefore Kṛṣṇa has incarnated in the form of His name: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

That's all. (end)



741023SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.43

-

Māyāpura, October 23, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "O Kṛṣṇa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief amongst the descendants of Vṛṣṇi, You are the destroyer of those political parties which are disturbing elements on this earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the transcendental abode, and You descend to relieve the distresses of the cows, the brāhmaṇas and the devotees. You possess all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of the entire universe. You are the almighty God, and I offer You my respectful obeisances."



Prabhupāda:



śrī-kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-sakha vṛṣṇy-ṛṣabhāvani-dhrug-

rājanya-vaṁśa-dahanānapavarga-vīrya

govinda go-dvija-surārti-harāvatāra

yogeśvarākhila-guro bhagavan namas te

[SB 1.8.43]



So Kuntīdevī, first of all she prayed that "My attraction for my family..." Two different families, Pāṇḍu and Vṛṣṇi, Pāṇḍu family, the husband's family, and Vṛṣṇi family, the father's family... So woman has got attachment for both the families. She wanted to get relief from this attachment. This is called anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Brs. 1.1.11]. So long we have got family attachment, we shall be disturbed by so many material desires. But bhakti begins when all material desires are finished. Therefore a guru's definition is given in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

[SB 11.3.21]



Upaśamāśrayam. Upaśama means fully satiated, no more any desire. Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce [Cc. Madhya 22.42].



Now the Durgā Pūjā is going on. This is also recommended in the Vedic śāstra, that those who want material opulence... Material opulence means riches and good wife. For this purpose, śāstra recommends that you can worship Durgā. There are different purposes, and different demigod worships are recommended. But at the conclusion it is said that,

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

[SB 2.3.10]



There are three kinds of men: akāma... Akāma means one who has no desire. Desire there is-not material desire. Desire you cannot kill. Desire must be there. We have to simply transfer the quality of the desire. Instead of desiring material opulence, we have to desire the favor of Kṛṣṇa. That is spiritual.



So akāma means devotees. They do not want anything from Kṛṣṇa. That is bhakta. Bhaktas, they are simply satisfied by serving Kṛṣṇa. They are therefore called akāma, no desires, no material desires. A bhakta feels ashamed to ask from Kṛṣṇa for his material comforts. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja, when he was offered by Nṛsiṁhadeva, "Now you ask from Me whatever you want," so Prahlāda Mahārāja became surprised. He said, "My dear Sir, I am not a mercantile man. We are in the modes of passion, and You are offering me all kinds of benediction. I can ask You. But do You mean to say that I served You in expectation of some return? No, no. Don't induce me in this way." This is śuddha-bhakta. Śuddha-bhakta never gives trouble to Kṛṣṇa for his personal benefit. They are called akāma. And sarva-kāma means karmīs, ordinary. They are working hard to get some result, good result for sense gratification. They are called sarva-kāma. And there is no limit of their desires. Just like this Durgā Pūjā, they'll want dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi rūpavatī-bhāryāṁ dehi yaśo dehi, this dehi, that dehi, dehi, dehi... There is no limit how much they are asking. Therefore they are called sarva-kāma. You go on supplying a karmī; he'll never be satisfied. "More, more, more." You go to so many businessmen-they have got crores and lakhs-but if you want to talk something about Kṛṣṇa, they have no time: "Please take your money, contribution. Let us do business." Because their kāma is never satisfied. Therefore sarva-kāma. And another is mokṣa-kāma. Mokṣa-kāma means when they could not fulfill all the desires in this material world, they, at that time, want to become one with God, that "If I become God, then my all desires will be fulfilled." That is called mokṣa-kāma.

So śāstra recommends that either you belong to the group of akāma or to the group of sarva-kāma or to the group of mokṣa-kāma, tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena yajeta puruṣaṁ param [SB 2.3.10], you worship very seriously Paramaṁ puruṣam. Paramaṁ puruṣam means Kṛṣṇa. Bhakti-yogena. Kṛṣṇa cannot be worshiped by any other yoga system except bhakti-yoga. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. If you want to know Kṛṣṇa, it is not possible to any other means. There are many other means-karma, yoga, jñāna and bhakti-but if you want to know Kṛṣṇa, then you have to take the bhakti-yoga, no other. Neither... Kṛṣṇa never said that "By jñāna, by cultivation of knowledge, one can understand Me." They can do so. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. By cultivation of knowledge, after many, many births, if that person, searching out the Absolute Truth, by cultivation of knowledge, if he comes in contact with a devotee, then he gets the chance of understanding what is Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa, understanding Kṛṣṇa, is not so easy job. Kṛṣṇa says,

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



It is not so easy. But any person, either in karma-yoga or jñāna-yoga or dhyāna-yoga or haṭha-yoga, if he comes in contact with a devotee, bhakti-yogī, then he can understand Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says,



ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]



Bhakti-latā-bīja, that is not very easily available. But it is available-guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya. Because Kṛṣṇa is situated in everyone's heart, if you are actually eager to understand Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa can understand that "This living entity is trying to understand." So He gives a guru. He gives... Caitya... He's caitya-guru. He is guru Himself within one's heart, and He gives intelligence. Buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi taṁ yena mām upayānti te. To a sincere person, He gives the intelligence that "You accept this guru."



Guru is therefore external manifestation of Kṛṣṇa because he acts as representative of Kṛṣṇa. So what is the qualification of that guru? Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta [SB 11.3.21]. You must go and surrender to guru. In the Vedas also it is said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. For whom guru is required? Not for all. But tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. One should go to guru to understand tad-vijñāna. Tad-vijñāna means transcendental science. They require guru. Similarly, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta: [SB 11.3.21] "You should go and search out a guru and surrender unto him." Why? Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. If you are jijñāsuḥ..., athāto brahma jijñāsā-Vedānta-sūtra-if you are actually searching after the Absolute Truth.

So the next question will be, "Then whom shall I select, guru?" Now, śābde pare ca niṣṇātam. A guru means one who is fully conversant in Vedic knowledge. Śābde pare. Śabda-brahman. Veda is known as śabda-brahman. In the material world all these books are material sound vibration, but Vedic knowledge is transcendental sound vibration. Hare Kṛṣṇa is transcendental sound vibration. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. This hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana is not a cinema song. No. It is golokera prema-dhana. This sound is coming... Just like we catch sound in the radios and television, similarly, you can catch sound also which is transmitted from Goloka Vṛndāvana. But you must have the particular machine to catch it. Then you can get message from Goloka Vṛndāvana.

goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya

devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu teṣu teṣu

te te prabhāva-nicayā vihitāś ca yena

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.43]



There are different planetary systems, spiritual world and material world. The... In the spiritual world, the topmost planet is called Goloka Vṛndāvana. So goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni. That is Kṛṣṇa's own abode. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā-there is information-"If you go to My dhāma, My planet, then you don't come back again." Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya [Bg. 9.32]. So these things are all mentioned.



So here Kuntīdevī says that "Please help me in cutting my affection with my family." Sneha-pāśam imaṁ chindhi: "Please cut off. Please help me cutting this family connection." Then Kuntī says that tvayi me ananya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate asakṛt. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to cut off family connection and enter into Kṛṣṇa's family, not void. We are not impersonalists or voidists. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they are impersonalists. They think, "Kṛṣṇa is person. Kṛṣṇa's activities are all personal. So this is also māyā." Because they are Nirviśeṣavādī, their ultimate goal is nirviśeṣa-brahman. So anything personal, they cannot accept it. And the Buddhist philosophy is to zero, śūnyavādi. Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi. The whole world is now corrupted with these two kinds of philosophies: nirviśeṣa-śūnyavāda, impersonalism and voidism. But Vaiṣṇava philosophy is not voidism, not impersonalism. Vaiṣṇava philosophy means to know the Absolute Truth as person. Impersonal realization of the Absolute Truth is partial knowledge. It is not complete, because the Absolute Truth is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. Vigraha means form. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate.

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the Absolute Truth is described, tattva:

vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



So Brahman realization is only the sat part realization, because the Absolute Truth is sac-cid-ānanda. And Paramātmā realization is the cit part realization. And Bhagavān... Here it is said, bhagavān, yogeśvara akhila-guro bhagavan namas te. Bhagavān is the personal. So that is the ultimate, ultimate realization. So the ultimate realization is made possible by the jñānīs. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate: [Bg. 7.19] "If one is actually searching after knowledge, and if he is actually a wise man, the symptom is that he'll surrender unto Me," Kṛṣṇa says. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante: "That is possible after many, many births," searching out, searching out, searching out, not for the karmīs. Karmīs have been described as mūḍha because they do not know anything more than working hard like an ass and get some return. That's all. They have no other ambition. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says,



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



So we should not remain mūḍha. At least, we must come to the stage of jñānī. Karmī, jñānī, yogi, then bhakta. Step by step. So this mūḍha person... Kuntīdevī said, "Kindly help me in cutting this mūḍha relationship. And then give me attachment for You." Tvayi ananya-manasaḥ. Tvayi me ananya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate. So this is bhakti, that we have to give up the illusory attachment. Here the attachment is illusory. It will not stay. We want to live in family-husband, wife, children, father, mother-but it is not possible to live here permanently. That is not possible. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. Kṛṣṇa says that "You may think that you are very happy in family relationship, but I'll not allow you to stay here. I will take everything from you as death." Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś ca aham. So we should understand that.



Therefore intelligent men, they should inquire, "Where we shall enter in family life and we can eternally enjoy?" That is Kṛṣṇa's family. You enter into Kṛṣṇa's family, Vṛndāvana family, where Kṛṣṇa has got His father, mother, His friends, His lover, His beloved, His cows, His garden, His Yamunā. You enter that, that family. Then yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]. Then you will not have to return back again to this temporary family, which will not stay. But if you enter Kṛṣṇa's family... Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. Kṛṣṇa is so kind that-you are so much family, fond of family life-"Just here see. I have got My family. I am not impersonal. I have got My family. I have got My father. I have got My mother. I have got My friend. I have got My beloved, Rādhārāṇī, and the gopīs. Everything I have got. You can enter also. Come. Why you are rotting here?" That is Kṛṣṇa's mission.

So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to practice in this life how to enter Kṛṣṇa's family. You enter Kṛṣṇa's family as you like. There are five rasas: śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, sākhya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa, and mādhurya-rasa. That is reflected in this world also, the same. Tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ vinimayaḥ. This..., this material world is reflection of the spiritual world. Chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. Here there are rasas, śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa. Here also there is master and servant; there is friend and friend; there is father and mother and the son; there is beloved. Everything is there, but they are imitation, chāya. They are not reality. So if you want real friendship, then make friendship with Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Kṛṣṇa-sakha here. Here it is said that śrī-kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-sakha: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are..." Kuntīdevī did not say that "You are my nephew." No. That is not spiritual relationship. But Kṛṣṇa-sakha, Arjuna, is related with Kṛṣṇa eternally. Eternally as friend. How eternally? What is the proof? There is in the Bhagavad-gītā. When Arjuna inquired... When Kṛṣṇa said that "This system of yoga I explained to the sun-god millions of years ago," imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1], at that time, to clear the idea, Arjuna, for our sake, he inquired, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, we are contemporaries. You are born the other day along with me. How can I believe that millions of years ago You spoke this philosophy to the sun-god? So what is the answer?" The answer is, "My dear Arjuna, both you and Me, we take so many incarnations, but you forget. But I do not forget. I do not forget." Therefore Arjuna is always with Kṛṣṇa. It is not that in this age, this millennium, Arjuna is friend of Kṛṣṇa. No. He is eternal friend. He has made friendship with Kṛṣṇa. It is never to be broken. It is never to be broken. So if you want to relish the rasa, the mellow, the taste of friendship, make friendship with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is prepared to make you friend. Therefore He comes: "Please come. Become My friend." But we are denying. Make Kṛṣṇa your friend. Make Kṛṣṇa your son. Then you'll never lament, "Oh, my son is lost" or "My son has gone bad." No.

So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the same thing. We are making temporary relationship in this material world, and that is being broken, so many families. Who knows what family I belonged to in my last birth? Might have been something else, not this family. We are changing our family because family means this body. I consider, "I belong to this family," because my body is produced from that family. The next life, the body is produced from another family. Then where is our family relationship? This is called māyā. In the material world, there cannot be anything fact. They are all illusion. The so-called family, the so-called friendship, the so-called lover, beloved, so-called paternal affection, sons, they are all simply... Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. This was detected by Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja said to Nṛsiṁhadeva, "My Lord, I am not anxious at all for my welfare because I know that anywhere, if I simply remember Your transcendental pastimes, oh, I..." Śoce... Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ. Tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahā. This chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, or chanting Kṛṣṇa's pastime, it is just like ocean. So Prahlāda Mahārāja said that "I have learned this art. Therefore, for me, there is no problem. But my one problem is śoce tato vimukha-cetasaḥ. I am thinking, 'These persons, who have no attraction for You, and they are simply engaged māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahataḥ, making gigantic arrangement for happiness which will not stay... After death everything will be finished.' I am simply thinking of them." Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] "And they are vimūḍhān. They do not consider it that they are eternal," nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). This is the Vedic mantra. The Kṛṣṇa, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is nityo nityānām, and we living entities, we are also nitya. We are plural number; Kṛṣṇa is one, singular number. Cetanaś cetanānām. Eternal and living, not dead. We are not dead. Kṛṣṇa is also not dead. We do not die. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. So why you have accepted this death? This is inquiry. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Unless this inquiry comes into the mind of a human being, he's an ass. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13].

So this inquiry should be there. So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to enthuse people to make this inquiry. Just like political leaders: they were sleeping, and Gandhi and other political leaders, they made agitation that "Why you shall remain dependent on this British ruling?" Just like, similar... It is not like that. It is an example. Our movement is that, that "You are eternal. Why you should rot in this material world where there is no question of eternity? Everything is temporary." Everything is temporary. So how we can attain that eternity? Kṛṣṇa says,

mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



"If you come to Me..." Kṛṣṇa is saying to us, indicating Arjuna, that "If you come to, come back to home, back to Godhead... Why you are rotting in this material world, temporary world?" "No, I have got so many responsibilities, Sir. How can I join You?" So Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān pari...: "Give it up." "Then, I'll be in trouble?" "No, you'll not be troubled." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ [Bg. 18.66]. Kṛṣṇa is giving assurance.



Therefore Kṛṣṇa is not an ordinary living being. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality. That is described here. What is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is Yogeśvara. Yogeśvara means... Yoga, mystic power... There are so many yogis, they can exhibit yogic power-aṇimā, laghimā, prāpti-siddhi. So, so many-aṣṭa-siddhi-yoga-not these ordinary yogis, simply practicing some āsana, but real yoga means to get this perfection, aṇimā, aṇu, to become very, very... We are very small. So the yogic power... They can give up this material body, and in their spiritual body they can enter anywhere, through a hole. That is called aṇimā-siddhi. Similarly, laghimā-siddhi: they can become very light, walking on the water. That is called laghimā-siddhi. Mahimā-siddhi: to becoming, become very big also. There are so many siddhis. So we are not very much interested with these siddhis. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta... Because... Just like a rich man's son, He does not bother about earning money because he knows that "My father is very rich. So if I need money, my father will supply." Similarly, we take shelter of the Yogeśvara, the master of all mystic power. So if you want to see some aṣṭa-siddhi-yoga, we take shelter of Kṛṣṇa and He'll show. Why shall I take so much trouble? Why? So people say that in the Western world, I have played wonderful things. But I did not know any siddhi. It is Kṛṣṇa's desire. He has shown. Kṛṣṇa is pleased that "For Me, this person has come to serve Me. Now see how wonderful it is." Therefore Yogeśvara. Instead of becoming a yogi, you take shelter of Yogeśvara. Then all yogic power will be within your control. Just like a rich man's son, if he is in trouble, the whole father estate is behind him. So why should he hanker after earning money?

So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. If you simply... Therefore Kṛṣṇa, er, Kuntīdevī says, tvayi ananya-viṣayā, tvayi ananya-viṣayā matir madhu-pate: "Without any other desires..." She is praying. Why? She is not praying to a loafer. So qualifications are given, mentioned here, that rājanya-vaṁśa-dahana anapavarga-vīrya. Apavarga. So Kṛṣṇa's power is unlimited, anapavarga-vīrya. If we take Kṛṣṇa's shelter, if we become actually surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, then all power of Kṛṣṇa is behind you. And in this age Kṛṣṇa is so kind. Even though we cannot worship Kṛṣṇa properly, still, anywhere we can chant the holy name Hare Kṛṣṇa, and the Kṛṣṇa is there with His all power.

Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. The name of Kṛṣṇa is identical with Kṛṣṇa, and all mystic power of Kṛṣṇa is there. Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva, nija-sarva, nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā. In the name, all the potencies... Kṛṣṇa is Yogeśvara, so all the potencies of Kṛṣṇa is there because the name is not different from Kṛṣṇa. So therefore, Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, regrets, etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi: "My dear Lord, You are so kind, so merciful, that simply by chanting Your holy name, I get the full benefit of Your personal association. Still, I am so unfortunate. I have no taste for chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." Etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ. So you are so unfortunate that this, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, you are not taking part.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730506SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.44

-

Los Angeles, May 6, 1973





Devotee: (leads chanting, etc.)



sūta uvāca

pṛthayetthaṁ kala-padaiḥ

pariṇūtākhilodayaḥ

mandaṁ jahāsa vaikuṇṭho

mohayann iva māyayā

[SB 1.8.44]



Translation: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: The Lord, thus hearing the prayers of Kuntīdevī, composed in choice words for His glorification, mildly smiled. That smile was as enchanting as His mystic power."



Prabhupāda: Pṛthayā itthaṁ kala-padaiḥ pariṇūtākhilodayaḥ. Akhilodayaḥ, akhilodayaḥ, enlightening or enthusing the whole universe. How? Mandaṁ jahāsa. Little smile. If Kṛṣṇa is pleased and smiles little, then the whole universe will be pleased. Akhilodayaḥ. Tasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭaḥ. If Kṛṣṇa is pleased, satisfied, then the whole universe will be satisfied, because the whole universe means part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. (aside:) What is that sound? Kat kat.



Devotee: Preparing for the feast. They're preparing for the feast.



Prabhupāda: This should be stopped. Prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇām. Just like the parts of my body, they are indriya, senses. The senses are satisfied, the different parts of my body is satisfied when there is food satisfaction in the stomach. If your stomach is hungry, then how you can be satisfied? You cannot be satisfied. Even there is various arrangement for your sense gratification, but if you are hungry, then you'll not be satisfied.



So the whole world is dissatisfied because the spiritual hunger is not satisfied. Kṛṣṇa is the central point. So spiritual hunger means... We are, our general propensity is to satisfy our hunger. So Kṛṣṇa is the center, Kṛṣṇa is the root, mūla. Yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ [SB 4.31.14]. Just like watering to the root, you can satisfy the whole tree-the trunk, branches, twigs, leaves, flowers, fruits, everything-if there is water in the root. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the root of all creation. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ. "Everything is emanating from Me," Kṛṣṇa says. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. Whatever you see, that is coming from Kṛṣṇa. There are so many other words.

What is this world? This world is made of two energies, material and spiritual. Actually it is spiritual, but some portion is material. The same example, that this, my body is full of consciousness, sensation, but some parts, just like the nail, there is no consciousness, there is no sensation. If you cut the nail, you won't feel any pain. But just a, a small, I mean to say, one tenth part of an inch, if you come down on the skin portion, immediately there will be sensation and painful. As they're side by side. Therefore, similarly, the material creation and spiritual creation is side by side. The material creation is another part of spiritual creation. Just like the cloud. The cloud is creation of the sunshine. Not that the sunshine is creation of cloud. This is the mistake, modern science. By the sunshine, the cloud is created. But when the cloud is created, the sunshine becomes covered. You cannot see the sun. Similarly, this māyā...

Māyā means absence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is māyā, absence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When you forget Kṛṣṇa, this is māyā. When we remember Kṛṣṇa, know Kṛṣṇa, there is no māyā. Just like you have experience that you go through the cloud and then come to the sunshine, there is no more cloud. So below the cloud there is darkness, there is... We cannot see the sun. So the sunshine is profuse sunshine. Not that cloud can cover the sunshine. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. Kṛṣṇa is within the universe, within the atoms, everywhere. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Every heart, there is Kṛṣṇa. But we cannot see Kṛṣṇa. Simply, somehow or other, we have been covered by the illusion of māyā. That's it. So as soon as we come to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness atmosphere, shining atmosphere, then there is no māyā. Māyā is illusion.

So here Kuntīdevī says, Sūta Gosvāmī says, that pṛthayā itthaṁ kala-padaiḥ. Pṛthayā, Kuntī's another name is Pṛthā. His, her father's name is Mahārāja Pṛthu; therefore she is called Pṛthā, daughter of Pṛthu. So when Kuntī offered prayers to Kṛṣṇa in very chosen nice words, all the words... Therefore Kṛṣṇa is known, His another name is Uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloka. Because Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme, He should be offered prayer with supreme words and feelings. Supreme words and feelings. The language should not be cheap, or the idea should not be cheap. Just like when we offer prayer to Kṛṣṇa, we follow the path by Lord Brahmā. Brahmā offered this prayer in the Brahma-saṁhitā:

cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]



Each word is full of meaning. Cintāmaṇi, prakara, sadmasu, kalpa-vṛkṣa. So Kṛṣṇa should be offered by chosen words. Uttama-śloka, very nicely arranged.



So such prayers, we can have many. Because many devotees of Kṛṣṇa... Just like Kuntī is offering her prayer. So we can practice how to offer prayer to Kṛṣṇa. Instead of writing ourself, if we, in the beginning, follow the footprints of the great devotees of Kṛṣṇa and follow their principles, taken to heart, how they have spoken, that will be advantageous, because Kṛṣṇa will be pleased. Kṛṣṇa... The Māyāvādī prayers... What is that prayer? Now call Kṛṣṇa by ill names. That is their prayer. They offer prayer to the Supreme that "You have no eyes, You have no hand, You have no leg, You cannot speak, You cannot..." So many things, all negation. So is that prayer? If I say, "You have no eyes," so in an indirect way it is to call you, "You are blind." If you have no legs, that means you are lame. You cannot hear: you are deaf. You cannot speak: you are dumb. So is that prayer? If I say, "My dear sir, you are blind, you are lame, you have no eyes..."

So these rascals' prayer is like that. He does not know what is the name of the Supreme. "O my dear, You have no legs, You have no hands, You have..." This is not prayer. This is not prayer. Prayer must be description of the Lord about His activities. Just like Brahmā is offering prayer, surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. "Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, You are so fond of Your surabhi cows, surabhi, that You are always engaged in taking them to the forest and enjoy with Your cowherd boys." The Māyāvādī will think, "What is this? The God has become a cowherd boy? How it is? He must be very exalted. How it is that He is cowherd boy?" But he does not know the nature of the Lord. He's free. He loves everyone. He loves His great devotee, He loves the cows, He loves the calves, He loves the trees, fruits, flowers, water, everything, because everything is manifestation of His energy. Just like you love any part of your body. Not that if there is some pain on your head, you take very much care, and when there is pain on your toe, you do not take care. No. You spend as much money for the pain of headache. Similarly, you can spend as much money when there is some pain on the toe. So Kṛṣṇa, being Absolute, there is no such distinction that, "Here is head, important, and here is leg, nonimportant." No.

So this caste distinction... Kṛṣṇa says, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Just like we have got division of my body. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. The head is working nicely because without brain, there is no work. So the working of the head certainly is very important. Similarly, the walking of the leg is also important. So Kṛṣṇa's thinking, taxing the brain or walking there is no such difference. In our body also there is no such difference. But because we are in the materialistic world, dual world, we make distinction: this is superior, inferior. But for Kṛṣṇa there is no such thing, "superior," "inferior." Everything is Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādī philosopher says that when Kṛṣṇa comes, He accepts a material body. But these foolish people, they do not know that Kṛṣṇa has no material body. For Kṛṣṇa, everything is spiritual. Kṛṣṇa has no material body. It is for us to distinguish between matter and spirit. But Kṛṣṇa, being the original source of everything, He is absolutely spirit. That's all. The Supreme Spirit. He has no such distinction.

The same example, as I have given many times: Just like for an electrical engineer, there is no such distinction that "This is heater" and "This is cooler." Heat and cool, opposite. But the, for the engineer, electrical engineer, he takes as much importance for the heater, as much for the cooler. So, for Him, there is no such distinction, material or spiritual. It is for us. Because we are now in the dual stage, the world of duality, relativity. This world is relativity. We cannot work so nicely with material consciousness. But Kṛṣṇa has no such thing. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. There is no distinction, material and spiritual.

So even we offer Kṛṣṇa prayer with broken languages, because Kṛṣṇa is Absolute, Kṛṣṇa will accept it. Bhāva-grāhī, bhāva-grāhī-janārdana. Janārdana, Kṛṣṇa, sees how much your heart is pure for serving Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa does not see the wording, the grammatical composition of your prayer. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja said... When other demigods were afraid of approaching Nṛsiṁhadeva, so Brahmā requested Prahlāda that "You offer prayer." So Brahmā's prayer is very..., Prahlāda Mahārāja's prayer... So Prahlāda Mahārāja says that "What prayer I shall offer to the Supreme Lord? Such big, big demigods like Brahmā and others, they are present here. Even goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, is present here. They are afraid or they could not offer proper prayers to Kṛṣṇa, Nṛsiṁhadeva, to pacify Him. He's very angry. So everyone is afraid." So Prahlāda Mahārāja said that "I am born in a low family. My father is Hiraṇyakaśipu. So how I can offer prayer? If big, big demigods could not offer prayer and satisfy the Lord, so what I can do?"

This is humbleness of Vaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava is so humble. He is induced, he's ordered by Brahmā, that "You offer prayer. Your prayer will be accepted." So then Prahlāda Mahārāja considering that viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha-pādāravinda-vimukhāt: "I can understand this, that Kṛṣṇa is not satisfied by the prayers of a brāhmaṇa who is qualified with twelve nice qualities. Kṛṣṇa is satisfied simply by devotion. I can understand. Because all these big, big demigods headed by Brahmā, they could not... They are asking me. That means Kṛṣṇa will be satisfied simply by bhakti."

That's the fact. That is the fact. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā: yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Kṛṣṇa says that "A little flower, little water, little fruit, that's all, if somebody offers Me with devotion and love, then I eat." Kṛṣṇa is not hungry. Kṛṣṇa is not hungry. He is self-satisfied, pūrṇa. But if His devotee offers Him something with love and affection, then He accepts. So do not think that "We have made such nice, sumptuous plate for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa must eat." No. There is no such thing, "must." You cannot make Kṛṣṇa must. That is not possible. So Kṛṣṇa will see how much you have love for Him. Then He will accept. Otherwise He'll reject. Therefore, it is forbidden, those who are nondevotee, those who are not initiated, those who are not chanting regularly, their offering to Kṛṣṇa will not be accepted. We must be very careful. We must know our position, whether I am sincerely following the principles of devotional service. Then Kṛṣṇa will accept. Yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. The real thing is bhakti. So either you offer Kṛṣṇa prayers or you offer foodstuff, everything must be along with bhakti, devotion, love. Then Kṛṣṇa will accept.

As Kuntī, Kṛṣṇa, Kuntī offered prayers... She's a woman. She has not much very learning. But still, whatever she has offered, kala-padaiḥ, according to her, as much, as many nice words could be collected, she has offered... Kala-padaiḥ pariṇūta, worshiped. So worship, for what purpose? Akhilodaya. For the enlightenment of the whole universe. For akhilodaya. By offering prayer to Kṛṣṇa, everything becomes auspicious, akhilodaya. Then Kṛṣṇa, whatever you speak for Kṛṣṇa, it is applicable. Whatever you speak. Because Kṛṣṇa is everything. If you say, "Kṛṣṇa is the noblest man," that is applicable. And if you say, "Kṛṣṇa is the greatest thief," that is also applicable. This is absolute. Because He has stolen so, so much butter, well-known butter thief. So not only that; so many things. If you say, "Kṛṣṇa is the greatest cheater," that is also applicable. And if you say, "Kṛṣṇa is the most benevolent, beneficent," that is also applicable. They're absolute. That is absolute. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, Vedānta-sūtra: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], wherefrom everything is coming.

So these words, what we think "This is good word; this is bad word," so for Kṛṣṇa there is nothing like that. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. Rather, what you think bad, that becomes good when it is applied to Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like Kṛṣṇa advised Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja that "You go to Droṇācārya and speak him, to tell him that 'Your son is dead.' " Because Droṇācārya will not die unless he hears, he gets a shock of his son's death. So his son was living. So unless he gets this shock... So he would not believe anybody. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was the truthful Dharmarāja, Yudhiṣṭhira. So Kṛṣṇa asked him that "You go on and tell this lie, that 'He is, your son is dead.' " But Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja hesitated: "Oh, I never spoken lies. How can I say it?" You see?

So this was a mistake by Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, because the so-called truthfulness or untruthfulness of this relative world is not applicable to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has got a plan. If we execute the plan of Kṛṣṇa, that is the highest truth. But we should not imitate unless we are actually ordered to do such thing. Just like Kṛṣṇa was personally asking. So unless we are ordered by Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa's representative, we cannot violate the morality of this world. That is not possible. It is a great philosophy. It requires little brain to understand. So man nimitte kṛtaṁ pāpaṁ puṇya eva kalpate(?). So if sometimes we have to do something which is sinful for the sake of Kṛṣṇa, not for others, not for me... For me, even if we do so-called pious activities, that is also impious. And if we do something for Kṛṣṇa which is in the estimation of the world impious, that becomes pious. That is Kṛṣṇa philosophy.

So therefore it is said that vaikuṇṭho mandaṁ jahāsa vaikuṇṭhaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is Vaikuṇṭha. Kuṇṭha means anxiety, doubt, kuṇṭha. If you are doubtful, if you are in anxiety, that is called kuṇṭha. And Vaikuṇṭha means without that thing, doubtfulness or anxiety. So in other words, whatever you do for Kṛṣṇa, there is no more doubt or anxiety. Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore His name is Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. There is a verse, sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, he engaged his mind to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. We have different senses. The mind is the center of all senses. Therefore our first business should be always engaging the mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, always thinking of the lotus. Smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇuḥ. Always. Then everything is all right. Then when you have to talk, vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane, simply talk of Kṛṣṇa, this Vaikuṇṭha. You can talk of Kṛṣṇa, about His pastimes with the gopīs. You can talk of Kṛṣṇa about His pastimes when He's killing the Pūtanā, Aghāsura, Bakāsura. Both are the same. Some of the rascals, they decide that to talk of Kṛṣṇa about His embracing the gopīs is very good, and the talk of Kṛṣṇa killing Pūtanā or other demons, that is not good. That is rascaldom. Anything about Kṛṣṇa, you talk, vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. Just like in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there are so many descriptions, so many other things, but because it is in relationship with Kṛṣṇa, so each word of Bhāgavatam is valued. Each word of Bhagavad-gītā is valued. Because there is relation. Similarly, if you dovetail everything in Kṛṣṇa's service, everything is good. Everything Vaikuṇṭha. That is Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane.

So that is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are trying to dovetail everything in connection with Kṛṣṇa. Make Kṛṣṇa center, and all your activities will be spiritual. That is distinction. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. As soon as anything is done for Kṛṣṇa, the bhakti... So the beginning you cannot do so, that anything you can dovetail. No. In the beginning you have to learn first of all how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. You are, we are in the training period. We are in the training period. We should not imitate: "Oh, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was ordered to speak lies, so let us go on speaking all lies." No, not that. You cannot do so. First of all, be trained up. For being trained up, you have to follow the regulative principles, the orders of spiritual master. In this way, sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Brs. 1.2.234]. When your all parts of your limbs will be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], in this way when you are actually advanced, then whatever you do in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that is good.

Thank you very much. (end)



741024SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.44

-

Māyāpura, October 24, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation. "Sūta Gosvāmī said: The Lord, thus hearing the prayers of Kuntīdevī, composed in choice words for His glorification, mildly smiled. That smile was as enchanting as His mystic power."



Prabhupāda:



pṛthayetthaṁ kala-padaiḥ

pariṇūtākhilodayaḥ

mandaṁ jahāsa vaikuṇṭho

mohayann iva māyayā

[SB 1.8.44]



So whatever Kuntī said, that was accepted by Kṛṣṇa. So He remained silent and simply smiled, that "A devotee is glorifying the Lord in chosen words." Here it is said that kala-padaiḥ. Means God is to be worshiped... He is to be offered the best selected words, not that like the atheist fools, they worship, or rather, insult. That very word... It gives us very much pain when God is called "daridra-nārāyaṇa." Why? Why Nārāyaṇa should be daridra? That means no conception of Nārāyaṇa. Therefore they add these insulting words.



But that is not the way of worship. Uttama-śloka. Kṛṣṇa's or God's another name is Uttama-śloka, "who is worshiped by the best, selected words." Uttama-śloka-guṇānuvarṇanam. Yad uttama-śloka-guṇānuvarṇanam [SB 1.5.22].

idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā

sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ

avicyuto 'rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito

yad uttama-śloka-guṇānuvarṇanam

[SB 1.5.22]



This is the injunction of the śāstra. Idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā. In the material world, everyone, at least the higher class, higher section of the society, they are engaged in so many research work. That is called tapasya, how to find out the best thing for the human, benefit of the human society, scientific research. That is also tapasya. When a scientist invents something, that is result of tapasya. It is not very easily obtained. Therefore tapa... So many people are engaged in tapasya. Idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya. So many people are engaged in education. Śrutasya. Śrutasya means "of education." The Vedic process of getting education is by hearing. Therefore it is called śruti. The Vedas are called Śruti. Formerly... Just like we are reading books. The books were not needed because the memory was so sharp-simply by hearing from the teacher, they'll remember. That is... That is called tradition by hearing. Therefore education means śruti. Śrutibhir pratipannam. Anything, if you want to prove, then you have to give evidence from the śruti. Then it is...



So anyone who is being educated, anyone who is engaged in research work for the benefit of the whole human society... Idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā ca buddhi-dattayoḥ [SB 1.5.22]. Or somebody is giving in charity, opening hospital, schools, or other good, good purposes. Ca buddhi-dattayoḥ. So why they are doing that? What is the purpose? The purpose is avicyutaḥ arthaḥ. Avicyuta means infallible, and artha means purpose. Avicyutaḥ arthaḥ kavibhir nirūpitaḥ. It is ascertained, the purpose. Why one should be engaged in research work? Why one should be engaged in getting good education? Why one should perform charity, or why one should be intelligent? This is higher-class activities. So what is the purpose? The purpose, it is said, kavibhir nirūpitaḥ: "By high-class scholars, they have ascertained." What is it? Yad uttama-śloka-guṇānuvarṇanam: [SB 1.5.22] "God is to be worshiped simply by glorifying Him by the best words, uttama-śloka." Not that "My dear God, You have no eyes. You have no leg. You have no hand. You have no mouth." What is this? It is the indirect way of insulting God. If one man has no eyes, then what he is called? He is called blind. So if one man has no legs, he is called lame. So similarly, if we worship God that "You are blind. You are lame. You are headless. You are brainless," what is this worship? Similarly, this kind of worship-daridra-nārāyaṇa, "Nārāyaṇa is daridra"-is just like that. No. Here Kuntī says that kala-padaiḥ, Kala-padaiḥ, "by chosen words." Just like if you worship some superior, when you give foodstuff to your spiritual master, superior, you find out the best, selected foodstuff, not that anything, worst: "You eat it. If you don't like, don't eat. I don't mind." No. This is the way of worship. When you worship superior, and who can be more superior than Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead? He's the Supreme, Absolute Truth. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13).

So Kuntī has all along... Very selected words she used. That we should learn. That is the injunction of the śāstras, uttama-śloka. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's another name is bhagavaty uttama-śloke bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī [SB 1.2.18]. The best words. Actually, if you love somebody, out of love you cannot use anything, means any word, which is not very much appreciated. So... And they are all applicable. It is not like the logic, kāṇa-chelera nāma padma-locana(?): one man has got a child who is blind, but he has given the name Padma-locana, "lotus-eyed." Not like that. The selected words which Kuntī has used, it is not improper. They are properly used. Just like here is one word used, Vaikuṇṭha. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Vaikuṇṭha, or God's another name is Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha means vigata-kuṇṭha hy asmāt. Therefore spiritual world is called Vaikuṇṭha. And the material world is duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. It is not Vaikuṇṭha. You cannot even walk without anxiety. Just like we were walking on the street, and the leg slipped. So we should be very much careful even in walking. Beginning from your morning walk, you are full of anxiety. But Vaikuṇṭha means no anxiety, no anxiety. That is spiritual world. We must understand what is Vaikuṇṭhaloka, and what is Jaḍaloka.

So here, everywhere, simply danger. But if we take shelter of the Vaikuṇṭha, Kṛṣṇa... Samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam. It is just like the boat for crossing over a furious, dangerous ocean. Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet is compared with very sound, secure boat. And boarding it, you can cross over the ocean of nescience. Bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padam. Bhavāmbudhiḥ. Ambudhi means sea, and bhava means repetition of birth and death, birth and death. Just like in the ocean you are struggling. Sometimes you are drowning, and somebody helps you, saves you from being drowned, and again he throws you in the ocean. Then again struggle. So our life in this material world is like that. We are struggling from the beginning, very beginning of our life. We are simply struggling. We learn from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that after the sex between the man and the woman, the man injects the semina within the womb of the mother, of the woman, and it is emulsified first night, and immediately forms a pealike form. That pealike form develops. So as soon as it is developed... Of course, in the process of development, there is no consciousness, just like deep sleeping. It is like that. But as soon as the body is little developed, the... There are nine holes: two nostrils, two ears, two eyes, one navel, one genital, one rectum. These nine holes develop. Then the consciousness comes back. And when the consciousness comes back, then he feels pains and pleasure, because when the body is developed... The body is very delicate. So he is forced to live within urine and stool and so many secretions, and there are always worms in the stool, in the urine, and they take advantage of the delicate body and they bite.

So the baby, packed up, cannot move, cannot say anything but feels pain, therefore moves. And the pregnant woman therefore feels that the child is moving at the age of seven months in the womb. So therefore the struggle begins from the womb. And when the child comes out, again struggle. And he is lying on the bed; some bug is biting. He cannot express. He is crying, and the mother thinks that he's hungry. In this way, wrongly understands, cannot give relief him. And he is going on, crying, crying, crying. We have seen it. We have... Everyone has got experience. Then as soon as he is grown up, he is given responsibility for learning ABCD, or going to school. He doesn't like. No child likes. At least I did not like to go to school. So this is also another struggle. Then, when he is grown up, he is given more and more responsibility, examination, and then married life, then family maintenance. In this way, struggling, struggling, struggling-again death. Again enter into the womb of mother. Again the same struggle. So where is happiness? Therefore when Kṛṣṇa says, duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam: [Bg. 8.15] "This whole material world is a place for suffering only," that is a fact. But mūḍho 'yam, being enamored by māyā, he does not know. He forgets. This life is of forgetfulness, ignorance.

So struggle is going on. So therefore this word is used, that you are struggling in this material world so much, even beginning from your life. Prahlāda Mahārāja says, sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5]. Asat. The spiritual world is called sat. Oṁ tat sat. So we should transfer ourself to the spiritual world. Asato mā gama, sad gama. Asato mā sad gama. This is the Vedic injunction. "Don't keep yourself in this asat." Asat means bad. Asat means which will not exist. That is called asat. Asad-grahāt. So because we have accepted this asat, grahāt, with very great eagerness, that "We shall become very happy; we shall live here very happily," therefore there is all... Actually there is no happiness. Suppose if you get some money all of a sudden, actually this is also asat, because when you did not get money, you were anxious to get it, and as soon as you get it, how to preserve it? "Shall I keep it in the bank? Because it is black market. Then there will be income tax. Then what I shall I do?" Another anxiety. Another anxiety.

So asad-vastu, in any way you want to enjoy, it will give you always anxiety. And if you go to the sad-vastu... Asato mā sad gama. If you go to sat, then that is Vaikuṇṭha. That is called Vaikuṇṭha, no more anxiety. This is... Therefore this very word is used, Vaikuṇṭha. Mandaṁ jahāsa vaikuṇṭho mohayann iva māyayā. This māyā is not illusion; this māyā is affection. When a mother laughs, smiles, the child feels very pleasure, very much. The mother... The child on the lap of the mother... Mother is seeing the face of the child, and child is seeing the face of the mother. Both of them are very pleased. They smile. So māyā, that māyā, means affection. When Kṛṣṇa smiles, He smiles with affection, and the devotee becomes enamored, becomes captivated simply by seeing Kṛṣṇa smiling. This is the process, the express, exchange of devotional service.

So Vaikuṇṭha, Kṛṣṇa's name, and Kṛṣṇa's place... Therefore, as Kṛṣṇa is Vaikuṇṭha, without any anxiety-Kṛṣṇa has no anxiety-similarly, Kṛṣṇa's place is also without any anxiety. Kṛṣṇa's activities, hearing Kṛṣṇa, that is also without anxiety. If we want to be anxietyless, then we should hear about Kṛṣṇa.

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām



Kṛṣṇa, if you simply hear about Kṛṣṇa... Sthāne sthitāḥ. It doesn't require to change your place. You may be in, in your place, position. You may be a medical practitioner. You may be engineer. You may be any other man, mercantile man. Whatever you may be, it doesn't... You may be a learned man. You may be a foolish man. It doesn't matter. But you hear. That is... If you want to get the position of Vaikuṇṭha, then you simply hear. It doesn't matter what is your position. Kṛṣṇa never said, "Only this kind of man..." Of course, there is classification. The classification is sinless and sinful. Only the persons who are sinless, they can understand about God. That sinlessness can be achieved very easily, as I was explaining last night. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravana-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Simply if you hear about Kṛṣṇa, then the sinless automatically, sinlessness automatically comes in, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], simply by hearing. So by hearing, hearing, it is both the process and the medicine, both, everything. Because one has to become sinless, so one has to adopt some means by which one can become sinless. So simply by hearing, you become sinless. And after being sinless, you become more and more interested.



Just like in jaundice disease that, if you... Because the doctors, the medical practitioners, they give sugar candy. The physician gives sugar candy. The sugar candy, to the person suffering from jaundice, tastes bitter: "Oh, it is bitter." But actually sugar candy is not bitter. Similarly, to the sinful man the kṛṣṇa-kathā, discussion about Kṛṣṇa, does not appear to be very palatable. They do not like to hear. They think it is waste of time. But that, as the sugar candy is the only medicine for jaundice disease, similarly, the hari-kathā, or kṛṣṇa-kathā, is the only medicine for our material disease. If we take it... Just like the jaundiced patient. If he takes sugar candy, then gradually he becomes free from the diseased condition, and at that time, the same sugar candy which he tasted in the beginning as bitter, it appears to be very, very sweet. Then he cannot live without. This is the process.

So we are in material disease at the present moment. We have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, and struggling for existence, we are trying to be happy by manufacturing so many plans. But this will not help us. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu approved this process. What is that?

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām



There was discussion between Rāmānanda Rāya and Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So Rāmānanda Rāya began from varṇāśrama-dharma. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu rejected-rejected not wholly. Eho bāhya āge kaha āra: "Yes, this is not bad, but it is not so important." Eho bāhya āge kaha āra: "If you know something more..." In this way, gradually, step by step, Rāmānanda Rāya said, "The ultimate goal of life is this," "is that," "is that." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said all of them as external, at least in this age. It is very difficult. Just like in the beginning Rāmānanda Rāya said that varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān [Cc. Madhya 8.58]. He gave stress on the institution of varṇa and āśrama, to observe the rules and regulation of varṇas, four varṇas-to become brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra-and four āśramas: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha... But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, eho bāhya, bāhya: "Yes, it is good, but it is not so, mean, important, not so important."



Because He knew, in this age, Kali Yuga, who is going to observe this varṇāśrama-dharma? Everyone is śūdra. A śūdra cannot understand this, neither it is possible to bring them back again. Although we are trying, but it is very difficult. Once one has become debauch, to reform him is very difficult. But still there is way. And that way is suggested when... Rāmānanda Rāya suggested that... It is the words of Lord Brahmā that jñāne prayāsam udapāsya: "One should not very much endeavor to speculate, speculating process." Just like these theosophists, the philosophers, the scientists. They, instead of having direct knowledge from the superior, they, more or less, speculate. So one has to give up this speculating habit. If one thinks that "I know. I am very educated. I am very advanced. I can discover what is God," that is not possible. That is not possible. Athāpi te deva-padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi jānāti tattvam [SB 10.14.29]. You cannot understand God by your speculative method. Big, big scholars, they have speculated about Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā. Misled, they could not understand.

Just like a big politician, Gandhi, he also has Bhagavad-gītā in his hand, but he never spoke throughout his whole life that Kṛṣṇa is worshipable. He never spoke. Have you seen that he has advised that Kṛṣṇa is worshipable? Never. Dr. Radhakrishnan, he is also so big scholar. He has commented on Bhagavad-gītā. Rather, he says, "It is not to Kṛṣṇa." When Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], Dr. Radhakrishnan says, "It is not to Kṛṣṇa." That is the difficulty. Because they have no mercy of Kṛṣṇa upon them, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. This is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. But they are not bhaktas. Tilak, he has described Bhagavad-gītā as a karmī, never said that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You'll find like that, so many, what to speak of others? There are about six hundred commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā, all misleading. Therefore we have presented Bhagavad-gītā As It Is, without any misinterpretation. And it is acting. These six hundred editions of Bhagavad-gītā was being advertised in the Western countries, and so many scholars and swamis went there-not a single person became a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, not a single for the last two hundred, three hundred years. Before that, there was no such attempt, but for the last at least hundred years, or more than that, many Indians went to the Western countries to preach our philosophy, and they referred to Bhagavad-gītā and so on, but unfortunately not a single person became a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, not a single person. But as we presented Bhagavad-gītā as it is, within five years, thousands and thousands have become devotee of Kṛṣṇa. One can compare this.

So this is the way, that "Don't speculate nonsensically." That is the injunction of Lord Brahmā, jñāne prayāsam, that "You are very much learned scholar. You are a great politician-'So I can speculate some religious system by misinterpreting this Bhagavad-gītā'-no, you should stop this." That is the recommendation. Jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva: "Just become submissive, submissive." That is the only way, to become submissive first of all. Then you can understand what is God. Therefore Kṛṣṇa demands, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. So jñāne prayāsam udapā..., namanta eva. And what is the next business? San-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām. One should hear bhavadīya-vārtām, the message of Kṛṣṇa, from a realized soul, not a professional man. A realized soul. San-mukharitām. Sat. Oṁ tat sat. That same, again. That is the way. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended, bhāgavata paro giya bhāgavata sthāne.(?) Don't go and hear Bhāgavata-saptāha by a professional man. That is useless waste of time. If you want to learn about Bhāgavata, then bhāgavata paro giya bhāgavata sthāne-realized soul. Grantha-bhāgavata and... That is the recommendation of Brahmā, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted it. When this verse was recited by Rāmānanda Rāya,

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām



Immediately Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, eho haya: "Yes, this is the system." Eho haya, āge kaha āra. Then further development. Then further development: śānta-rasa, dāsya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, and vātsalya-rasa... That is rasa-vicāra. That is... When one has stepped into this Vaikuṇṭha platform, then the rasa-vicāra, not before that.



So here also, Kṛṣṇa is described as Vaikuṇṭha. If one takes shelter of Kṛṣṇa, then he also become Vaikuṇṭha. Samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavam. He becomes assured of his safety. Kṛṣṇa is Vaikuṇṭha. So pṛthayā itthaṁ kala-padaiḥ. And we should not try to insult God. We should try to glorify God in glorified language. That I already explained. Uttama-śloka-guṇānuvādāt. Don't try to speak nonsense and describe God. No. God is never daridra. How He can be daridra? If you describe daridra-nārāyaṇa, it is a blasphemy. No. Uttama-śloka. Just like Kuntī has described, kṛṣṇa-sakha: "You are the friend of Arjuna." That is the proper explanation. Gopī, gopī-vallabha: "Kṛṣṇa, You are always prepared to please the gopīs." Yaśodā-nandana. Yaśodā-nandana vraja-jana-rañjana. These are the description. "Kṛṣṇa, You are the son of Yaśo..." Kṛṣṇa takes pride. Kṛṣṇa, when His name is attached with the activities of a devotee, He becomes very much pleased. But sometimes Kṛṣṇa is called Kaṁsa-nisūdana, Madhusūdana, Kaṁsāri. That is also Kṛṣṇa's pleasure. He appears to be enemy, Kaṁsāri, to the demons.

So these are the description of Kṛṣṇa. We have to follow. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Don't manufacture something which will not be compatible. You just hear, sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatā..., from the realized soul, how Kṛṣṇa should be described. Here... Just like Kuntī is describing Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-sakha. He's Kṛṣṇa, and Draupadī is also called Kṛṣṇa, and Arjuna is also called Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa is both, friends for both of them. Kṛṣṇa supplied unlimited measurement of cloth to Draupadī because Draupadī was crying to Kṛṣṇa, "Save my honor." Similarly, Arjuna also, he accepted Kṛṣṇa as the supreme guide. Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam: [Bg. 2.7] "There is perplexity, my dear Kṛṣṇa. I cannot decide whether I shall fight or I shall not fight." Kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ: "I am kṣatriya, but due to my weakness, I am crying to avoid fight. So therefore please instruct me. Because You can, I understand that You can give me the right instruction; therefore I become Your śiṣya." Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is known as Pārtha-sārathi. Pārtha-sārathi, Kṛṣṇa-sakha, Yaśodā-nandana, Nanda-nandana, Vāsudeva, Devakī-nandana. So God has no name, but He has got thousands and millions of names on account of His different varieties of activities with His devotees. This is the science of understanding Kṛṣṇa's name. Kṛṣṇa-sakha and Vṛṣṇi-ṛṣabha, "The best of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty." Because Kṛṣṇa took birth in the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, so He's the best, Ṛṣabha. Ṛṣabha means the best. And because Kṛṣṇa took birth in the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, therefore the whole family became very famous. And His business was avani-dhrug-rājanya-vaṁśa, vaṁśa-dahana. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8].

So in this way Kṛṣṇa should be described in connection with different activities. But those who are impersonalists, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa, and being impersonalists, they do not believe in the activities of the Supreme. They think that when the Supreme Absolute Truth comes in the material world, in the material form, then "There is activity?" They cannot understand. Athāpi te deva padām... Therefore nobody can understand Kṛṣṇa without being trained up by a self-realized devotee. If a... If one takes the shelter of Kṛṣṇa's representative, devotee, then it doesn't matter what he is. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ, ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ [SB 2.4.18]. If he has taken shelter of a pure devotee-never mind he's a kirāta, hūṇa, āndhra, pulinda, pulkaśā-he is śudhyanti. He becomes purified, and gradually he understands Kṛṣṇa.

So from the example of Kuntīdevī, if we want to understand Kṛṣṇa, and if we want to be transferred to the Vaikuṇṭha atmosphere, then we should follow the Kṛṣṇa's... So Kṛṣṇa was very much pleased. If you worship Kṛṣṇa in the proper way, mahājano yena ga..., then he accepts. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. And Kṛṣṇa also says, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. That bhakti is the most important thing. Kṛṣṇa is not interested with your foodstuff. Kṛṣṇa is interested with your bhakti. Therefore this word is used, yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Not that "I am very rich man. I can offer Kṛṣṇa luci, puri, halavā. He must take it." Just like we get some palatable foodstuff-we eat up to the neck. No. Kṛṣṇa is ātmārāma. Kṛṣṇa has no hunger. Even if He is hungry, He can fulfill it Himself. He doesn't require your help. But He accepts your foodstuff because you offer Him with bhakti. That is the main thing. Just like you relish foodstuff when you are hungry. If you have got sufficient appetite, any kind of foodstuff, you'll find it is very nice. But if you are offered very palatable foodstuff and you are not hungry-you have no appetite-useless. Similarly, you can Kṛṣṇa offer very nice foodstuff, luci, puri, halavā and other things, but if you have no bhakti, then Kṛṣṇa will not touch. Therefore it is essential; those who are initiated, they should prepare Kṛṣṇa's foodstuff, and the professional man, noninitiated person, cannot prepare. Because a bhakta prepares the foodstuff with some desire that "Let me do it very nicely. Kṛṣṇa will eat."That... That is different thing from the professional man cooking.

So yo me bhaktyā... The main thing is bhakti. And all the prayers offered by Kuntīdevī-full of bhakti. So we should learn from Kuntīdevī how to offer, and then Kṛṣṇa will be very much pleased, and He will smile. Jahāsa.

Indian: Who has told this "daridra-nārāyaṇa"?



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Indian: "Daridra-nārāyaṇa" was told by who? Is it śāstra or it is...?



Prabhupāda: It is not in the śāstra. But somebody, some swami has told it.



Indian: Ramakrishnan...?



Prabhupāda: Yes. Not Ramakrishnan. Vivekananda. (pause) All right. [break] (Bengali) [break]



Indian: ...all the time wanted miseries and so now?(?)



Prabhupāda: Hm?



Indian: Kuntī?



Prabhupāda: Kuntī had no miseries.



Indian: No, she wanted all the time.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Kun... Yes. Because she wanted Kṛṣṇa. That is the subject matter of this prayer, that Kṛṣṇa was going to Dvārakā, taking leave from Kuntī, so she thought that "Kṛṣṇa, when we were always in danger, You were always with us. And now we are situated in good position, we are out of danger, and You are going away? The better we be again in danger so that I can see You." That was Kuntī's prayer. That's all. Now we can... (end)





730507SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.45

-

Los Angeles, May 7, 1973





Devotee: (leads chanting, etc.)



tāṁ bāḍham ity upāmantrya

praviśya gajasāhvayam

striyaś ca sva-puraṁ yāsyan

premṇā rājñā nivāritaḥ

[SB 1.8.45]



Translation: "Thus accepting the prayers of Śrīmatī Kuntīdevī, the Lord subsequently informed other ladies of His departure by entering the palace of Hastināpura. But upon preparing to leave, He was stopped by King Yudhiṣṭhira, who implored Him lovingly."



Prabhupāda: So the capital of the world empire is called Hastināpura or Gajasāhvaya. Gaja and hasti means elephant. Maybe there were many elephants, because formerly the kings, they used to keep many, many horses, elephants. Still, in New Delhi they have taken, kept some token elephants in the rājyapal bhavan(?), or the President's house. So formerly there was one king, and the capital was Hastināpura. The king of Hastināpura was ruling all over the world. There was one flag. These are mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. There were not many states, and the world was under one culture, Vedic culture.



So people, the advanced people, they were Aryans, ārya. Aryans means advanced. So the Indo-European stock, they are also Aryans. They came from Central India, Central Asia, and some of them went to Indian side. That is the history. The Caspian, Caspian Sea, that was the place of Kaśyapa Muni. Kaśyapa. From Kaśyapa the Caspian has come. Just like formerly the capital of Afghanistan was known as Gandhar. Now it has become Kandahar. So by historical references, it will be ascertained that the whole, this planet was known as Bhāratavarṣa. What is now India is now known Bhāratavarṣa, but formerly the whole planet was known as Bhāratavarṣa. Formerly, this planet was known as Ilāvṛtavarṣa, but since the time of King Bharata, who also, the forefathers of the Pāṇḍavas, the planet is called Bhāratavarṣa. So everywhere there was Vedic culture. The treasures are still available, and the history of the whole world is called Mahābhārata. The same point, Bhārata. And Mahābhārata means "greater Bhārata," greater. Just like nowadays we say "greater India," greater some city, "greater New York," so this Mahābhārata means is history of the greater Bhāratavarṣa.

So Hastināpura was capital, and the king of Hastināpura was the emperor of the world. There were, the other, there were states, but they were paying tax to the emperor. So Kṛṣṇa, after receiving the fine prayer, nicely composed by Kuntīdevī, He accepted, bāḍham. Bāḍham means, "Yes, that's all right." He smiled because whatever Kuntī has said, they are true. That is not exaggeration. And therefore Kṛṣṇa smiled that Kuntī was so pleased to enunciate the glories of the Lord. She knows what Kṛṣṇa is. So He said bāḍham, "Yes, it is all right." In this way, He was prepared to go, to return to Dvārakā, and the ladies also, when they were returning, so Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja requested, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, my dear brother, if You kindly stay a few days more."

So Kṛṣṇa is fully independent. He could have refused: "No, I cannot stay more." But here it is said, premṇā. Premṇā means out of love. Rājñā nivāritaḥ. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira cannot order the Supreme Personality of Godhead to stay or to undo His decisions. But premṇā, everything is possible. Premṇā. Premṇā means by love. Therefore, if we increase our love for Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa becomes purchased by us. Kṛṣṇa agrees. Kṛṣṇa is the order-giver for everyone, but He accepts the order of the devotee. Just like Kṛṣṇa, while driving the chariot, Arjuna said senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me acyuta: [Bg. 1.21] "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are Acyuta." Acyuta means who never falls, falls back. So "You have accepted my charioteer post..." So charioteer post means He has to carry the order of the king who is on the chariot. Chariot driver is a driver, and the master is the man who is sitting on the chariot. That is the position. So Arjuna knew that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Out of friendship, He has become my charioteer, order-carrier." So when he requested Him, rathaṁ sthāpaya me acyuta... "Just place my chariot between the two soldiers," senayor ubhayor madhye, so he was little hesitating that "I am ordering Kṛṣṇa." Therefore he reminded: "Acyuta." Acyuta means who never falls back. Therefore, he reminded that "Kṛṣṇa, although You are my master, but because You have voluntarily accepted to become my charioteer, therefore I am asking You. It is not disrespect. So you have to carry it as a charioteer." Kṛṣṇa also said, "Yes, I am willing. Yes." This is the position.

So if we can purchase Kṛṣṇa by love... That is stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā: durlabha, vedeṣu durlabham, vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. God is adurlabha, vedeṣu durlabha, not adurlabha. I am sorry. Vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. Durlabha means very difficult to obtain. Dur. Dur means with difficulty. And labha means getting. So Brahmā says that officially if you study Vedic literature to find out God, to know about God, it is very difficult. It is very difficult. Therefore those who are depending on personal studies, speculation, personal knowledge to understand God, for them, Kṛṣṇa is durlabha, very difficult to find out. It is not possible. Nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]. In the Bhagavad-gītā also it is said that "I do not expose Myself." Kṛṣṇa reserves the right of being exposed to anyone and everyone. No. That is not possible. Although the Vedic literature is meant for to find out Kṛṣṇa, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ... [Bg. 15.15]. All knowledge... Vedic, veda means knowledge. So any department of knowledge, you may pursue, the business is how to find out Kṛṣṇa. That is real business. Either you take chemistry or physics or politics or sociology, anything, medicine, everything-all departmental knowledge-the aim is to find out Kṛṣṇa.

That was being done by Caitanya Mahāprabhu when He was teaching grammar to His students. So He was explaining dhātu. Dhātu means verb. So He was explaining Kṛṣṇa. Later on, the students, they became little dissatisfied that "Nimāi Paṇḍita simply explains Kṛṣṇa in everything." So the small school was closed by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They are described as adhama-paḍuyā. That is in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Adhama, adhama-paḍuyā means, adhama, adhama means very low grade, adhama. And uttama means high grade. Uttama and adhama. And madhyama. Madhyama means via-media. There are three grades in everything, first class, second class, third class. So this class of students, adhama, who are not interested to understand God or Kṛṣṇa, they are third-class student. Adhama-paḍuyā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was explaining during His instruction, Kṛṣṇa. But the adhama-paḍuyā did not like it.

So the purpose of education means to know God, to know Kṛṣṇa. That is the ultimate purpose. But they do not know. These rascals, they do not know. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know the ultimate goal of life is Viṣṇu. They are trying to be learned scholar simply by material acquisition. Therefore it is called durāśayā. What is the purpose of education? Purpose of education to know the supreme cause, sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1], and become happy. Everyone is inquisitive, jijñāsu. Everyone is jijñāsu. So that jijñāsu, that propensity, for the lower animals, they are anxious to inquire "Where is food? Where is food?" Āhāra-nidrā. "Where is shelter, where is sex, and where is defense?" The jijñāsu. Everyone is inquiring. The whole world is inquiring. Those businessmen going into the market, they immediately inquires. The answers are, nowadays there is what is called telex...?

Devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: The paper comes automatically...



Devotees: Telex.



Prabhupāda: Telex. So they are getting... In Zurich, we saw that every bank is by television giving the quotation, of price quotation. That city is very speculative. They are speculating on the price of gold and they purchase and sell, so they must know the price of the gold, every moment, how the market is changing. Their brain is always in that way.



So everyone is inquisitive, every one of us, even the animals, birds, beasts, everyone, inquisitive. But when one becomes inquisitive to understand God, then his human life is fulfilled. Then he is actually in human life. Otherwise, to simply inquisitive what is the price of gold, that means selling and purchasing, make some profit, and when there is profit, then there is sense gratification. That's, this is their aim. When they get some money, immediately how to spend it for sense gratification, not only for personal self but also family. Divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā [SB 2.1.3].

Our life is being spoiled. How? Nidrayā hriyate naktam. At night we are sleeping or enjoying sex. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ [SB 2.1.3]. Vyavāya means sex. So at night we have got two business, sleeping and sex. And daytime, divā cārthehayā rājan. At daytime, simply "Where is money? Where is money?" Artha, or self-interest. Divā cārthehayā rājan. Īhayā means searching after, desiring. Then, as soon as he gets money, then what business? Divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā [SB 2.1.3]. Kuṭumba means family. So as soon as we get money, we spend it, go to the store, purchase so many things. So this is our business. The materialistic life means to spoil the night by sleeping and sex life, and to spoil the day: "Where is money? Where is money?" and spend it. That's all. Is it not? This is the clear analysis of materialistic life. Cārthehayā. "Where is money? Where is money?" This is also inquisitiveness, "Where is money? Where is food? Where is shelter? Where is this, where is that?" So this inquisitiveness is there in the animals. Then what is the use of this human form of life, the, if the same inquisitiveness is there-where is money or where is shelter, where is food, where is sex? No. This inquisitiveness is already there in the animal life. Now you have got better life, human form of life, intelligent life, advanced life. Still you'll be engaged in these inquiries. This is Vedic civilization. These things are not to be inquired. They are already there. Supply is there.

So what should be the inquisitiveness in this human form of life? Therefore the Vedānta-sūtra says: athāto brahma jijñāsā. Now this life is meant for inquiring about the Supreme Absolute Truth, or Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the Absolute Truth, ultimate goal. So that is human life, when we inquire about. Therefore those who are inquisitive about God, they are not ordinary persons. They have been described in the Bhagavad-gītā as sukṛtina. Sukṛtina means background is pious. Just like you are all. You have come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement on account of their, of your very nice background. In your past life you must have cultivated Kṛṣṇa consciousness, advanced, but it was not complete. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa has given the chance again: "Now come to this platform and make your life successful." Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. Yoga-bhraṣṭa. Those who could not fulfill or finish the Kṛṣṇa consciousness business completely, they're given another chance, another chance. What is that chance? Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe. Śucīnām means very pure family, brāhmaṇa family, Vaiṣṇava family. Just like these children. They have taken birth now in the Vaiṣṇava family. Father is Vaiṣṇava, mother is Vaiṣṇava. And they are taken care of. So very exalted life. From the very beginning of life, they are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, they are dancing, they are taking prasādam. The atmosphere is so congenial for spiritual life. They are getting chance. So this is a chance. These children are not ordinary children. Because they could not complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness in their previous life, they have been given chance to take birth in a family, the father and mother, they're Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is... Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. These are there.

So to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, even if you fail in this life, in one life, there is no loss. There is no loss in this way that you get another chance. But if you are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, there is no certainty whether you are getting next life human form of life or cat's or dog's. There is no... That will be decided according to your karma. Therefore we should take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness seriously and try our best to complete it in this life. Not waiting for another life. Although there is chance. The next life, even if we fail... But we should not be indolent: "O, if I fail in this life, I shall have another chance." No. We must decide to finish this Kṛṣṇa consciousness business in this life and immediately go back to home, back to Godhead. That should be our determination.

Because Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to understand Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Kṛṣṇa is everything. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything. If this much we can understand, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is the cause of all causes, He is the source of everything, these three, four things if we can understand, if we can understand... If we can understand one thing, we understand everything. If you simply understand Kṛṣṇa. That is the Vedic injunction. Kasmin tu bhagavo vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. Simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, everything becomes understood. The scientists, they are making research, so many things, but a Kṛṣṇa conscious person can understand very easily all the problems of the world.

Just like we were discussing this morning, that Kṛṣṇa, we have to accept Kṛṣṇa with mystic power, acintya-śakti. Acintya-śakti means beyond our conception. Because the mystic power is there in us also. Although we are teeny living entities, so many mystic power we have got within. We do not know. We cannot understand. Take, for example, just like your hair. You cut, it is again growing. You do not know how it is growing, but it is growing. That is a fact. That's a fact. How it is growing, that you do not know. That is mystic power. That is mystic power. So many things, there are. So if there is any cut on your body, an injury, even if you don't apply medicine, automatically it becomes cured. How it is being cured? Even if you don't go to the doctor, physician, automatically it will be cured. We are experiencing daily. That is mystic power. We are creating so much chemicals, even by passing stool, what to speak of other things. The stool is analyzed by scientists. It contains the greatest amount of... What is...? Hypo...?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Hydrophosphates.



Prabhupāda: Hydrophosphate. Hydrophosphate is the very nice medicine for weak health. But that... Just try to understand that such important medicinal value, we are producing in our stool, what to speak of other things. So that is mystic power.



So we have got this mystic power, but we do not know. The example is given like that. The, the deer who has got musk in the navel and the flavor is very nice, so he is jumping here and there, here and there, here and there. Where is this flavor? He does not know the flavor is in his navel. You see. The flavor is there in him, but he is finding out, "Where it is? Where it is?" Similarly we have got so many dormant mystic power within us. We are unaware. But if you practice the mystic yoga system, some of them you can evolve very nicely. Just like the birds are flying, but we cannot fly. Sometimes we desire, "Had I the wings of a dove..." There are poetry: "I could immediately go." But that mystic power is also within you. If you develop by yogic practice, you can also fly in the air. That is possible. There is a planet which is called Siddhaloka. In the Siddhaloka, the inhabitants, they are called... Siddhaloka means they have got so many mystic powers. We are trying to go to the moon planet by so many machines. They can fly. As soon as they desire, they can go.

So mystic power there is in everyone. It has to be developed. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. We have got so many dormant powers. It has to be cultivated. Just like Kṛṣṇa. Say, four or five years ago, you did not know what is Kṛṣṇa. By cultivation you are coming to know Kṛṣṇa, what is God, what is our relationship. So the human life is meant for such cultivation, not for seeking where is food, where is shelter, where is sex. These are already there. Tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido na labhyate... [SB 1.5.18]. These things are not our subject matter of inquiry. These are already there. It is enough there even for the birds and beasts. And what to speak of human being? But they have become so rascal. They are simply absorbed in the thought of the where is food, where is shelter, where is sex, where is defense. This is the misguided civilization, misguided. There is no question of these things for... There is no problem at all. They do not see that the animal has no problem, the bird has no problem. Why the human society will have such problem? That is not at all problem. Real problem is how to stop this repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. That is real problem. That problem is being solved by Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. If you simply understand what is Kṛṣṇa, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], there are no more material birth.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice, if you make friendship with Kṛṣṇa, then you can talk with Kṛṣṇa as Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja requested: "Kṛṣṇa, kindly stay a few days more." So Kṛṣṇa, not few days more, Kṛṣṇa will remain perpetually with you if you love Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



741025SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.45

-

Māyāpura, October 25, 1974



Pradyumna: "...accepting the prayers of Śrīmatī Kuntīdevī, the Lord subsequently informed other ladies of His departure by entering the palace of Hastināpura. But upon preparing to leave, He was stopped by King Yudhiṣṭhira, who implored Him lovingly."



Prabhupāda:



tāṁ bāḍham ity upāmantrya

praviśya gajasāhvayam

striyaś ca sva-puraṁ yāsyan

premṇā rājñā nivāritaḥ

[SB 1.8.45]



So this verse... All the ladies of the palace... It is natural for ladies. When there is separation, they cry. So they were shedding tears, but Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira asked them to stop, not to cry, because it may be inauspicious. Kṛṣṇa was going home, and everyone should give Him farewell, a smiling face. But they could not do so. That was not possible. They were feeling so much of Kṛṣṇa's separation that they were crying, and Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira asked them not to cry.



(reading:) "No one could make Lord Kṛṣṇa stay at Hastināpura when He decided to start for Dvārakā, but the simple request of King Yudhiṣṭhira that the Lord remain there for a few days more was immediately effective. This signifies that the power of the King was loving affection, which the Lord could not deny. The almighty God (is) thus conquered only by loving service..." Kṛṣṇa, although ready for going, still, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja stopped. And because Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is the elder cousin of Kṛṣṇa and very exalted, pious king, could not..., Kṛṣṇa could not refuse the order. (reading:) "The almighty God is thus conquered only by loving service, and nothing else." Prāyaśa, prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi. Kṛṣṇa is Ajita. Nobody can conquer Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can order Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can supersede Kṛṣṇa. Nobody is greater than Kṛṣṇa. Nobody is equal to Kṛṣṇa. Nobody is (more) powerful than Kṛṣṇa. Nobody is richer. Everything... Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Being. Therefore His another name is Ajita. Ajita means... Jita means conquered. Ajita means who is never conquered. Kṛṣṇa had so many fights with the demons. Even in His childhood, the demons could not conquer over Kṛṣṇa. Beginning from Pūtanā, when He was only three months old, and up to the killing of so many other demons, Kṛṣṇa was never defeated. That is the history. He was never defeated. Ajita. Therefore His name is Ajita. But Ajita becomes conquered. Ajita jito 'py asi. Although Kṛṣṇa is never conquered, still, you can conquer Him. How? Simply by becoming His beloved devotee.

Just like Bhīṣmadeva. Bhīṣmadeva is one of the recognized stalwart devotee of Kṛṣṇa, mahājana, authority. Whatever Bhīṣma will speak on devotional service, that is authoritative. All the twelve mahājanas... Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kapilaḥ kumāro manuḥ prahlādo janako bhīṣmaḥ [SB 6.3.20]. So Bhīṣma wanted to conquer over Kṛṣṇa. He promised. How he conquered, that you know, the story, that when Duryodhana showed some reluctance, that "My dear grandfather, you are not fighting with the Pāṇḍavas wholeheartedly because you have got affection for them. So you are on my side. You should fight wholeheartedly." A little criticizing. So to, in order to please Duryodhana, Bhīṣma promised that "Tomorrow I shall kill all the five brothers. Is that all right?" 'Yes, sir. Do that." "So they cannot be saved unless Kṛṣṇa breaks His promise." Kṛṣṇa said that... Both the parties were informed that "It is family fight. I cannot take part in the family. But I can divide Myself into two: My soldiers one side, and I am one side. But even if I am in one side, I'll not fight." So this was His promise, that He would not fight in the Battle of Kurukṣetra. But Bhīṣma obliged Him to fight, to break His promise in order to save Arjuna. Therefore Bhīṣma conquered over Kṛṣṇa, because He had to break His promise. Arjuna was in such a precarious condition that unless Kṛṣṇa would take up the weapon to stop Bhīṣma, Bhīṣma was determined: "All right, let, let me kill my grandson." So in battlefield, it was a great ocean of fighting, and Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa, they were compared with big, big sharks, crocodiles in the ocean. That was described by Parīkṣit Mahārāja, that "Only for Kṛṣṇa, my grandfather Arjuna was saved. Otherwise, it was impossible for my grandfather to conquer over the fight, to come out victorious. It is simply due to Kṛṣṇa."

So Bhīṣma conquered over Kṛṣṇa. Instead of conquering over Arjuna, he conquered over Kṛṣṇa. So similarly, here also, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, he conquered over Kṛṣṇa's decision. If we become devotee of Kṛṣṇa, then ajita jito 'py asi. This is the statement of Lord Brahmā, that Kṛṣṇa can be conquered. Just like Yaśodā-mā conquered over Kṛṣṇa. That Dāmodara-stotra, you are reading, how Kṛṣṇa was afraid of His mother. So any devotee can attain that stage, controlling Kṛṣṇa by love and affection. There is no question... A devotee never likes to control over... They want to serve Kṛṣṇa. This is also service. When a devotee conquers over Kṛṣṇa or controls over Kṛṣṇa, that is also service. That is not actually controlling, because Kṛṣṇa wants to be controlled, just like a father sometimes says to his children, small children, to rise over the body, and they kick the father. And they... The father feels some relief. It is a kind of massaging. So similarly, everyone worships Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Being, and therefore Kṛṣṇa wants sometimes to be, I mean to say, thought as insignificant subordinate. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, that "Everyone worships Me, but without worshiping, if somebody, I mean, controls over Me, I am very much happy."

So to control over Kṛṣṇa is not a very easy job; unless one is a great devotee, he cannot... Just like the cowherd boys. They used to rise on the shoulder of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was defeated in play. So the bet was that one who is defeated, he would take the other party on His shoulder. So Kṛṣṇa became defeated.

itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā

dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena

māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa

sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ

[SB 10.12.11]



When Kṛṣṇa was playing like that, taking His friend on the shoulder, so Śukadeva Gosvāmī made a statement, "Who is this person, taking His friend on His shoulder?" Now, itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā. The great, great sages, impersonalists, they merge into the brahma-sukha. So brahma-sukha... Brahman is the effulgence of the body of Kṛṣṇa. Yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]. Brahman, impersonal Brahman, is the rays of the body of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī's pointing out that "Here is the source of brahma-sukha. The impersonalists, they take pleasure to merge into brahma-sukha, but here the Personality, Kṛṣṇa, who is taking His friend on His shoulder, He is the source of brahma-sukha." In other words, the impersonalists enjoy brahma-sukha, and the devotee enjoys that Supreme Brahman by rising up on His shoulder. That is the position of the devotee.



Itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena: "And He's the Supreme Person for the devotees." Dāsyaṁ gatānām, those who have accepted to become the servant, eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. So for them, here is the Supreme Person. And māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa: "Those who are under the influence of māyā, they are seeing Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human child, māyāśrita." And who are playing? Now, sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ [SB 10.12.11]. They have come to this position so much so that they are rising on the shoulder of Kṛṣṇa. How? Kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ. Puṇya-puñjāḥ, heaps of pious activities, many, many lives'. First of all, one has to understand Kṛṣṇa after becoming very, very perfect.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



Out of many millions of persons, somebody is interested in making this life perfect. Generally, the karmīs, they do not know what is the perfection of life. Therefore it is said, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. They are being carried away by the waves of material nature.



Therefore Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is warning, "My dear friends, why you are being carried away by the waves of this material ocean?" Māyār bośe, jāccho bhese', Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi. This is Vaiṣṇava's desire. Vaiṣṇavaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī. Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī kṛpāmbudhiḥ. So Vaiṣṇava vision is different. Vaiṣṇava vision is... He can see what is the position of these māyāśritānām, those who have taken shelter of this māyā, what is their position. Position is miserable. Duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]. And they are being carried away by the waves. Today, one kind of body; tomorrow, another body; tomorrow or next life... So in this way the karmīs are being carried away. So therefore, out of such millions of karmīs, one becomes jñānī. Jñānī. Koṭi karmī madhye eka jñānī śreṣṭha.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that "Out of many, many karmīs, one who is jñānī..." Jñānī means one who knows that "I am not this body. I am spirit." But still, there is some mistake. They think that "I am the Supreme Spirit." So 'ham. Māyā is so strong. Even after so much austerities, coming practically on the verge of perfection, they are misled by māyā. This so 'ham. So 'ham means "I am the same." But "I am the same" does not mean "I am the same Supreme." "I am the same in quality." So 'ham does not mean that "I am as good as the Supreme Brahman." It does not mean. Part is never equal to the whole. We are part of the Supreme Brahman. Mamaivāṁśaḥ. So in quality, just like a small particle of gold is also gold-quality is the same. A small drop of sea water is the same quality, salty. But that does not mean the drop of sea water becomes the sea. The māyā is so strong. Therefore Bhāgavata says, "The impersonalists, Māyāvādīs, although they think that they have become one with the Supreme, but their intelligence is not yet complete." Ye 'nye, ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. They think like that: "Now we have become perfect, Nārāyaṇa." But Bhāgavata says, "Sir, you may think like that, that you have become liberated, but you are not liberated because you are still in ignorance, because you are thinking one with the Supreme." Aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ: "Your intelligence is not yet perfect."

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ [Bg. 7.3]. Siddha... Jñānīs are siddhas. Yogis are siddhas. Although they are trying their best to become perfect, but still, they are missing Kṛṣṇa on account of aviśuddha-buddhi. And therefore āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Although, by austerities, they come to that platform of brahma-anubhāva, Brahman realization, still, they fall down, anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ, on account of neglecting to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So they cannot understand Him. Kaścit. Kṛṣṇa says, kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ, not that everyone, jñānī, will understand. Even one is jñānī, then he'll take many births to understand Kṛṣṇa. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19].

So to understand God, the Supreme Being, who is controlling the whole universe, it is very, very difficult to understand Him. But if we become devotee, then Kṛṣṇa reveals Himself. That is the... Then not only the devotee understands what is Kṛṣṇa, but he attains the position that he can order over Kṛṣṇa, he can control Kṛṣṇa. This is devotee's position. So why a devotee should aspire for merging into the effulgence of Kṛṣṇa's rays? They have got a different position. So we should try to become a devotee simply by service. You can become a perfect devotee simply by service. There is no other method. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Bhakti means service, simply. That is bhakti. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Brs. 1.2.234]. Simply the spirit, bhakti... Bhaktir uttamā. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. Ānukūlyena. Whatever Kṛṣṇa orders, if you discharge that, that is bhakti, simply favorable to Kṛṣṇa. Whatever Kṛṣṇa says...

So Kṛṣṇa says very simple thing, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. If we become intelligent enough, then we fully surrender to Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. We take up the principle, to think of Kṛṣṇa always, twenty-four hours. Satataṁ cintayanto, kīrtayanto mām. If you chant Kṛṣṇa's name, then satatam, twenty-four hours... That is possible. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura used to do. Then you think of Kṛṣṇa without fail, and other things automatically come. Man-manā bhava mad... Who can devote so much time for thinking of..., unless he has become a devotee? So man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī. And a devotee is always ready to worship Kṛṣṇa, offer Him obeisances, however big he may be. In this way, we can attain this position of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira or Yaśodāmāyi when Kṛṣṇa, the Ajita, could be controlled, even by the devotee.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730508SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.46

-

Los Angeles, May 8, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



vyāsādyair īśvarehājñaiḥ

kṛṣṇenādbhuta-karmaṇā

prabodhito 'pītihāsair

nābudhyata śucārpitaḥ

[SB 1.8.46]



Translation: "King Yudhiṣṭhira, who was much aggrieved, could not be convinced, despite instructions by great sages headed by Vyāsa and the Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, the performer of superhuman feats, and despite all historical evidence."



Prabhupāda: So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was very much aggrieved. He was thinking, Vaiṣṇava, that "I am a petty king, and for giving me the throne, so many people have been killed." That is the greatest war within the recollection of five thousand years, Kurukṣetra, battle of Kurukṣetra. What is this figures? Six million, four hundred thousand people died in that battle. What is the statistics of the last war? How many people died? Is there any statistics?



Devotee: Two million.



Prabhupāda: Two million. And here it is six million.



Devotee: 640,000,000.



Prabhupāda: Eh? Last war?



Devotee: No, Kurukṣetra, 640,000,000.



Prabhupāda: Oh. Six hundred forty?



Devotee: Bhagavad-gītā, 640,000,000.



Prabhupāda: Oh. So which is greater? (laughter) Hare Kṛṣṇa. It is zero. It is a business of zero, add or subtract. So anyway, a very large number of people died, and Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, because he is Vaiṣṇava, although he was kṣatriya... Kṣatriya's business is to keep himself in power even by killing his own son. That is kṣatriya's business. Kṣatriya, when there is question of fight...



Just like Bhīṣmadeva, Bhīṣmadeva, grandfather of Arjuna, very affectionate grandfather... Because the Pāṇḍavas, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva, when their father died they were small children. Naturally Bhīṣma is the grandfather of the family and he had to take care to raise the children. In one side he is grandfather, and he actually raised the children. So very affectionate, especially fatherless... And the daughter-in-law Kuntī was so helpless because this Dhṛtarāṣṭra and his family, they were trying always to kill these Pāṇḍavas. And Vidura and Bhīṣmadeva, they were giving protection some way or other. So still, although so much affectionate, when the war was declared, Bhīṣmadeva took the side of Duryodhana. He did not take the side of Pāṇḍavas, although they were very affectionate, beloved. He replied that "This side, Duryodhana, they are maintaining me. I am maintained by them. So I cannot go against them. That is not possible." Naturally, Bhīṣmadeva would have come to the side of Pāṇḍavas because very affectionate. But he said that "That is not possible, because I am maintained by them." This is the duty. If somebody maintains you, you must be very much grateful to him. These are the examples, Vedic culture. He is not maintained by anyone, but because he had no claim on the kingdom, he was thinking himself that "I am dependent on this family."

Actually, the kingdom belonged to Bhīṣmadeva, the kingdom. But he promised... His father wanted to marry Satyavatī. At that time his father was old enough. Bhīṣmadeva was grown-up boy, twenty, twenty-two years. But nature, his father wanted to marry again. Bhīṣmadeva is the son of mother Ganges. Bhīṣmadeva's father married the predominating deity mother Ganges, of the Ganges water. So she was very beautiful. So she agreed to marry Bhīṣmadeva's father on one condition. What is that condition? That all the children that will be begotten, they will be thrown in the Ganges water. This was the condition. If the king agreed, then she would marry. So when a man becomes mad after woman... So he agreed, "Yes, I shall throw all the children. Never mind. (laughter) Come on." Māyā-mohita. Māyā-sukhāyā bharam udvahato vimūḍhān [SB 7.9.43]. This whole world, rascal world, they are captivated by this woman. Woman is captivated by man, man is captivated by woman. This is the tie here in this material world. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. I have explained several times. The whole material existence means this attraction. [break] Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. There are so many instructory verses. Here sex enjoyment is the most prominent, and people are captivated by this. This is life. So anyway even the father of Bhīṣma, he was captivated. so this was the condition. So in this way every child was being thrown in the Ganges water. So after all... Bhīṣmadeva's father became very mortified. So Bhīṣma, when Bhīṣma was going to be thrown in the water, he objected, "No, I cannot allow. I cannot allow." "Then I am going." "Now you can go. I shall keep this child."

So Ganges, Mother Ganges, left Bhīṣma's father. And Bhīṣma was raised by his father. He became grown-up. Again this father became captivated with Satyavatī. Satyavatī. Satyavatī, before her marriage... Satyavatī is the daughter of a fisherman. The fishermen... In your country there is no such distinction. But in our country there are classification. A fishermen, there is a class. So their girls and women, very well-figured, very enchanting figure. So Satyavatī was the daughter of a fisherman, and Bhīṣma's father become enchanted. So he went to the fisherman. He was king. So "Give me your daughter. I shall marry." "Oh, you are already married. You have got son. Why shall I give my daughter to you?" "No, I am king. I shall maintain her." "No, no, No. I don't want to give." In India still, if a man wants to marry, and if he has got children by his former wife, people will hesitate to give him daughter, because there are stepsons. So nobody wants that "My daughter will be troubled by the stepson,-daughter. No." Still they are practiced. To marry for the second time becomes a problem. But nowadays these things are gone.

So the grown-up son, Bhīṣmadeva, he understood that "My father is inclined to marry that girl." So he went to plead, canvass: "So why don't you give your daughter to my father?" "No, no, I cannot give my daughter to your father. You are his son. You will inherit the kingdom, and my daughter's son will not inherit. So how can I give my daughter?" So he said that "I'll not accept the kingdom. I promise that your daughter's son will inherit the kingdom." "No, no, no. Still I cannot." "Why?" "You'll marry. Then your son will be inheritor. My grandson will not be inheritor." He was calculating in that way, pākā businessman. (laughter) So he promised that "You give your daughter to my father, and I promise that I shall not marry. So there will be no son. So naturally my stepmother's son will inherit the kingdom." Then he agreed.

So Bhīṣmadeva's father, although it was little shameful that the son is canvassing for the marriage of father, still, he could understand that "My son is so sensible that I wanted to marry, and he has managed." So he gave him one benediction: "My dear son, you'll remain brahmacārī, I can understand. But I give you one benediction, that unless you desire to die, you will never die." Icchā-mṛtyu. "This benediction you will have. Unless you desire that 'Now I shall die,' nobody can kill you, and you'll never die." So this was, the... Therefore... And because he promised so seriously that "I shall not marry," he gave up his kingdom, therefore his name is Bhīṣma. Bhīṣma means "very serious." So this Bhīṣmadeva actually maintained the whole Pāṇḍava family. That means Pāṇḍava, the Pāṇḍava and Yudhiṣṭhira and Pāṇḍu, they are the sons of the stepmother. And because Bhīṣmadeva was elderly son, practically he maintained even Yudhiṣṭhira, here, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍava. And then again, Pāṇḍu, he died, his sons, these Pāṇḍavas, Yudhiṣṭhira, they were also raised by Bhīṣmadeva. So much affection.

But when there was question of fight, so Bhīṣmadeva fought so severely that Arjuna had to be protected by Kṛṣṇa. Bhīṣmadeva, you know... In Mahābhārata these stories are there. Bhīṣmadeva actually had some affection. So Duryodhana thought that "My grandfather is not fighting properly because the other side, his beloved grandsons. I am also grandson, but I am not so beloved. But the other side, Pāṇḍavas, because they are fatherless, he has more affection for them. So he is officially fighting. He is not fighting with his real vigor." He complained that. But actually, that wasn't a fact, that "My dear grandfather, you are not fighting with Arjuna with your full vigor. I can understand that." "Oh, I am not fighting? So what do you think?" "Now, I want that you decide to kill them all tomorrow. You can do that." "All right. I shall do that. If you are doubting about my fighting, then I shall..." So he made special five arrows to kill the five brothers next. So Duryodhana asked his grandfather that "Let me keep these five arrows with me. I shall deliver you tomorrow morning. Otherwise it may be missing."

So all these things-Kṛṣṇa is Paramātmā; He knows everything. So He saw that "There is danger tomorrow. Now Bhīṣma has decided to kill all these Pāṇḍavas." So He asked Arjuna, "Arjuna, you just go, approach Duryodhana this evening." Formerly the practice was, daytime there is fight, but in the after evening they are all friends. After evening they are friends. One can go this camp, that camp, and talk together, sit together, just like friends. There is no enemy. So Duryodhana sometimes promised Arjuna that "I want to give you some benediction. You can ask." So Arjuna said-Duryodhana was elder than Arjuna-that "I will ask you in proper time." So Kṛṣṇa reminded that "Today, tonight you go to Duryodhana and ask him to deliver those five arrows kept in secret. Otherwise tomorrow you will be finished."

So Duryodhana went to, er, Arjuna went to Duryodhana in the camp. Duryodhana received him well: "Come on, brother. What do you want?" He thought that "We are fighting. Arjuna has come to beg the kingdom without fighting." So they were so liberal. He said, "Yes, come in. If you want the kingdom without fighting, I am prepared." But a kṣatriya will never beg, "Give me, sir, without..." No. If they can own by fighting, then they will claim. This is kṣatriya spirit. So he said that "No, I have not come to beg the kingdom. We shall fight, go on fighting. But I want those five arrows you have kept." Oh, immediately he delivered. Although he was very cautious that these five arrows may not be missing, but promise is promise. Immediately he delivered. So Bhīṣma understood later on that the five arrows were taken by Arjuna by trick. So still, he promised that "Even without those five weapons, today I shall kill Arjuna. Unless Kṛṣṇa gives His special protection to Arjuna, there is no escape. Either Kṛṣṇa has to break His promise, otherwise His friend will be killed."

So Kṛṣṇa, when He joined Arjuna, He said that He would not fight: "I can help you simply by becoming your charioteer, but I cannot fight." Because the purpose was that Arjuna was to gain the fight. But if Kṛṣṇa would fight, people would say that Kṛṣṇa won the fight, not Arjuna; that He avoided fighting. It was sure. Kṛṣṇa fights or not fights, because He was on the side of Arjuna, it was sure that He would gain the battle. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yatra yogeśvaro hariḥ [Bg. 18.78]. Where there is Kṛṣṇa, the victory is assured. So in this way there was fierce fighting between Arjuna and Bhīṣma. And Arjuna's chariot became broken into pieces, and he fell down, and when Kṛṣṇa saw that "Now Arjuna is going to be killed," He broke His own promise. He broke His own promise and took one wheel of the chariot and reached before Bhīṣma that "Now I shall kill you." Bhīṣma immediately gave up his weapon. So "That was my promise, that I wanted that either You have to break Your promise or Your friend will be killed. So now You have broken Your promise. So I am giving up. Because it is not expected that I shall fight with You." (laughter) So Kṛṣṇa said that "Yes, I have kept your promise, but I have broken My promise. You decided, you promised..."

So this is Kṛṣṇa's business, to... Bhīṣma was a devotee, great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So he promised that either Kṛṣṇa would break His promise, otherwise His friend will be dead. So he broke His promise. So sometimes Kṛṣṇa breaks His promise, own promise, for the sake of a devotee. Nobody is expected to break his promise, but Kṛṣṇa is so kind, for protection of His devotee He can do anything. He can break His promise also. This is Kṛṣṇa's position. So such Bhīṣma was so affectionate to the Pāṇḍavas. So Kṛṣṇa wanted... Bhīṣma was lying on the bed of arrows, preparing for his death. So Kṛṣṇa wanted that these Pāṇḍavas should go to Bhīṣma and hear his instruction. Therefore, despite His advice to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, that "There was no wrong on your part. You are thinking that you have killed, or for your sake so many men have been killed. That is not... You are not responsible for that. You are not sinful..." For a kṣatriya, killing is not sinful. For a brāhmaṇa, sacrificing an animal in the arena, that is not sinful. So it is all explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, sa doṣam api na tyajet [Bg. 18.48]. Killing is bad, but a kṣatriya's business is to kill. Without killing, one cannot become perfect kṣatriya. Because he has to give protection, and there are so many demons, rascals. So if the king becomes nonviolent, how other citizens will be given protection? No.

So the king's business is as soon as he sees one undesirable element, immediately he would kill him. That is real protection. Just like when Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going on tour, he saw one black man was trying to kill a cow. Immediately saw, "Who are you? You are trying to kill cow in my kingdom? I shall kill you." He immediately took out his sword. This is king, that... Not that animals should not be given protection, only man should be given protection. No. Prajā. Prajā means one who taken birth in the kingdom. That is called prajā. So animal is also American, man is also American, but there is no protection for the animal by the government. So that kind of government, rascal government, was not there. Equal right. Your country says equality given. Why not equality to the animals? That is defect. It is due to, I mean to say, absence of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person will not distinguish like that. For eating animal, they will philosophize that animal has no soul; therefore it can be killed. No. This is nonsense. Everyone has got soul. Even a small ant has got soul. But they have to kill. They have to eat. They are philosophizing different way. Lord Jesus Christ said, "Thou shalt not kill," and now they are interpreting, "Killing means murdering human being." But that is not in the Bible.

So they are manufacturing their own ways of understanding Bible and ethical principles. Therefore it is becoming valueless. It is becoming valueless. No value. One cannot change the words of the authority. If you believe in Lord Jesus Christ, you cannot make any change to your convenience. This is rascaldom. You cannot be a Christian if you violate the orders of Lord Jesus Christ. But they are doing so. Now the Christian priests... We had a meeting in Sydney. One priest asked me, "What we have done that they are not anymore caring for us?" I told him that "You are always violating the ten commandments, and you say what you have done? Lord Jesus Christ says, 'Thou shalt not kill,' and you are killing, expert in killing. And you are still Christian? So you cannot understand what you have done? You have always misguided people." I told him. So he was not very happy to hear this straight answer. (laughter) But he admitted...

Anyway... So for kṣatriya, just like Mahārāja Parīkṣit... If kṣatriya becomes nonviolent... Just like our Mahatma Gandhi started nonviolence in politics. So that was a political policy, but in politics there is no question of nonviolence, in politics. That is foolishness. Actually, India gained independence not by nonviolence. That is a great history. India gained independence... Gandhi was fighting with nonviolence for thirty, thirty-five years; there was no result. But one of the leaders, when he, I mean to say, ensued fighting, then within, I think, within one year the Britishers left. So in politics there is no question of nonviolence. So a king, a protector, kṣatriya... Kṣatriya means kṣat... Kṣat means injury, injury. And tra, tra means deliver. So a kṣatriya's business is to deliver a person who is going to be injured. That is kṣatriya. Just like this cow was going to be injured, and as soon as Mahārāja Parīkṣit saw it, he immediately took his sword to kill him. So this is kṣatriya.

Therefore kṣatriyas are allowed to go in the forest and kill some animal. Because he has to practice. So what kind of animal? Not the cows or simple animal. He must kill one tiger, one lion, one jungle boar. Ferocious, very ferocious animals, That was the kṣatriya's business. Not that a rabbit (laughter) or an innocent bird, sports. This kind of sporting was not allowed. If you want to kill, you must kill one rhinoceros. Then one can understand that you have power of killing. That kṣatriya used to do. Even, say, twenty-five years ago, Mahārāja of Jaipur, he used to go into the forest every year and he would fight with a tiger, simply with a sword, simply with a sword. He would fight with a tiger in the jungle, and he was so expert, he would kill. And then the tiger would be brought in procession, in royal procession. Because the king used to say, "This tiger is the king of forest, or the lion is the king of the forest. I am also king. So after his death, there must be a royal reception." So this was, the function was going on. So kṣatriya means they used to kill, practice. Unless they practice, how they can kill? And now our president, they practice only smoking, (laughter) that's all. That's all. And when there is fight, he is in the chamber, safety chamber, and others are, the poor boys, they are called by the draft board, and go and fight. This is not kṣatriya, These are śūdras. Kṣatriya, when there is fight, the king must come forward first. The other party's king also. The king will fight with king, and the soldiers will fight soldiers according to position. And when the king is killed, then victory is owned. It doesn't require that all the soldiers were killed. No.

So there are many... This is actually Vedic culture. You will find all this from Mahābhārata. Bhāgavata also, we are trying to explain as far as possible. The brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, this is natural division. So for fighting, kṣatriya. In India, because still there are some kṣatriyas, there is no such draft board. The kṣatriya class, they would come forward to be recruited by the military department. They will not go away. They will be very glad to accept military service, because in their blood the kṣatriya spirit is there. In India there is no scarcity to find out a fighter. But when people are trained as śūdra, how he can fight? Therefore it is very scientific. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. The society must be divided. There is division already, natural. We have to simply pick out, that "This boy is brāhmaṇa, this boy is kṣatriya, this boy is vaiśya, and this boy is śūdra." So they should be given separate employment. Then there will be peace. If a person is employed according to his natural tendency, he becomes successful, he becomes successful. But if you give some employment, just like to put a cart before a horse, like that, no, that will not be successful.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that... You can say that "There is no need of kṣatriya; let there be all śūdras." No, then there will be social scandal. Everything must be there. The brāhmaṇa must be there, the kṣatriya must be there, the vaiśyas must be there and the śūdras must be there, and the state should look that these things are observed scientifically and they are being educated in that way. That is king's business. He must see that the kṣatriyas, those who are kṣatriya spirited, they are being trained up as kṣatriya. The brāhmaṇas are being trained up as brāhmaṇa. Everything is required. Just like in your body, all the four divisions... Just like head, that is brāhmaṇa; the arms, that is kṣatriya; the belly, that is vaiśya; and the legs, they are śūdra. So as much as the head is required, so much the legs are also required. You cannot say, "One class will do." No. But the modern tendency is one class of men. And therefore therefore there is confusion. There must be four classes. That is scientific.

So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to educate some brāhmaṇas. If the society take our help and conduct the business of the society-kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra-then there will be peace and prosperity. Otherwise there will be chaos and confusion.

Thank you very much. (end)



741026SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.46

-

Māyāpura, October 26, 1974



Pradyumna: "King Yudhiṣṭhira, who was much aggrieved, could not be convinced, despite instructions by great sages headed by Vyāsa and the Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, the performer of superhuman feats, and despite all historical evidence."



Prabhupāda:



vyāsādyair īśvarehājñaiḥ

kṛṣṇenādbhuta-karmaṇā

prabodhito 'pītihāsair

nābudhyata śucārpitaḥ

[SB 1.8.46]



After the Battle of Kurukṣetra, when everything was settled, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, who is well known as Dharmarāja, very pious king, he was very much aggrieved. It is said that sixty-four crores of men were dead within eighteen days in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is very much pious, he did not like the idea of so many persons being killed simply for the sake of enthroning him on the throne of the kingdom. He was very much aggrieved that "For me so many men have died. How much sinful I have become, although I am going to be the king."



But he had no cause to become aggrieved. Even great learned sages like Vyāsa... Therefore it is said, vyāsādyaiḥ. Not only Vyāsa, vyāsādyair īśvara. And Kṛṣṇa was there. He's īśvara, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ, not only ordinary īśvara but the supreme īśvara. Īśvara means controller. So there are many different types of controller, but the supreme controller is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. So he also tried to convince Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira that it was duty. For a kṣatriya, in dutiful war, dharma-yuddha... Dharma-yuddha... Therefore the battlefield of Kurukṣetra is called dharma-kṣetra. Although there was fighting, but the fighting arena was not ordinary land. It is dharma-kṣetra because the fighting was being performed under the superintendence of Kṛṣṇa, Dharma-setu, the leader of all religiosity. Under His superintendence, under His care, the fighting was going on. Therefore this fighting was not ordinary fighting. People cannot understand that how fighting can be religious principle. Yes, the fighting can be also religious principle-but not the present fighting. Present fighting, the politicians, out of their whims, they declare war, that is not religious fighting; that is abominable. That is to serve their political ends. When the politicians cannot control the mass of people being dissatisfied, they make a clique to declare some war so that all their attention may be diverted. This is politics.

But the Battle of Kurukṣetra was not that type of battle. One should be aware of the Battle of Kurukṣetra very nicely. It was dharma-yuddha. Dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ [Bg. 1.1]. Why they settled up that the fighting should take place in the dharma-kṣetra? They are to fight, yuyutsavaḥ. It was settled they will fight, but why they selected the dharma-kṣetra? This is Vedic system. Even up to date, in villages, not in the cities... In the cities, as soon as there is some misunderstanding between you and me, we go to the court, either criminal court or civil court, to settle up, and it takes years to settle up the business. It goes on. I have seen for generation. One generation passed another generation; the fighting is going on in the court. But if people are Kṛṣṇa conscious, it could be settled within few minutes. Still among the villagers the system is current in India: when there is some fighting, they go to a saintly person or in a temple to settle up. Just like when Sanātana Gosvāmī was there in Vṛndāvana, so in that area, whenever there was some fighting between two parties, they would come to Sanātana Gosvāmī: bābā, ap isko phars lakharji.(?) Bābā means saintly person. So they would come to Sanātana Gosvāmī, and they would ask him to become mediator, arbitrator, to settle up. And whatever verdict or judgment he will give, they will accept that "Bābā has said. That's all right." Therefore Śrīnivāsa Ācārya has prayed the Gosvāmīs, dhīrādhīra. Kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau, dhīradhīra-priyau.

Dhīrādhīra-priyau. There are two kinds of men. One is dhīra-very learned, sober, everything in knowledge, wise. They are called dhīra. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says dhīras tatra na muhyati.

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



He has specifically mentioned the word dhīra. Dhīra means the sober, learned... Generally we call in English language "gentleman." Gentleman means he must be sober, learned, and thoughtful. That is gentleman. But nowadays, gentleman is different-simply by dress. Dhīra and adhīra. So there are two classes of men, and the Gosvāmīs were very dear to both classes of men, dhīrādhīra. That is the sign of a saintly person, samatītya. Samatītya: they have no enemy. Ajāta-śatravaḥ. Even the adhīra, the saintly person considers as friend, and even a dhīra, he considers friend. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. This is the dhīra.



So these saintly persons were also advising, Vyāsadeva, and vyāsādyaiḥ, not only Vyāsadeva. There were other big, big saintly persons. The monarchy, as it is conceived in the Vedic civilization, that is not this monarchy. Just like we have got experience in the history, a monarch means get money and spend it for wine and woman. Not that kind of monarch. Monarchy means the king... The ideal monarchy-Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahārāja Parīkṣit-they were very much advanced in spiritual knowledge, in administrative knowledge, in economic development. Everything, perfectly they were educated, and they were being guided by saintly persons like vyāsādyaiḥ. Vyāsādyaiḥ. Mahārāja Rāmacandra was being guided by Vasiṣṭha. So the kings were guided by a committee of saintly persons. Big, big learned, saintly persons, brāhmaṇas, they would give advice to the king. He is already learned. There was a case, Veṇa Mahārāja, the father of Pṛthu Mahārāja. He was very much upstart. Therefore the committee of the learned brāhmaṇas and saintly persons killed him. Because he was not hearing to the committee of the saintly persons, brāhmaṇas, he was killed, and his son, Mahārāja Pṛthu, was enthroned. There were many cases. If the king was an upstart, the brāhmaṇas, they were so powerful, they did not require any weapon; simply by their words they will kill him.

So this monarchy is different. People now, they have taken to democracy. Democracy is also mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that in the Kali-yuga there will be no more monarchy or the kingdom ruled by the kṣatriyas, but amongst the people who will be tricky, some way or other get the votes of the people, he will be seated on the throne. That is stated. Some way or other. So therefore, people are in trouble because so many rascals, they somehow or other manage to get some vote and become the president and minister and... So what they know? They do not know how to govern, how to bring peace in the country. But this monarchy, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, just see. Because for the sake of his personal interest so many have been killed, he was sorry. Just see. Not that some way or other, you divide India: "Let me become Prime Minister, that's all." We have got political information that in India when it was..., the proposal was for partition, Gandhi was completely against this partition. He said, "Better I will have no independence; still, I shall not allow the country to be divided." He was stubborn on this point. But he was absent, and in the meantime our, the big Prime Minister signed it, agreed, partition because he wanted to be prime minister anyway, some way or other. "Let the country go to hell." This is politician, going on. Not...

Yudhiṣṭhira is not like that: "Let... Somehow or other, let me become King. Let so many people were killed. Never mind." No. He was so sorry, so sorry that he could not be solaced even by the instruction of Kṛṣṇa and saintly person like Vyāsadeva. He was so sorry. Of course, he accepted, but personally he was so very, very sorry, that "So many people have been killed for me." But what could be done? It was Kṛṣṇa's desire. Kṛṣṇa comes-paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8], His two business. So He wanted to establish the kingdom of His representative. He wanted that "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is right representative. He should be enthroned on the kingdom of whole world." Formerly Bhāratavarṣa meant this whole planet, not this small tract of land. Now it is called India. But the Bhāratavarṣa means the whole planet, this planet. There was one flag. Up to Mahārāja Parīkṣit there was one flag, not like at present there are hundreds and thousands of flags. You Americans, you know. In New York, when we pass through that United Nation building, we see so many flags are there. They are united, but everywhere the flag is increasing, disunited. Not like that. Actually, by monarchy, the pious king, there was unity all over the world. All over the world. And in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra it was a family fight, so all the kings of different parts of the world, they joined this side or that side. That is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gītā. So... But still, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira did not like that so many people would be killed for the sake of enthroning him, but Kṛṣṇa desired. Kṛṣṇa desired. Kṛṣṇa wanted it, that... Duryodhana, they were demonlike, simply making politics and diplomacy. Their only business was... Dhṛtarāṣṭra along with his sons, they were simply making diplomacy how to kill the Pāṇḍavas and catch over the kingdom. That was their policy.

So the political head, executive head, of course, he should be intelligent to understand diplomacy and politics, but his only business is to see how people in general are in happiness. That is his business. Nowadays political parties, they are simply engaged how to keep up their position. All the political parties-I have seen personally-simply they are making plan how to keep their position in the government so they may not be dethroned, other party may not come. The whole time is wasted. When they will think of "No, the people are suffering for want of food. The people are suffering for unnecessary increase of price, although things are available in the black market. How to manage this?" That is the duty of the government first. But nobody is caring. Hundreds and thousands of people are starving, unemployment, but they are getting their fat salary, and they are satisfied. Bring income tax and divide amongst themselves, that's all.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was not that type of king. Therefore he is known as Dharmarāja Yudhiṣṭhira, most pious king. So he was now sorry, and prabodhito 'pi, prabodhito 'pi. He was trying to pacify Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, "Don't be sorry. It is done for the sake of good cause for establishing dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya, so don't be sorry," but still, he could not be pacified. Śucārpitaḥ. Śucā means distress. He was so much distressed within his mind that he could not be satisfied.

So, next verse? Or you can speak... (end)



730509SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.47

-

Los Angeles, May 9, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



āha rājā dharma-sutaś

cintayan suhṛdāṁ vadham

prākṛtenātmanā viprāḥ

sneha-moha-vaśaṁ gataḥ

[SB 1.8.47]



Translation: "King Yudhiṣṭhira, son of Dharma, overwhelmed by the death of his friends, was aggrieved just like a common, materialistic man. O sages, thus deluded by affection, he began to speak."



Prabhupāda: So when friends die, family members die, we talk of that we are not this body. Theo... Not theory; this is actually the fact. I say, you say, everyone says. At least, we have understood from Bhagavad-gītā, dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13], the body is different from the soul. And it is also clearly said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. After the destruction of the body, the soul is not destroyed. He remains. He gets another body. Arjuna was also consoled by Kṛṣṇa that "Why you are so much anxious about your grandfather? He will get another body, new body. What is the use of this old body?" So actually that is the fact. But still, why a man becomes aggrieved when the body is lost? That is explained here, that sneha-moha, illusion of affection. Actually, there is nothing to be aggrieved. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Dhīra, those who are sober, they are not bewildered. Sober man knows that "My, this relative, my father or my brother, my grandfather, his death means he is changing this body. He is going to another body. He is not dead."



So dhīra... Dhīra means one who is not disturbed. That requires training. In great dangerous position, one is not disturbed, that is not ordinary thing. Therefore the word has been used: dhīra. Dhīra and adhīra. There are two classes of men. Dhīra means, acts very conscientiously, without being disturbed by the external factors. I have explained several times the dhīra. The example of dhīra is given in the Kumāra-sambhava poetry, by Kālidāsa. We had our syllabus studying Kumāra-sambhava in our I.A. class in college. So there the example, Kālidāsa is giving example: the dhīra is Lord Śiva. Just see. The story is when Lord Śiva lost his wife in the dakṣa-yajña... Dākṣāyaṇī, daughter of Mahārāja Dakṣa, became the wife of Lord Śiva. And because Lord Śiva sometimes by chance did not show any good respect to Dakṣa, so there was misunderstanding between the son-in-law and father-in-law, and the episode ended that Dākṣāyaṇī, the wife of Lord Śiva, gave her life. His (her) father was very much angry upon the son-in-law. So she wanted to mitigate the misunderstanding, but her father was very stubborn. So at last she said, "My dear father, you are thinking of Lord Śiva, my husband, as ordinary man, and you have become so angry. So this is due... You are thinking that I am your daughter. So all right, I have got this body from you. I am returning you." So she immediately died.

So dakṣa-yajña, the Lord Śiva's devotees, they massacred all the yajña arena. You know dakṣa-yajña. Mahārāja Dakṣa was also cut off by his head, and he was put in a goat's head, in this way. So after the death of his wife, Lord Śiva was very much aggrieved. He went to the forest and engaged himself in meditation. So there was a need of one soldier commander, and the calculation was that such soldier must be there, by the demigods... Because there was always fighting between the demigods and the demons, so to kill the demons, there was need of a very great soldier who must be born by Lord Śiva, by the semina of Lord Śiva. So at that time Pārvatī, Dākṣāyaṇī, after death she has taken another body as daughter of King of Himalaya, Pārvatī. Therefore her name was at that time Pārvatī. Pārvatī means "the daughter of Parvata." Parvata means mountain. So the plan was that within the womb of Pārvatī and by the semina of Lord Śiva, one son must take birth, and later on he took and his name was Kārttikeya. Kārttikeya was born. So, but they were... Lord Śiva was in meditation, and Pārvatī was not married at that time with Lord Śiva, although she was destined to marry Lord Śiva, because in the transcendental world, the husband and wife, they are also eternal. Even the wife or husband changes body, again they become husband and wife. This is in the higher sense. They do not separate. So but Lord Śiva was in meditation. And it is very difficult to break his meditation. So he was naked, and Pārvatī was engaged to worship śiva-liṅga, the genital of Lord Śiva. Still in the Vedic culture, there is worshiping of śiva-liṅga, the genital of Lord Śiva. So Pārvatī was engaged to worship the genital of Lord Śiva. Certainly there was touching by young girl, but he was not agitated. So Kālidāsa said, "Here is a dhīra. Here is dhīra." We become excited by seeing one beautiful girl. But the most beautiful girl, young, she was touching the genital of Lord Śiva, still there was no disturbance.

So here is the example of dhīra. Dhīra means who are not sexually disturbed, even there is cause, even there is cause of disturbance. A young woman... Therefore the woman's name is kāminī. Kāminī...Kāma means lust. So they invoke one's lust. Therefore by nature, women are beautiful, they dress themselves beautifully. This is nature, to invoke the lusty desire of man. So according to Vedic civilization, woman, when she is dressed nicely and she is beautiful, she must invoke lusty desires. Therefore Vedic civilization does not allow a woman to be nicely dressed unless she is before her husband, unless she is before her husband. Because if she, I mean to say, agitates the lusty desires of all others, that is not very good. So woman is allowed to dress herself very nicely when her husband is present. Otherwise she will not dress. There are some restrictions. Proṣita-bhartṛkā. By the woman's dress, one will understand who is she-whether she is living with her husband, whether she is widow, whether she is unmarried, or whether her husband is out of home, or whether she is prostitute. The culture is so nice, simply by the dress one will understand that "Here is a woman; her husband is not at home. Here is a woman; she is widow. Here is a woman; she is prostitute." In this way, there are. "Here is a woman, she is not married." By dress, one will understand. That vermillion sign means she is married. When she is nicely dressed, oh, she has her husband at home. When she is in white cloth without any ornament, she is widow. When the sīmanta... What is called in English, sīmanta? This? Parting. If it is not in the middle, it is in side, she is a prostitute. So woman should dress in such a way that man will understand. And not married, she will not have this veil. It must be open. So anyway, these are social customs in the Vedic civilization.

So a girl is advised to worship śiva-liṅga. Just like we will find in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, the neighboring girls of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they were going to the Ganges. In our childhood we have seen, our sisters; they were also worshiping. Mother taught them. Now these things are gone. Nobody is worshiping śiva-liṅga because there are so many liṅgas. So this custom (laughs) is now gone. Anyway, this girl, Pārvatī, was engaged to worship the liṅga, or the genital, of Lord Śiva, but Lord Śiva was not disturbed. So that is called example of dhīra. Dhīra means very sober, not disturbed. That soberness can be had... That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13], and how one can become dhīra? Now,

yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ

manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

yasmin sthito na duḥkhena

guruṇāpi vicālyate

[Bg. 6.20-23]



There is a stage of highest perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness when one is fully in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he doesn't want anything, what to speak of the sense gratification. He is no more in need of anything. If one gets Kṛṣṇa, if he is confident about Kṛṣṇa, and if he is confident that "Now I have got the shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, I don't want anything..."



Just like Dhruva Mahārāja. There are so many examples. Dhruva Mahārāja so severely underwent austerities, penances, meditation, to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The purpose was that "When I will see Lord Viṣṇu, I will ask some benediction so that I can get better kingdom than my father." He was insulted by his stepmother. So ambition was how to get a better kingdom than his father or his grandfather, Lord Brahmā. That was his ambition. But when he actually saw Lord Viṣṇu, and He was ready to give him any benediction, he said, "Oh, my dear Lord, I am quite satisfied. I don't want any benediction." Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce: [Cc. Madhya 22.42] "My dear Lord, I am so satisfied that I have no more need of asking any benediction." This is perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When he is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, he has achieved all success; so why he will ask for anything more? He is so full in power and satisfaction that even great calamity, dangerous position, he doesn't care. He doesn't care. He knows that "These things are coming and going. Why I shall be agitated? Let me depend on Kṛṣṇa." Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. So many times he was tortured by his father. He never became agitated. His father's only request was that "You give up this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." He would not give up. So this is determination. This is called gravity, and this is called soberness, that you go on talking like this. Just like in pushing our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, so many dangers we have to meet. But we don't care for it. If I am, I mean to say, real servant of Kṛṣṇa, then this movement will go on, in spite of so many obstacles. So that is called soberness. Dhīras tatra na muhyati.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was that kind of dhīra. He is the son of Dharmarāja, dharma-putra, highly elevated. So everyone was astonished that "How he is aggrieved for the death of his relatives!" Because the other side, Duryodhana was his cousin-brother. All the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, they played together, they ate together, they were family members, friends, and... But there was misunderstanding. [break] ...life is coming out of matter. Now, you, daily you are slaughtering animals. Now, what do you see? The bones and the blood and the flesh and urine and the stool, after cutting this body. So these are the ingredients out of which this man has come or this animal has come. Take these ingredients and create another living entity. There is no answer. What do you think, scientist? These are the ingredients we will see. But can anyone manufacture a life? No, that is not possible. Therefore who are thinking, anyone who is thinking that "I am this combination of bones and blood or chemicals..." They will say some jugglery of words, combination of chemical. Take this chemical. No, that is not possible. Therefore it is my mistake to think that "I am a product of this material thing." That is nonsense. Sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Such person who is thinking like that, that "I am the combination of this matter," he is no better than the cows and the asses. Sa eva go-kharaḥ. Everything is detailed in there.

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



Anyone who is thinking this bag of bones and flesh as the "I am," "I am this body," and out of this misconception, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke, sva-dhīḥ, "Out of this body or in relationship with this body, the persons, men and woman, they are my kinsmen. They are my nationality, they are my society..." Sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ [SB 10.84.13]. "And where this body is produced, that land is my land, motherland." "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am German," "I am this." And we are mad after this, this, these nationalists. In this way, yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ, yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicit. They go to the place, holy places of pilgrimage, and they take their bath. In India you will see, so many people are going to Haridwar, Vṛndāvana, and take their bath and shave their head, and then come back: "I went to tīrtha, holy place." That is not tīrtha. Tīrtha means to meet a high-grade saintly person. Tīrtha. Tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni. They make tīrtha holy place. Anywhere a saintly person is there, that is tīrtha. That is holy place. Not that I have to go Haridwar, five thousand miles from here. Wherever there is experienced holy persons, that is tīrtha. But they do not know. They go five hundred, five thousand miles away. Sometimes from your country they go to find out a guru in India. (laughs) And the guru who is canvassing here, he is useless. He is useless. So these things. Anyone who is of such conception of life, they have been described as asses and cows, means an animal.



So this sneha-moha, this so-called material affection, it is due to prākṛtena ātmanā. When we consider this body, "I am this body," then this sneha-moha, this illusion of affection, comes. Ātmanā. This ātma-śabda can be used in terms of this body, in terms of the mind, and in terms of the spirit soul. Therefore, distinctly it has been differentiated: prākṛtena ātmanā. Prākṛta means this body is prākṛta. This is not aprākṛta. But the soul is aprākṛta. Aprākṛta means not material, and prākṛta means material. So those who are absorbed in this material concept of life, they become in this way delusioned or illusioned. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ. So the others, they considered that "The Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's this illusion is due to his conception of this body." This we have to avoid.

This question was raised by Arjuna also, that "I understand that I am not this body and my grandfather is not this body. Still, I am affected when my body or my grandfather is in danger." So what Kṛṣṇa advised? Kṛṣṇa advised, "Yes, that affection is possible." I know that I am not this body. Theoretically or... But if somebody comes to cut my body, I will be very much protective. Although I know... I cannot feel that "I am not this body; let the body be cut off. I don't mind." No. Then Kṛṣṇa said that this position... Āgamāpāyinaḥ anityās tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. "These temporary happiness and distress which come and go like seasonal changes..." Seasonal changes. Just like there is summer season, there is winter season. So sometimes it is very cold, sometimes it is very warm. And how these feelings are appreciated? Due to this body. The water is the same, but in summer season water is very pleasing to take bath. The same water is very troublesome to take bath in winter season. So according to the changes of the season and according to the affection of this material body, we are feeling pains and pleasure. Otherwise there is no pains and pleasure. Asaṅgo 'yaṁ puruṣaḥ. Ātmā, real spirit soul... Just like our scientist was asking whether soul is dependent on the matter. No. Soul is independent. Asaṅgo 'yaṁ puruṣaḥ. That is the Vedic instruction. It is never affected. Although therefore it requires knowledge. It requires knowledge. Mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya [Bg. 2.14]. Our pains and pleasure we feel on account of this skin, mātrā-sparśāḥ. So we should not deviate from the duty. Even there are pains and pleasure due to this body, we should not deviate from our duty. That is the instruction of the śāstra. It is not that because it is very, I am feeling very much cold, I shall not take my bath. No. That's my duty. I must take. And because I am feeling very hot, therefore I shall not go to the kitchen. There shall be no cooking today. No, that is not possible. Cooking must go on. Similarly, despite all difficulties, all inconveniences on account of this false body, one must do his duty. And that was the instruction to be given to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.

So that is applicable in every field of life, that we must chalk out what is our duty. And it must go on in any condition. It doesn't matter I am feeling pain or pleasure. That is the instruction.

Thank you very much. (end)



741027SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.47

-

Māyāpura, October 27, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "King Yudhiṣṭhira, son of Dharma, overwhelmed by the death of his friends, was aggrieved just like a common, materialistic man. O sages, thus deluded by affection, he began to speak."



Prabhupāda:



āha rājā dharma-sutaś

cintayan suhṛdāṁ vadham

prākṛtenātmanā viprāḥ

sneha-moha-vaśaṁ gataḥ

[SB 1.8.47]



Sneha, love, affection, and moha, illusion. So, prākṛtena. Prākṛtena means on the bodily conception of life. Actually, sneha is different. There are affection in different stages. This morning I was reading the statement of a fisherman who caught Caitanya Mahāprabhu in His trance, and by touching Caitanya Mahāprabhu he became spiritually ecstatic, but he thought that he has become ghostly haunted: "Here is a ghost." And he was thinking, "I am ghostly haunted, so if I become mad, who will take care of my wife and children?" This is the position. The fisherman was actually, spiritually, by the grace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, simply by touching Him, he was so much spiritually advanced that he was chanting, dancing, crying-means all the symptoms of spiritual ecstatic transformation was visible in his body-but he thought that he had gone mad on account of touching the body, ghost. He was thinking like that. And the man thinking was that "If I become mad like this, then who will take care of my wife and children?"



This is sneha. Everyone is thinking. Even the lower animals, they are also thinking of giving protection to the children. I have got personal experience in Kanpur, I was sitting in my room, and one monkey was outside the door with his (her) kitty to take something out of my eating. But by chance the small kitty entered through the bars of the window within the room, and I saw the mother became almost mad immediately: "Oh, my son has gone inside, and it will not be allowed to come again." Anyway, I managed to push the small kitty to go away; then she was relieved. So this affection for children, for wife, for family members, increase, then to society, to country, even to the whole human society. There are so many persons. They have given their state (estate) for benefit of the whole human society. There are many, many philanthropists, charitably disposed men. They do that.

But all these activities are simply moha, illusion, only moha. It has no value. If you say that "So many things, it has no value?" it has value-temporary, puṇya. Puṇya... There is also pāpa also. Suppose if you give charity... Charity is pious activities, but if you give charity to a brāhmaṇa, then it is-proper brāhmaṇa, qualified brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava-then your charity is properly utilized. And if you give the same charity to a drunkard, then you commit sinful activity. If you do not know what kind of charities we shall perform, if you blindly give charity, then sometimes you may be doing pious activities, but sometimes you are clearing the way for going to hell. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is stated there are three kinds of charities: sāttvika, rājasika, tāmasika. If you perform sāttvika charity, then you get good result; rājasika charity, you get some profit; and tāmasika charity, you go to hell. So one must be very careful even for this sneha, or charity, or philanthropy.

There is another story-it may be fact-that a boy was raised by his aunt very liberally. Then, gradually, the boy became, in bad association, a thief. And the aunt was encouraging, "Oh, it is a very good business. You are bringing so many things without any labor." So... Or out of affection he (she) did not chastise the boy when he was stealing. Then he, at the end, became a murderer. So he committed a murder. Then when he was to be hanged, so the government men inquired, "What is your last wish?" "Now, I want to speak with my aunt through the ear." Then he was allowed. And the aunt was generally crying that "My nephew is going to be hanged." She was... So he caught up her ear with the teeth and cut it. So he said, "My dear aunt, if you would have chastised me in the beginning, then today, this position, that you are crying and I am going to be hanged, this would not have happened. But you did not do that. Therefore you are uselessly crying now, and this is your punishment: I cut off your ear with the teeth." A very good instruction.

So the so-called sneha, if it is not properly done... Nature's regulation is so strict that you cannot avoid the consequence. That is not possible. These are practical. I have seen another practical... In front of our residence there was another neighbor. So the old man had his daughter-in-law. So she was beating her one child. So I inquired through my servant, "Why this young woman is beating her child?" Now, then the servant brought me the news that this boy gave paraṭā to his elder brother who is suffering from typhoid. The typhoid... In typhoid fever, solid food is forbidden strictly, but the boy did not know. He asked his younger brother that "If you steal one paraṭā and if you give me, I am very much hungry." So he became very sympathetic to his brother, and he gave the paraṭā. And the boy was ill; he aggravated the illness. So as soon as the mother heard that he gave a paraṭā to him, he (she) began to beat: "Why did you give?" Now, it was charity, it was affection and sympathetic, but the result was beating with shoes. So if we do not know where charity should be given, then, where affection should be there, then we are under the laws of nature; we shall be punished if it is not properly done. There is punishment.

Therefore it is said, prākṛtena ātmanā. Prākṛtena, by worldly relationship, prākṛtena ātmanā viprāḥ sneha-moha-vaśaṁ gataḥ. Sneha, affection; moha, illusion. Just like Arjuna, the same thing: out of affection he was denying. He was denying, "No, no, Kṛṣṇa, I shall not fight. There, on the other side, there are my brothers, my nephews, my grandfather, and my teacher, Droṇācārya, all my object of affection and obeisances, and I will have to kill them. You are inducing me. No, no, don't do it." That is prākṛtena. He did not know the spiritual necessities. Sometimes we take sannyāsa. I have seen. One of our Godbrother, big Godbrother, he took sannyāsa. So his son was crying, and he was also crying. Then, if you have got affection for your family, society, then why you are taking sannyāsa? That is prākṛtena. We should not be carried away by this material affection, no. That is not good. You must do your duty. That is the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, that "Arjuna, you are being carried away by your material affection, and you are hesitating to execute your duty. This is not good." Anārya-juṣṭam: "This is befitting for the anārya, non-Āryan." Non-Āryan means not civilized, and Āryan means civilized. This is the distinction. Now people are very much fond of calling themselves as civilized, Āryan, belonging to the Āryan family. Where is the Āryan civilization? Āryan civilization means this Vedic civilization. Just like Arjuna, a kṣatriya, belonged to the Āryan civilization, and because he was denying to fight, Kṛṣṇa accused him, "Oh, this is just like non-Āryans." Anārya-juṣṭam, non-Āryans.

So this is Āryan civilization. Āryan civilization means giving importance to the spiritual life. That is Āryan civilization. And those who are giving importance to the material life, prākṛta, that is called prākṛta. Sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ. In devotional life also, there are prākṛta-bhaktas. Prākṛta-bhaktas are described,

arcāyām eva haraye

pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu

sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ



"A devotee"-of course, that is the beginning-"who is carrying the arca, Deity worship very nicely," arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayā, "with great affection, regulative principle, but he does not know," arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate, na tad-bhakteṣu, "but he does not know how to respect a devotee," na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu, "he does not know how to do good to others-simply he is attached to the Deity worship-"sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ, "he's still on the material platform."



So one has to make advance. What is that advance? That advance is... What is that verse? The four kinds of... Prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ. Īśvare tad-adhīneṣu. The further advancement... One has to make advance, stage by stage, from the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, from the lower stage, to the middle stage to the higher stage. So the next stage, from prākṛta, from material position... Of course, any devotion is, any devotee is not on the material platform. He is... But if we remain more on the material platform, not on the spiritual platform, then we'll fall down. We'll fall down. Therefore one should try to make forward march. The forward march is to become a preacher. Bhakteṣu cānyeṣu. Preaching means to obey the order of the spiritual master or superior authorities and to do good to others, do good to others. They are suffering for want of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Try to preach them. This is the second stage. If we simply become blocked up for Deity worship and do not preach, then we remain in the lowest stage. But when we take up this work, preaching...

Preaching means he must be conscious, Kṛṣṇa conscious, advanced. Kṛṣṇa conscious means that he's a lover of Kṛṣṇa. Iśvare tad... He'll see four things: first Kṛṣṇa, īśvara; and tad-adhīna, the devotees... Iśvare tad-adhīneṣu and bāliśeṣu. Bāliśa means people, ignorant men, who do not know what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They are called bāliśa, just like child. Child is called bāliśa. Ignorant men, bāliśeṣu, dviṣatsu ca, and other class. He'll see four things: īśvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; he'll see the devotees of Kṛṣṇa; he'll see some ignorant person; and he'll see some envious person. That you will have to meet. If you become preacher, then you'll create so many enemies also. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. His father became enemy, not outside. Outside he might have many enemies, but the five-years-old boy, because he was taking opportunity in the school and as soon as the teachers are out, in the tiffin hour, he would immediately stand up on the bench and preach... You have seen the picture. He was preaching amongst his small class friends. That preaching work is there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, how he was intelligently preaching.

His first was... Kaumāram... Bhakta? I forget now. My memory is becoming old. (laughs) So, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha [SB 7.6.1]. That, he was preaching: "My dear friends, we are now unmarried boys, so this is the opportunity. Now we are unmarried. We are not very much attached to family life. This is the opportunity." Kaumāra ācaret prājñaḥ. Because as soon as one becomes materially affectionate... Here it is said, prākṛtena ātmanā viprāḥ sneha-moha-vaśam. The more we increase... When the child, when we are children, we have got little affection for playing or for father, mother, that's all, limited. But the more we grow, and especially when you are married, then this material affection increases, more entangled. That is also stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. This material life means sex life. So a man is searching after woman, and woman is searching after man. This is material bondage. This is natural not only human society-in dog society. Just see. The dog is crying, is crying at night because he has lost that woman. Is it not? Just see, even in the dog, what to speak of human being. So this is material life, to be affectionate unnecessarily. Therefore devotional service means vairāgya-vidyā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu showed by His example how He gave up the affection of young, beautiful wife, very nice home, most affectionate mother, most influential position in the society-gave up.

So this is the..., people do not know what is devotional service. Devotional service means... Just like Kuntī was praying, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, kindly help me how can I give up this affection of my family, the Pāṇḍavas and the Vṛṣṇis." This is required. This is the first sacrifice, not prākṛtena vaśaṁ gataḥ. Then it is... Actually, the perfection of life is no more affection for anything material: brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. That is the beginning, when we have lost complete affection for... We are not cruel; that is not another... But we know, we should know, that this is not required. This is simply moha. This is simply moha. This is illusion. It has no meaning. It is simply entanglement. That one must know. That is called vairāgya. Vairāgya-vidyā. Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya wrote hundred verses appreciating Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, of which two verses are available, because when he sent the hundred verses glorifying Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He immediately torn the papers, but the devotees collected the torn papers and saved one or two ślokas. So one of the most important śloka is,

vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga-

śikṣārtham ekaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-śarīra-dhārī

kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye

[Cc. Madhya 6.254]



Who is this Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu? He immediately recognized, "He is Kṛṣṇa. He is Kṛṣṇa." Kṛṣṇa, as the Supreme Person, He ordered this vairāgya-vidyā, "Just give up, nonsense, all these things. Just surrender to Me." This is vairāgya-vidyā. The so-called affection and duty and so on, so on, sarva-dharmān parityajya: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up." This is vairāgya-vidyā. So Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya could understand that "He is the same Kṛṣṇa, same Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered, but He did not personally teach how to become elevated in vairāgya-vidyā. Here is the same person, He has come again to teach practically how to attain this vairāgya-vidyā stage." Therefore he said, vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam [Cc. Madhya 6.254]. Vairāgya-vidyā means you become detestful to the material thing-paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]-but, as Kuntī said that "My affection may increase for you," vairāgya-vidyā means not only simply give up affection of this material, but you increase your affection for Kṛṣṇa. That is vairāgya, not that giving up all affection for the material world, you become zero. The zero stage is brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20] stage: "I have no more any affection for material things." But zero stage, you cannot stay. That is not our nature. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). We want ānanda.



So we give up this association. Unless we take Kṛṣṇa's association there will be no ānanda; it is simply zero. In the zero platform you cannot remain for many years or many days. Then you'll fall down. If you don't get, if you don't increase your affection for Kṛṣṇa-simply you give up the affection of this material world-then you cannot stay for many days. You'll fall down. You'll fall down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. Simply negative process will not help you. You must take the positive position. So that is required. Otherwise, devotional service means vairāgya-vidyā. It is the transcendental education to become unattached to this material world. This is called vairāgya.

In another place it is said,

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



Vairāgya or jñāna, these two things required in human life, to become unattached to this material world and, based on jñāna, knowledge. Just like a so-called sannyāsī, they give up as a sentiment and take sannyāsa, but unless he has knowledge, he cannot stay; he'll fall down. He'll fall down. Therefore vairāgya and jñāna, two things must be there. Jñāna means full knowledge that "I am spirit soul; my only necessity is spiritual advancement of life." This is jñāna. And then, naturally, he has no more any affection for material things.



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was thinking-it is natural-that on account of his position, to become the emperor of the world, suhṛdāṁ vadham, so many friends have been killed. Āha rājā dharma-sutaś cintayan suhṛdāṁ vadham. This is natural. But duty is duty. When Kṛṣṇa says that, as He did to Arjuna, that "You must fight. You must kill them," that is duty. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness-no consideration of my affection. That is duty, and Arjuna did it. This is the duty of the devotee. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā [Cc. Madhya 19.167]. First-class devotion is to serve Kṛṣṇa just to please Him. If He is pleased, if He says that "You kill your son," then we should be prepared to do that. That is called vairāgya-vidyā. Of course, never Kṛṣṇa says like that, but actually, in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, Arjuna was ordered, if not the son but the nephew. But his sons were also killed. So this is duty. So many people inquire, "Kṛṣṇa was inducing people to fight." But this fight by the order of Kṛṣṇa and the fight or war declared for the satisfaction of the politicians, they are not the same. We must always remember. They are not the same.

Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja was standing, and his father was being killed. Is it a very good thing? Suppose if I am here and somebody kills me, and if you do not protest, is it a very good business? People will be surprised that "So many disciples are there, and this man is being killed, and nobody do anything?" So from material point of view, Prahlāda Mahārāja could have asked Nṛsiṁhadeva, "My Lord, do not kill my father." He could have asked, and immediately his request would have been granted. But he did not do that. He was standing and seeing. But he knows that "This killing of the body of my father is not killing. I shall save him. I shall save him." That he did. When he was offered benediction, he did not take anything. He said, "My Lord, what shall I do, all this material benediction? I have seen in the case of my father. He was so strong that even the demigods were frightened for his presence. His position was so strong, and You finished it within a minute. So what is the benefit of taking? No, no. Please do not request me." But although he did not ask anything for his personal self, but he asked the Lord, prayed, that "One thing I request." "What is that?" "My father was a great demon, and he was against You. He has committed so many sinful life. So I know he'll have to suffer for these things. I request You to excuse him." This is Vaiṣṇava son. "Oh, yes, immediately." Immediately.

So he knew that "What is this of asking for this material...? My father is not this body, but he has to suffer so many things for his sinful activities. I shall save him in due course of time." Therefore that is called putra. Putra means

pun-nāmno narakād yasmāt

trāyate pitaraṁ sutaḥ

tasmāt putra iti proktaḥ

svayam eva svayambhuvā



This is represented by the alphabet pu, and trāyate, tra. Combined together, putra. The putra's duty is to save the father from hellish condition of life. Therefore there is śrāddha ceremony. So here is a putra. Real putra, Prahlāda Mahārāja, that he saved his father from the hellish condition of life. Similarly, a father should be the protector of his child not only simply by feeding him, making him very fat in this life, but from death. Na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum, pitā na sa syāt. One should not become father, one should not become mother, one should not become guru, one should not become relative, husband, and so many. The list is there. Why? If he cannot save his subordinate from imminent death. That is father; that is mother; that is guru. And how one can be saved from imminent death or repeated death? Simply by Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti...

[Bg. 4.9]



You can save your son, your disciple, your relative or anyone whom you love, real affection. Then give him Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and he'll be saved from death. That is the purport of this.



Thank you very much. (end)



730510SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.48

-

Los Angeles, May 10, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



aho me paśyatājñānaṁ

hṛdi rūḍhaṁ durātmanaḥ

pārakyasyaiva dehasya

bahvyo me 'kṣauhiṇīr hatāḥ

[SB 1.8.48]



Translation: "King Yudhiṣṭhira said: O my Lord, I am the most sinful man. Just see my heart, which is full of ignorance. This body, which is ultimately meant for others, has killed many, many phalanxes of men."



Prabhupāda: So anyone explaining. You can explain.



Pradyumna: This King Yudhiṣṭhira is lamenting that the body, this material body, does not actually belong to us. We can even see relatively that the material body belongs, while we are inside this material body, it belongs to the family. We have debts to pay to so many living entities-to our forefathers, our family. It belongs to our country. Our country takes it and says, "You take your body and you fight in Vietnam," or "You do this kind of work" or "You don't do this." It is subject to the religion we are born in. It is subject to so many rules and regulations beyond ourselves. This body, even while we are in it, does not belong to us, and before we came into this body, it was matter, belonging to someone else, and after we leave this body, as it says in the purport, "While there is life in the body it is meant for the service of others, and when it is dead it is meant to be eaten by dogs and jackals or maggots." So after death the body is disposed of in different ways. Some people bury the body; in that case the worms take the body. Some people burn the body; in that case it is consumed by fire and becomes ashes.



Prabhupāda: This one word, pārakyasya is very important. If you work... Somebody is working very hard, nobody is interested to work very hard for others. That is not the material philosophy. Everyone wants his own satisfaction, means sense gratification. So those who are in the bodily concept of life, they are working for their bodily sense gratification. But if we consider philosophically, we'll see that even this body does not belong to me. Therefore it is a very important word, pārakyasya. From the very beginning. The body was given by father and mother. So if anyone creates something, so that thing belongs to the creator. If the father and mother has created this body, then from the very beginning the body belongs to the father and mother. And actually, in the childhood, as the father and mother says, "Sit down here, eat this, don't go there," everything is controlled by the father and mother, and originally given by the father and mother. So how we can claim, "This is my body"? From the very beginning. Then somebody maintains you. Suppose you are working in office, in a factory. So actually that body belongs to him, the maintainer. Just like a dog. The master maintains it, and the dog's body is meant for the service of that master. As soon as the master indicates, "You do this," immediately he does it. A dog has no independence, practical. So in this way the body belongs to the master. In the beginning, body belongs to the father and mother. Then, if you grow up, then body belongs to your country. In this way, go up to the death point, and after death also, the body belongs to others.



There are three stages, three different kinds of transformation of this body after death: stool, ashes and worms, uh, earth or dirt. According to the Vedic civilization, the body is burnt into ashes. So the body becomes ashes. And somebody throws the body to be eaten up by some animal. The Parsee community in India, they throw the body to be eaten by the vultures. That is their system. So after eating, the vultures, they pass stool; so body becomes stool. Is there any scientist to take the stool of vulture and make again a body? The body has turned to be stool, the body has turned to be ashes. Why not take little ashes and turn it to again body? Scientific method. Is it possible?

So this is called ajñānam. If you work for your own thing, there is some sense. But if you are working for others only, you have no claim, and day and night, hard work, then what is that intelligence? That is ass's intelligence. Ass. Ass just like works very hard, not for himself. He works for the washerman, for carrying tons of cloth on his back and for a morsel of grass. So in the actual sense also, if you go to see a gentleman, busy gentleman, businessman, ask him that "We want to talk with you something about Kṛṣṇa consciousness." "Oh, I have no time. I have no time, sir." "Why?" "I am very busy." "Why you are busy?" "For business." "What is this business for?" "For maintaining my family." So in this way, ultimately, he is thinking he is working for himself, but he is working for others.

So our intelligence is, if we have to work for others and sacrifice this body for others, why not for Kṛṣṇa? That is our philosophy. If I am whole time, whole duration of life, I am working for others... Others means, ultimately, my senses. The senses are others. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. My senses dictating, "You stick to this woman and go to hell." "Yes, I am ready. Yes." Kāma, lust. So I am servant of the lust. Neither I am servant of the woman or servant of this man or that man. I am servant of my lust. And the lust is dictating that "You do this nonsense." "Yes, I'll do. Yes, I'll do." So in this way, we are actually servant of our senses and the dictation of the senses. This is our position. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. Durnideśa means... Nirdeśa means direction, and durnideśa means bad direction. Just like people, they are doing so many sinful activities for maintaining this body. But at the ultimate analysis the body belongs to somebody else. So we are fool, that I am doing so much sinful activities for others. This is sense. But one... Everyone is under this ignorance. Although he is working for others, he is thinking "I am working for myself, for my interest." Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. These rascals, they do not know what is actually his self-interest. He is working for other's interest, but he is thinking that "I am working for my interest." This is ajñāna.

So therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja says, aho me paśyata ajñānam: "Just see how much foolish I am. I am foolish, I am." This body... I may be king, but this body, although I am king, if I do not discharge my duties nicely, president or king or very big man, immediately votes will be against me. So I am working for others. I have to keep... Just like recently in your country, the democratic party and... What is the other party? Republic party. So many things are going on, ajñāna. This is ajñāna. Philosophy means to see intelligently, darśana. The translation of philosophy means darśana. Darśana means seeing. Philosophy means to see the actual fact. That is called philosophy. So if we philosophically take all these things, we are working for others out of ignorance, and I am thinking that "It is my interest. It is my self-interest..." Actually, you have to work for others. That is your business. And that other is Kṛṣṇa, not this material world. I have to work for others. Because I am servant originally. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. That is the constitutional position of every living entity, a servant. He cannot be master. If you don't become servant of Kṛṣṇa, then you have to become a servant of māyā. You cannot be master of māyā. That is not possible. Master of māyā is Kṛṣṇa. Mama māyā. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā [Bg. 7.14]. A master can control māyā, but we are not master. We are servant. How we can control māyā? It is impossible. But if you become servant of Kṛṣṇa, māyā will not touch you. That's all. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. You cannot control māyā. That is not possible, because you are servant. If you don't become servant of Kṛṣṇa, you must become servant of māyā.

So we are falsely trying to enjoy māyā. Enjoy means master. That is not possible. Tribhir guṇamayair bhāvaiḥ. This is the influence of the three modes of material nature. We are falsely thinking that... The so-called scientific advancement, they are also trying to control over māyā, nature. That cannot be. It is not possible. But they will go on trying for it. The māyā, there is a nice example I have seen in somewhere, in India. There was a mirror and a bird, a sparrow, was coming. And as soon as he comes before the mirror, there is another sparrow on the other side. So he'll strike the mirror, that "There is another bird." And he would also strike. In this way he was struggling. That shadow sparrow was striking and he was trying. He was trying. He thought that "I shall defeat the other sparrow." But that is not possible. That is not possible. I have seen it practically. This is foolishness. The bird is thinking that "There is another sparrow. Strike it." And he is also striking. That perpetual striking is going on. That is called struggle for existence. He has no sense.

So, so long we are nonsense, we have to go, struggle for existence. Struggle for existence in this life. Suppose I am struggling, I am thinking, "If I could have possessed the strength of an elephant or a tiger, I would have been successful." Then next life he gets the body of lion, tiger, or elephant. Nature will give. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. Whatever you want, He will give you, up to mukti. The Māyāvādī philosophers... Mukti means to merge into the existence of Brahman. Kṛṣṇa will give you very easily. But He is very strict to give you bhakti. That is His special... Because to the bhaktas, Kṛṣṇa, although the Supreme, He becomes within the grip of the bhaktas. Vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. Adurlabha. For bhakta He becomes, He becomes controlled by the bhakta. The topmost bhakta is Rādhārāṇī. So although Kṛṣṇa is the īśvaraḥ paramaḥ, the supreme controller, He is controlled by Rādhārāṇī, because She is bhakta. Nobody can excel Her devotion, Her service. In sixty-four ways... These are described in the Bhakti-rasa..., Nectar of Devotion, how Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī excels in Her devotional service, everyone, everyone. There are stages, different. Just like the Pāṇḍavas, they are also bhaktas. But the gopīs excel them. And the gopīs are also bhaktas, but Rādhārāṇī excels all of them. So there are stages of bhaktas. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is very cautious to endow one with this devotional service. He can give mukti very easily. Mukti, to achieve mukti, liberation, that is not very difficult job. But if one becomes a bhakta, devotee, mukti will stand before him with folded hands. Muktiḥ mukulitāñjali sevate asmān.

For a devotee, mukti is not very important. Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that mukti, kaivalyam, one with the supreme, kaivalyam, kevalam, narakāyate: "What is this? It is as good as the hell." That is the opinion of the bhakta. They don't want mukti. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "I don't want any material wealth," dhanam. Na janam. "I don't want to be leader of hundreds and thousand of people, president or this or that. No." These are material desires. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu is nullifying everything: "No, I don't want this." Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitām. "I don't want any beautiful wife also." These are material desires. Everyone wants. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu rejects. Then you want mukti? Because after all, mukti... Dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Mokṣa means mukti. People are addicted to these four principles. So ultimately, You want mukti? "No. That is also not." Why? Mama janmani janmani. Janma, if one takes birth again, then there is no mukti. Mukti means no more taking birth in this material world. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, "I don't want this, don't want this, don't want this." And janmani janmani means "I don't want mukti also." Janmani... If one is mukta, he is liberated, he cannot take birth again. So He says, mama janmani janmani: "Let there be birth after birth, birth after birth. It doesn't matter." Then what You want actually? No. Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi: [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4] "Simply I want to serve You. That's all. It doesn't matter. What shall I do with mukti? I may go to hell; it doesn't matter. But I want to serve You there also."

So for a devotee there is no such distinction: "Here is hell" or "Here is heaven," "Here is Vṛndāvana" or "Here is Los Angeles," "Here is..." No. Because Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. Wherever He gets the opportunity of serving Kṛṣṇa, that he wants. That's all. Nothing more. Mama janmani janmanīśvare [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. Janmani janmani, it doesn't matter. What kind of janma will be... Of course, from the śāstras we can understand that śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate [Bg. 6.41]. To take birth by a devotee is different little than another's. Because one who has dedicated to Kṛṣṇa, He is under Kṛṣṇa's control, direct. Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi [Bg. 18.66]. So that bhakti means he is sinless, spotless. So therefore there is no possibility of his taking birth in lower animal group. That is not. He will get birth; that is assured-śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe-either in a very rich family or in a pure brāhmaṇa's family. Because he will get another chance of developing his devotional service in a pure brāhmaṇa family or pure Vaiṣṇava family. Vaiṣṇava is greater than a brāhmaṇa. That is a great opportunity. Because the father, mother, they are engaged in devotional service. Just like these children who were born amongst our devotees, they are not ordinary children. Because from the very beginning they are getting chance of devotional service: dancing, chanting, seeing the Deity, offering a flower, offering obeisances to the spiritual master. These things will not go in vain. Don't think. Every account is kept. Every account. Therefore the Deity worship is recommended-why? If somebody comes, consciously or unconsciously, and offers obeisances, he gets immediately credit certi..., credit note, yes. Immediately. In this way, when the credit notes are so much, oh, it is a big amount. It is a big amount. Then he can purchase Kṛṣṇa. This is bhakti. Even... Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Even little of it can save you from the greatest danger. Bhakti is so nice. Svalpam api. Just like Ajāmila. Ajāmila, he was the greatest sinful person. But at the time of death, he uttered "Nārāyaṇa," and he was protected by Kṛṣṇa. Immediately Nārāyaṇa's soldiers came and protected him from the Yamarāja's soldiers. Ajāmila uddhāra.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is very advanced devotee. He says that paśyata ajñānam: "Just see my ignorance. I have killed so many soldiers simply for this body." Paśyata ajñānaṁ me hṛdi rūḍhaṁ durātmanaḥ: "And this ignorance is deeply rooted in my heart." People are... Every step, they are being baffled; still, they will do the same thing. Punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. No sense is coming. No sense is coming. Durātmanaḥ. Not mahātmanaḥ. Mahātmanaḥ means he is no more interested in this kind of business. That is called mahātmanaḥ. Those who are repeatedly engaged in this kind of business, they are called durātmanaḥ. Only for the body's sake working very hard. So if you analyze, the whole world is doing that. Durātmanaḥ.

Pārakyasyaiva dehasya bahvyo me akṣauhiṇīḥ. Now the akṣauhiṇī is mentioned here. One, what is the exact word, one group of soldiers?

Devotees: Phalanx.



Prabhupāda: Phalanx, another name?



Devotees: Regiment?



Prabhupāda: Regiment or something like..., composing. Just like in your country you have got. The Seventh Fleet or something like that was sent to India. They have got a group, so many ships, so many soldiers, so many... But formerly there was no ship, no aeroplane. They used to fight with horses, soldiers, elephants. So the estimation is there. You read the estimation.



Pradyumna: "A solid phalanx of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 109,650 infantry and 65,000 cavalry is called an akṣauhiṇī. And many akṣauhiṇīs were killed on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra."



Prabhupāda: So that's all right. Let us have kīrtana. (end)





741028SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.48

-

Māyāpura, October 28, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "King Yudhiṣṭhira said: O my lot! I am the most sinful man! Just see my heart, which is full of ignorance! This body, which is ultimately meant for others, has killed many, many phalanxes of men."



Prabhupāda:



aho me paśyatājñānaṁ

hṛdi rūḍhaṁ durātmanaḥ

pārakyasyaiva dehasya

bahvyo me 'kṣauhiṇīr hatāḥ

[SB 1.8.48]



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja says that this body is meant for others. It is others' body. Everyone should be interested for his own body. Who is interested for other's body? I eat for maintenance of my body, not that your body. It is the very good argument given by Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja that "First of all ascertain whether it is your body. If for the bodily sense gratification, satisfaction, you are committing so many sinful life, but first of all consider whether this body is yours."



Now, first of all, consideration is: this body is given by the father and mother. So actually the body belongs to the father and mother. Or just like the slaves-they sell their body to the master. So somebody, if maintains your body, then it becomes... The body belongs to him. Suppose you are working somewhere and he is giving you money for maintaining your body; then actually the body is maintained for the person who gives me payment. You see. So many people are going to the other side of the river, running very quickly to go there because the body is sold to that master who is paying for eating. Otherwise why he's taking the body there? So actually the body belongs to others. And spiritually the body belongs to Kṛṣṇa. But when we forget our relationship with Kṛṣṇa-the body belongs to somebody else; that's a fact-then we think that "The body belongs to my father and mother" or this and that... Sometimes we do not think that. So why, from material point of view, if the body does not belong to me, why shall I commit so many sinful activities for others?

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is repentant that pārakyasyaiva dehasya bahvyo me 'kṣauhiṇīr hatāḥ: "Many hundreds and thousands of soldiers, horses, elephants, men we have killed." Akṣauhiṇī, there is a calculation 64,000 elephants, 64,000 horses and 64,000, like that. Exactly I cannot, but some of the items are 64,000. Chariots. One... Nowadays it is called exactly? A group of soldiers? What is called?

Devotee: Phalanx.



Prabhupāda: Phalanx, and another name is there.



Brahmānanda: Division.



Prabhupāda: Division. One division. One division of army consisting of so many horses, so many elephants and chariot... There are different types of fighter. Somebody would fight from the back, riding on the back of the elephant, somebody on horses. That is also nowadays current, cavalry. And somebody on chariot, somebody standing, infantry... So, one akṣauhiṇī means 64,000 elephants, horses, chariots and so many thousand infantry. That makes one division. So Kṛṣṇa Himself gave so many divisions to Duryodhana. Altogether there were eighteen divisions or more than that. They were all killed.



So actually, a sane man is thinking that "After all, the idea was that I should be enthroned on this chair, on this throne of the kingdom, and for me so many animals and men were killed." Here it is mentioned, yes (reading), "A solid phalanx of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 109,650 infantry and 65,600 calvary is called an akṣauhiṇī." Such eighteen divisions of soldiers were there on one side. "And many akṣauhiṇīs were killed on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, as the most pious king of the world, takes for himself the responsibility of killing such a huge number of living beings because the battle was fought to reinstate him on the throne. This body is, after all, meant for others. While there is life in the body, it is meant for the service of the others, and (when) it is dead it is meant to be eaten up by the dogs and jackals." Even it is dead body, that is also meant for others. If you throw it on the street, then it will be eaten by the animals and the vultures. So body is meant for others. Or if you don't throw, if you burn it, then-it is right of the sons to burn it-then it belongs to them. So either living or dead, logically the body belongs to others. And another logic is: Who is interested to maintain a body which belongs to others? This is logic. And other point is that everyone is maintaining this body with so many sinful activities, although the body does not belong to him.

So real sanity is to understand that this body belongs to Kṛṣṇa. We are misunderstanding that this body belongs to my father, mother, or my master or to the cats and dogs or the vultures, in so many ways. That is material. Materially, we can understand that. But spiritually, this body belongs to Kṛṣṇa because the body is made of, I mean to say, prepared by the eight elements. We have got the five elements, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4]. There is earth, water, air, fire, and the mind and the intelligence and the false ego. This is the eight combination of the matter. Then, the matter being agitated, there are ten senses and then sense objects. In this way this body is composition of twenty-four elements. But all these elements, Kṛṣṇa says, bhinnā me prakṛtir aṣṭadhā: [Bg. 7.4] "That is My energy." This body is made by Kṛṣṇa's property. Earth, water, air, fire-this is all Kṛṣṇa's property. You cannot create earth, or you cannot create water. You cannot create sky, nothing of the material elements. It is created by Kṛṣṇa, and this body is..., this external body is made of these eight elements. Similarly, I am also Kṛṣṇa's. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prakṛtiṁ parāṁ jīva-bhūtām. Me parāṁ prakṛtiṁ jīva-bhūtām. Jīva, the living entities, they are parā-prakṛti, superior energy, but that is also me: "Mine." So I, as ahaṁ brahmāsmi, because Kṛṣṇa is absolute, in that sense, I, the energy of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa, we are one. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi means that, or "I belong to Kṛṣṇa." The Māyāvādī thinks that "I have become Kṛṣṇa." No. The Vaiṣṇava philosophy is that "I am Kṛṣṇa's property, not that I become Kṛṣṇa." Just like the part and parcel of my body, this finger. The finger can claim that "I am part and parcel of the body," but the finger cannot claim that "I am the whole body." That is not possible.

So actually our body belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and I also belong to Kṛṣṇa. Pārakya. In both senses it belongs to other. Other means Kṛṣṇa. So, logically both the body, mind, intelligence, and myself-everything should be engaged for Kṛṣṇa's interest. That is real knowledge. That is real knowledge. Kṛṣṇa says that kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata [Bg. 13.3]. He is also kṣetra-jña. I am kṣetra-jña because I possess this body, and the body is kṣetra, the field of activities. Just like here the cultivators, they have got... Each one of them have got some land, and they are producing food grains or any other products according to his ability and capacity, and he's enjoying this property. Therefore he's called kṣetra-jña or kṣetrī. The field is called kṣetra and the owner is called kṣetrī, or kṣetra-jña. Kṣetra-jña means that cultivator knows that "This earmarked land is mine." Kṣetra-jña. "It belongs to me." So actually this field does not belong to him; it belongs to the government, because he has to pay, collect, tax to the collector. So actually land does not belong to him; it belongs to the government. Similarly, where is the difficulty to understand that although I am cultivating this body, karma...? Taking this body as my field of activities, we are doing work. Everyone can understand it. But finally this body belongs to Kṛṣṇa, as this land belongs to the government.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa claims, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi. Just as there are in cities, two taxes: occupier tax and owner's tax... Rented house, actually the house belongs to the landlord, but the tenant also claims, "This is my house." But finally the house belongs to the landlord. So Kṛṣṇa claims, kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata. The same example: As a piece of land, some bighās of land, belongs to a certain person-he can claim, "This is my land"-similarly, other man can claim, "It is my land," other can claim, "My land," but all these lands belongs to the government. Similarly, I claim this is my body, you claim it is your body, he claims it is his body, but ultimately all bodies, becomes (belongs) to Kṛṣṇa. This is clear understanding. Where is the difficulty to understand that everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa? Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam: [Īśo mantra 1] "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa."

So this is knowledge. This is knowledge. And when you come to the right knowledge, after many, many births... Even Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira... Of course, he is playing the part of ordinary man, pious man. Pious man is also not perfect. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja should have thought like this, that "Yes, this body does not belong to me, but it belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa desired that with this body there must be fighting for His satisfaction." So Arjuna thought like that. Arjuna thought like that. Therefore Arjuna is higher grade devotee than Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja has got personal consideration. When Kṛṣṇa advised him that "You go to Droṇācārya and speak this lie, that his son Aśvatthāmā is dead, otherwise he'll not die. You go and speak," so he hesitated. He said, "How is that? I never spoke lie. How can I go and say him the lie?" So this personal consideration is there, that "If I speak lies, then I will be sinful, and I'll be punished and so on, so on." But a devotee does not think like that. "Maybe it is sinful, but it will satisfy Kṛṣṇa; I must do it." This is devotee's decision.

Just like Kṛṣṇa sometimes became sick. So, in Dvārakā... You have seen that play in Bombay. And so many physicians came; nobody could cure Him. Then Kṛṣṇa suggested His own medicine, that "If some of my devotees will give the dust of his feet on My head, then I'll be cured." So the first devotee, Nārada and others, everywhere, it was approached that "Give your dust of feet. Kṛṣṇa is suffering." "No, no, no. How can I give my dust of feet? Kṛṣṇa is Supreme Personality of Godhead." But when the gopīs were approached, when they heard that Kṛṣṇa is sick, and He's in urgently necessity of the dust of His devotees' feet, so immediately they began to give: "Take it, take it immediately. Immediately." They did not consider that "Giving the dust of my feet to Kṛṣṇa, I shall go to hell." "Never mind, I shall go to hell; it doesn't matter, but let Kṛṣṇa be cured." That is first consideration.

So this is the topmost devotee, prepared to do anything without any consideration. That is pure devotee. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam [Brs. 1.1.11]. There should be no personal desire. That should be zero. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anā... Simply one should try to please Kṛṣṇa. There is no other consideration. Only to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is pure bhakti. That is explained by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,

vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām

[Bg. 2.41]



This is perfect conclusion, that "I shall execute the desire of Kṛṣṇa." "But Kṛṣṇa is not physically present before me. Then how I shall know what Kṛṣṇa desires?" That is not very difficult. Kṛṣṇa's representative is there, the spiritual master. If you fulfill the desire of the spiritual master, then you fulfill the desire of Kṛṣṇa. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. That is stated by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. If you please your spiritual master, then you know that "I have pleased Kṛṣṇa." Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi: ** "If you displease your spiritual master, then you are nowhere. Your position is lost."



Therefore, yesterday we were explaining the ten kinds of offenses. Out of ten kinds of offenses, the serious offense is guror avajñā, disobedience of the order of guru. This is the verdict of the śāstra. Kṛṣṇa is helping us in so many ways. He comes personally to help us, to deliver us from these clutches of māyā, and He advises, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. And when He's not physically present, He keeps Bhagavad-gītā left by Him so that others may read and take advantage of this sublime instruction of Kṛṣṇa. So He is helping us from within-buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam-from within. Tene brahma hṛdā. These statements are there in the śāstras. "He expounded the Vedic knowledge," hṛdā, "from the heart,"-brahma means Vedic knowledge, śabda-brahman-"to Brahmā." Because at that time there was nobody to instruct him. So how he got the instruction of Vedas? Because Kṛṣṇa instructed. Kṛṣṇa hoite catur-mukha, hoy kṛṣṇa-sevonmukha. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung. Catur-mukha means Brahmā. So being instructed by Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā became inclined to serve Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he has written Brahma-saṁhitā. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. He understands, "Here is ādi-puruṣa. I am the only creature now within the universe, so I am getting instruction from Kṛṣṇa, hṛdā, from my heart."

So Kṛṣṇa, when instructs from within the heart, He is called caitya-guru. And that caitya-guru is expanded by the process, personal presentation of spiritual master. So both ways He is helping us. Kṛṣṇa is so kind. Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpā. Kṛṣṇa is helping from within, but sometimes we are so dull, naturally, that we cannot understand. Therefore He sends His representative to instruct externally. So He is helping internally and externally. There is no difference between the internal and external instructor. We should take advantage of this instruction. That is called vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ, fixed-up resolution. Fixed-up resolution. If we become fixed up in this resolution, that "Whatever we have heard from my guru, the representative of Kṛṣṇa, I must execute. I do not care for my personal convenience or inconvenience. This is my life and soul," then your life is perfect. Then your life is... If I make some amendment, addition, alteration, in the name of Kṛṣṇa, guru, then it is spoiled. No. We should receive the instruction as it is, especially...

Kṛṣṇa says... Just like Kṛṣṇa says to Yudhiṣṭhira, "Go and speak the lie," and He speaks to Arjuna that yudhyasva mām anusmara: [Bg. 8.7] "You fight," so not the instruction the same to everyone. Kṛṣṇa knows who is capable to do something particular, and similarly, guru also knows. So it is not that the same instruction is given to all. There may be, because variety. It is not impersonalism, one kind of... No. Variety. Kṛṣṇa is ānandamaya. Ānanda means variety is the mother of enjoyment. Unless there are varieties, how there can be ānanda? Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda. So Kṛṣṇa's business is variety. The Māyāvādīs, they cannot understand. They simply understand that we are one. No. Varieties. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. Kṛṣṇa is enjoying varieties. He is living in the cintāmaṇi-dhāma. There are surabhī. He's tending, tending the cows, and He's playing with the cowherd boys. He's making jokes with the gopīs. He is enjoying the company... Varieties. He's becoming the son, dependent son of mother Yaśodā. So Kṛṣṇa is variety. Without variety, there cannot be enjoyment. So therefore variety of instruction also.

So that is given by the spiritual master. "You do this," "You do that," "You do this," "You do that," because Kṛṣṇa is not one-sided. So as confidential representative of Kṛṣṇa, we have to follow the instruction of the spiritual master. As it is given particular to me, I should execute without any personal consideration. That is the perfection of life. Because after all, this body is meant for Kṛṣṇa. The mind is meant for Kṛṣṇa. I am also Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel, so pārakyasyaiva. Everything belongs to somebody else. Finally, that somebody else is Kṛṣṇa. So if we fix up our mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and serve Him, then our life is perfect.

Thank you very much. (end)



741029SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.49

-

Māyāpura, October 29, 1974



Pradyumna: "I have killed many boys, brāhmaṇas, well-wishers, friends, parents, preceptors and brothers. Though I live millions of years, I will not be relieved from the hell that awaits me for all these sins."



Prabhupāda:



bāla-dvija-suhṛn-mitra-

pitṛ-bhrātṛ-guru-druhaḥ

na me syān nirayān mokṣo

hy api varṣāyutāyutaiḥ

[SB 1.8.49]



So according to Vedic civilization, special protection for children, brāhmaṇas, women, and saintly persons, brāhmaṇa comes (under) saintly person, special... And cow. Special protection. Bāla-dvija-suhṛn-mitra. Others, next, just like we chant the mantra: namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. The first reference is given to the cows and the brāhmaṇas. Why not others? There are so many animals, so many human beings. Why? Go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. This is to be noted. Unless in the society these two creatures are taken care of, that is not human society.



Dvija, dvija, especially meant the brāhmaṇas, although dvija means brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, because all of them are twice-born-once born by father and mother, and the next birth is by the spiritual master and spiritual knowledge. So therefore to specify especially the brāhmaṇas, they are called dvija-śreṣṭha. Amongst the dvija, the most important dvija, the brāhmaṇa. Of course, others, they are as good, provided they take instruction from the dvija-śreṣṭha. Dvija-śreṣṭha. Śreṣṭha means the best. Best of the dvijas.

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



So their welfare is first considered. Go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. Before that, go, cows, cows' protection. In the modern society they do not know even the preliminary knowledge of worshiping the Supreme Being by giving protection to the cows and the brāhmaṇas.



Besides that, as soon as one is born, he becomes debtor to so many things.

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

[SB 11.5.41]



We become debtor to the demigods as soon as we are born on this earth. As a human being, not as cats and dogs. Cats and dogs, they are not debtor to anyone because they have no sense, nonsense. So first of all we become debtor to the demigods-the sun, moon, the Indra, Candra and many others. So how we become debtor? Because the sun is giving sunshine. We are taking advantage of the sunshine. Unless there was sunshine, you could not live even. Sunshine is so important. It is said that little this side or that side of the orbit of the sun makes the whole world frozen or blazing. Sun is so important thing. It has got an orbit. Yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi. Sun is very powerful planet, very important planet, of all the other planets. Rājā, it is the king of planets. Yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā: the sun is the king of all planets. Because without sun all planets will be frozen, or if the sun becomes too much bright, then everything will be ablaze. At the last stage of annihilation the whole universe will be ablaze by the scorching heat of the sun, and then there will be torrents of rain. For one hundred years the whole universe will remain ablaze. And then for one hundred years there will be heavy rain. In this way the creation will be annihilated.



So we are so much indebted to the sun, to the moon, to the heavenly king, because they are supplying our necessities. The Indra sends the cloud. By the electrical action... We have got experience. And the cloud gives you sufficient rain. Ghanavad vatarhit(?). Most munificent. The cloud gives you rain even where you do not require. On the hill you do not require, on the ocean you do not require, but when there is cloud, there is no miserly behavior. "Take even samudra, you take." Therefore one who is very charitable and munificent, he's compared with the cloud. If you want to sprinkle water even a few yards, you have to take so much trouble. But you see the cloud distributes rain like anything. More than sufficient. Even on the hill, even on the sea. So we are indebted to the demigods. Just like water department. You have to pay tax. Or the light department, you have to pay tax. If you don't pay the bill of the electrical department, it will be cut off, will be discontinued. But we are not paying any bill to the sun-god. Just see. We are taking advantage of the sunshine, but what payment we are paying? Nothing. Therefore this yajña is recommended. Saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā, in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said. Saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā. You are born with the responsibility of performing yajña. If you perform yajña or if you perform sacrifice in the name of Sūrya, in the name of Candra, in the name of Indra, Vāyu, then they will be pleased and will give you regular sunshine, regular moonshine, regular rain. Then you'll be happy. Therefore in the Vedas this deva-yajña is recommended.

But this yajña is performed not for satisfying the particular demigod. Even if you perform any yajña for satisfying the demigod, the Nārāyaṇa is situated there. The nārāyaṇa-śilā, śālagrāma-śilā is there whenever there is some yajña. Because He is the yajña-puruṣa. Actually, when you pay tax to the light department or water department, it is not that the director or the in-charge of the light department and water department takes that money. He does not take money. It goes to the government treasury. Similarly... Therefore it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā,

ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te 'pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam



Avidhi-pūrvakam. The tax department... There are different tax department, but if you pay the whole amount, government treasure making a bill for this department, this, this department, this, then automatically it will be distributed. Similarly the deva-yajña, to perform yajña in the name of the demigods, can all be performed in one yajña when you become Kṛṣṇa conscious. When you become... How? That is also stated in the śāstra, that devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan [SB 11.5.41]. Nārada Muni says to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira that we have got so many due taxes to be paid to the devatās, demigods, because we are utilizing so many material elements controlled by different devatās. And then we are debtor to the ṛṣis. Ṛṣis means saintly person. Just like we are reading this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And who has given this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam? By Vyāsadeva. So we are debtor. Vyāsadeva has given us Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, mahāmuni-kṛte kiṁ vā parair īśvaraḥ. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, it is made by Vyāsadeva. So we are taking advantage of the knowledge, so we are so much indebted to Vyāsadeva. We are indebted to the demigods, we are indebted to Vyāsadeva or other ṛṣis. Manu-saṁhitā, we are indebted to the great Manu. Viṁśati,(?) we are indebted to Parāśara Muni. He has given dharma-śāstra. In this way, there are so many Vedic literatures, and we take advantage of it. Therefore we must be indebted. Deva, ṛṣi, and bhūta. We are taking milk from the cows. Bhūta, āpta. Āpta, friends, relatives. We are taking advantage in the family from the father, from the mother, from the elderly brother, from the servant.



So in this way, you are all indebted. You cannot take any service from anyone without being indebted. You cannot take. You must be... So we are becoming entangled, complicated with indebtedness. That is called karma. If you don't pay bill, then you have to suffer. Then you have to suffer because you are taking simply. These rascals, they do not know. They are so much ungrateful. They are taking milk from the cows, and when the milk is no more supplied, "All right, send it to the slaughterhouse." Once he has taken milk, he's indebted; again, it is being killed by him. So how much he has become entangled in his karma he does not know. Mūḍha. Duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ.

Those who are addicted to commit sins, they are all mūḍhas. They do not know. So therefore, because they are mūḍhas and because they are duṣkṛtina, they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. The mūḍhas and the duṣkṛtinas, sinful men, they cannot understand. Therefore you'll find generally those who are too much lowborn, without any knowledge, without any pious activities, they are all atheist, godless. They cannot understand. How they will understand? Because they are mūḍhas, narādhama. Narādhama means this life, human life, is an opportunity to understand how things are going on. But they do not take advantage. Narādhama, lowest of the mankind. Then you go to the learned, learned, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ, the so-called learned B.A.C., D.H.C., P.H.C., what is their learning? Simply the same thing. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna: How to eat, how to sleep. Their learning, their education, is meant for how to eat, how to sleep. That's all. So that is also dog's business. Māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Real knowledge is, education is, how things are going on within this nature. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. So they are not interested in these things. Education means "How to get one service so that I can get salary and I may live very comfortably and my wife, my children..." The same thing, dog's business. Dog is also interested only for eating, for having sex with another female dog, and get every six months half a dozen kitties(?). Like that. This is not... Therefore, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ. Even they are so-called educated, their real knowledge is taken away. Real knowledge is to inquire about the Absolute Truth, athāto brahma jijñāsā. So in this way we are going on.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja said, bāla-dvija. He says bāla-dvija-suhṛn-mitra. We should not go against them. Bāla, yena bāla na partita(?). Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that, mātā śatru pitā vairī yena bāla na partita.(?) The mother is enemy and the father is enemy who does not take care of the children, how to educate them how to become God conscious, how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. He's enemy. So any father and mother who has not given education for spiritual advancement of life, he's enemy, he's not father and mother. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja saw, himself, the father being killed. Why? Because he was against Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He was against Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Father being killed. Similarly, suhṛt mitra. Just like Vibhīṣaṇa. Vibhīṣaṇa is Rāvaṇa's brother. But he complicated himself in the plan how Rāvaṇa should be killed with Rāmacandra. Rāmacandra... He made a..., that "This, my brother, should be killed." Suhṛt mitra.

So there are many instances. Bali Mahārāja. Bali Mahārāja he rejected his spiritual master: "Oh, you are nonsense. You cannot become my spiritual master." Because why? That Śukrācārya, when Bali Mahārāja was going to promise, so Śukrācārya advised, "Don't promise anything. He is Viṣṇu. He has come as dwarf to take everything from you." Then Bali Mahārāja found that "This is a foolish man." This Śukrācārya, Śukrācārya means jāta-gosāi, by semina they become ācārya. The semina. That is the, in India, guru-vaṁśa. Guru-vaṁśa, guru means spiritual master. The spiritual master, vaṁśa. That is disciplic succession. Evaṁ paramparā, that is guru-vaṁśa, not by semina. That is going on. The Śukrācārya: "This is my guru's family." Guru's family... "He has begotten a child, so something must be given. His credit is he's begotten child. Therefore something must be given." So this is going on, Śukrācārya. So Śukrācārya was rejected by Bali Mahārāja, Śukrācārya. "No, this family guru or the jāta-gosāi, no." Real guru. So why rejected? When Śukrācārya was thinking that "This man Bali is going to give everything to Viṣṇu. Here is Vāmana. Then how I shall live? Because I get something from this man, and I live. So if he's going to give everything to Viṣṇu, then what is our position? We shall starve." That is their business only, how to exploit the disciple and take money from him and fill up the belly. That is Śukrācārya's business. Therefore Bali Mahārāja rejected, "No, no, I don't want you." So there are many instances. Svajana-tyāga. The gopīs, when they were going to Kṛṣṇa, they, all the svajana, their brother, the husband, their sons and everyone forbade, "Oh, where you are going, where you are going?" Or the yājñika brāhmaṇas' patnī, they also did not care for Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore the conclusion is that you can be freed from the debts of devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ nāyam ṛṇī na kiṅkaraḥ [SB 11.5.41]. Who? Sarvātmanā ye śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam. One who has taken full shelter of Kṛṣṇa, sarvātmanā, without any reservation, he's no more ṛṇī. He's no more. He's fully liquidated. How? Kṛṣṇa says,

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



"If you think that without liquidating the debts of so many persons, devatā, ṛṣi, bhūta, āpta, general people, if you think by simply surrendering to Me you will be liable to punishment for not paying bills to so many persons," Kṛṣṇa assures, mā śucaḥ: "don't bother, I'll give you protection."



So from the material point of view, everyone must be prepared to pay, to take protection. But does it mean that if one becomes devotee he becomes irresponsible? No. These things automatically come. Just like we are giving protection to the children. So many children are here. Why? What is the aim? The aim is that we want to see that everyone becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. That automatically comes, to take care of the children, to give them education, to give them food, to give them shelter. That is real protection. And simply to give them... Just like in Western countries they feed the children with powdered flesh, mixed with water, boiled, and push with the spoon, and... They become fatty, of course. But that is not really maintaining the children, that is not really. Śāstra says that unless you save him from the imminent danger of death, then there is no protection. What is this protection? Suppose if you make your child very fatty. Does it mean because he's fat, he is very strong, therefore he'll not die? He'll die. Where is your protection from the death? Therefore śāstra says, pitā na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt, na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum. One should not become father or mother... That is real contraceptive method. If one is Kṛṣṇa conscious, then he knows that "What is the use of producing some children like cats and dogs? What is the use? If I produce any children, then they must be Kṛṣṇa conscious so that this will be their last birth." Because if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious then there is no more birth. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. You send to Kṛṣṇa, back to home-that is required. Father, mother, guardian's duty is to educate the wards, subordinates, in such a way that he becomes fully Kṛṣṇa conscious and so that he can be saved from this repetition of birth and death.

So this is... First duty is to give protection to the bāla-dvija. But Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is thinking that he has killed so many boys. The other party, there were grandson of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, sons... Brother's son or own son, the same thing. The big family. So he has killed so many bālas. And dvija, Droṇācārya was a brāhmaṇa. He also killed him in the battle. Bāla-dvija, and suhṛt, Karṇa was friend, or there were many other friends who joined. So he has killed suhṛt mitra, friend. And pitṛn, just like grandfather or Droṇācārya, Kṛpācārya, they were killed. They were just like father's age, grandfather's age, pitṛn. Gurūn: Droṇācārya was guru, spiritual master, teacher in military science. Druhaḥ. So he was thinking like that. But the real point he was missing, that whatever he has done, it has been done under the instruction of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, for ordinary men this is a great sin. For sense gratification, if we kill so many persons, we are liable. But so far the Pāṇḍavas are concerned, they did not do it for their sense gratification. They did it for Kṛṣṇa. Therefore whatever they had done, that was right. Otherwise, ordinarily, one becomes responsible both ways.

Just like this bali-dāna. Bali-dāna, before the goddess Kālī, if it is done properly, then the goat which is sacrificed before the goddess Kālī, it gets immediately a human body which would have taken so many years, millions of years to come to the, but because it is being sacrificed, that is the Vedic mantra. Therefore, but this man who is killing, he has to become goat to be sacrificed by this goat having taken birth as human being. Therefore it is called karma-bandha. Yajñārthe karmaṇaḥ anyatra karma-bandhanaḥ. So there are rules and regulations. So his only aim is to eat some meat. So he can take this risk. You eat meat, but give the, what is called, facility (to) the animals to become human being immediately after death. That facility is given to (indistinct), so that he can also take advantage of... Māṁsa. Sa māṁ khadati iti māṁsaḥ. So these things are there. Na me syān nirayān mokṣaḥ. There was a king who killed so many animals for sacrifice. So when he was entering heaven... I forgot the name, famous king. So many souls were ready for killing him, because he killed so many animals. So therefore it is said, ordinarily, nirayān mokṣaḥ. We have to take responsibility for all this, nirayān mokṣaḥ. Why? Hy api varṣāyutāyutaiḥ. Ayuta, ten hundred thousand million.

So this is karma-cakra. We are getting some opportunity and making our next life. In this way it is called karma-cakra. Yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti [Bs. 5.54]. Everyone is enjoying the result of his past karma. Who? Now, from, beginning from that King Indra, the heavenly king, very powerful, exalted position. That Indra, and there is an insect which is called indra-gopa. Yas tv indra... Indra-gopam mahā-indra. Beginning from this insect known as indra and up to that Indra, everyone is bound up by his karma-phala. That is called destiny. Everyone is bound up.

yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.54]



Those who have taken, fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, bhakti-bhājām, karmāṇi nirdahati, their karma, nirdahati, means as far as possible the result is diminished or practically made nil. Even it is there, karma-phala, very slight. Just like the example is just like one is condemned to be murdered by somebody by cutting his head, but by Kṛṣṇa's grace he may be saved from cutting the head. Suppose there is some accident by knife in the hand. They are calculated like that. And generally, a devotee is completely relieved from all karma-phala. So ordinarily, we are indebted to so many persons, not only bāla, dvija, gopa, but ṛṣi, and the devatās. We have to take care of it. But if we become fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, sarvātmanā ye śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ gato mukundam. Not any other demigods. Mukundam. Mukundam means... Muk means liberation. So one who gives liberation. Gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam. So one who takes full shelter of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, then He's freed from all this indebtedness to so many persons.



So this is our duty, to surrender fully to Kṛṣṇa and be saved from the reaction of so many sinful activities in our past life.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730512SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.50

-

Los Angeles, May 12, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



naino rājñaḥ prajā-bhartur

dharma-yuddhe vadho dviṣām

iti me na tu bodhāya

kalpate śāsanaṁ vacaḥ

[SB 1.8.50]



Translation: "There is no sin for a king who kills for the right cause, who is engaged in maintaining his citizens. But this injunction is not applicable to me."



Prabhupāda: Explain.



Pradyumna: Nama om... (recites praṇāma mantras) The first part of this verse, the first half of this verse, naino rājñaḥ prajā-bhartur dharma-yuddhe vadho dviṣām iti, this is a statement or an injunction of śāstra, that for the killing, or the vadha, dviṣām, of the enemies, dharma-yuddhe, in religious fight, rājñaḥ prajā-bhartur, of a king who is maintaining his citizens He has to maintain his citizens. So if there is some danger, then he has to eliminate the enemy.



Prabhupāda: What is religious fight? Religious fight means you have got right to kill your aggressor. If somebody takes your property, if somebody sets fire in your house, if somebody kidnaps your wife, or somebody is trying to kill you, they are called aggressor. So aggressor should be killed immediately. It is not that somebody has become an aggressor, and if I say, "Now I have become a Vaiṣṇava, I'll not be violent. I shall tolerate. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught us to be tolerant like the tree or the grass. So I shall become tolerant. Let him do." Just like Gandhi used to say. Somebody questioned him that "If somebody comes and violates the chastity of your daughter in your presence, what will you do?" He said, "I shall remain nonviolent." But that is not śāstric injunction. This is foolishness.



If somebody is aggressor, he must be killed immediately. Dharma-yuddha. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is thinking that "Although there was fight, the fight was between our own men, my brother, my nephews, my grandfather. So they are family members. I have killed them for my kingdom." He is thinking in that way. He is a pious man. Violence is required. We don't say nonviolence. Just as Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He gave us the instruction, tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā: "One should be tolerant, forbearing like the tree, like the grass." Amāninā mānadena: "One should give respect to others. In this way one should chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." Because in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, there will be so many aggressors. The nature is so cruel. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, a five-years-old boy. His only fault was that he was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, and the father was aggressor, giving him trouble so many ways. So we must be prepared.

Therefore as there is danger... Suppose Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught us that "Be tolerant," but not that where violence is required we should be tolerant. No. Just like while Nityānanda Prabhu was injured by Jagāi and Mādhāi, He wanted to immediately kill him. Similarly, nonviolence does not mean that in right causes also you will remain nonviolent. No. You do not attack anybody unnecessarily. You do not kill unnecessarily animal even, not even an ant. You should be nonviolent by your nature. But when there is aggression, there are enemies, the śāstra says, dharma-yuddha. That is dharma-yuddha.

So prajā-bhartur dharma-yuddhe vadho dviṣām. Dviṣām, envious. So they must be killed. But Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was thinking in terms of fight between the family: their friends, their nephews, their grandfather. So he was thinking himself as culprit. But in dharma-yuddha... The Pāṇḍavas, they tried to settle the issue. Actually, the kingdom belonged to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. It was inheritance from his father, Pāṇḍu. But some way or other, they were cheated by the Kurus. They were sent to the forest. In the meantime they grabbed everything. And when they came back, so asked, "Give us some..., our ruling power,"so they would not give. "No. Without fight, we shall not give." So the Pāṇḍavas, even Kṛṣṇa tried their best to settle up the issue, but there was no settlement. So at that time, war was declared. That is dharma-yuddha. They tried to settle up the fight, but it was not possible. When it is not possible, then the last resort is to take to fighting. That is dharma-yuddha.

The battlefield... It is therefore called dharma-kṣetra. Dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre [Bg. 1.1]. That fight was right. And especially when Kṛṣṇa was present, it is already dharma-kṣetra. Wherever... Just like this is temple. Similar houses are there, many. Why it is temple? Because Kṛṣṇa is there. Therefore it is called dharma-kṣetra, temple. What is the difference between temple? In other houses there may be big hall like this. There may be many men eating, sleeping. That is not temple. Where actually God is there, that is called temple. Similarly, although battle of Kurukṣetra was a fighting place, because Kṛṣṇa was there, therefore it is dharma-kṣetra. Wherever Kṛṣṇa is there, that is dharma-kṣetra. Tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ. So those who are bhaktas, they can make every place a pilgrimage, because they can sing the glories of the Lord and they can bring the Lord in that place. So it doesn't matter whether if he is here or there, in America or India. Wherever Kṛṣṇa is there, that is dharma-kṣetra. Dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ [Bg. 1.1].

So that fight was quite sanctioned by the śāstra. It is not the Pāṇḍavas did wrong, no. They did right thing. But Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, being too cautious, too religious, he is thinking that "I did not carry out the injunction of the śāstra that fighting is meant for the enemies, not for the friends. So I have fought with my friends, with my relatives, with my brothers. Therefore I am most abominable." That is the nature of the Vaiṣṇava. They always think of themselves as very humble, meek. That is the tṛṇād api... Personally, one should remain very humble and meek, but that does not mean that when there is... For a kṣatriya, to kill the enemies, that is dharma-yuddha. That is religious. Therefore there was section-kṣatriya section, the brāhmaṇa section, the vaiśya section-that everyone is engaged in his own occupational duty. So other section, brāhmaṇa, vaiśya, śūdras, if they are in difficulty, they should lodge complaint to the king. Just like in these days also, suppose one is wrong-doer. He has done wrong to me. I cannot take directly to punish him. No. That you cannot do. You have to lodge the complaint to the government agent, and if required, government can kill him, sanction, "Kill this man. He is a murderer." So the sanction should come from there. Similarly, these divisions, very scientific. Killing business is for the kṣatriya, not for the brāhmaṇas. Kṣatriya, he can kill; there is no sin for him. The brāhmaṇas are not going to kill.

So this system-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra-very scientific system. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. But now everything is lost. But to make people happy, the Vedic culture is the most perfect. The kṣatriyas are meant for fighting. Kṣatriyas are meant for ruling, punishing. These are meant for the kṣatriyas. They are exacting taxes. That is their means of livelihood. The government can levy tax for expenditure. You cannot levy tax. So there are living means of everyone. For brāhmaṇa, the living means: paṭhana pāṭhana yajana yājana dāna pratigraha. Brāhmaṇa is meant for teaching others and become himself a learned scholar. That is brāhmaṇa business. Paṭhana pāṭhana yajana yājana. He should be a great worshiper of Viṣṇu, and he should teach others also. Just like we are not only worshiping Kṛṣṇa in our temple, but we are making propaganda. This is brāhmaṇa's business. But if the government calls all our students to the draft board, "Come on, fight," that is nonsense. Of course, they have got clauses not to disturb the ministerial class. That exception is there. Many of our students was excused from being called by the draft board on the ground that they have adopted the religious, ministerial order. That rule is prevalent everywhere, at all times.

So at the present moment the society is chaos because there is no proper training for the particular class of man. A brāhmaṇa should be trained up, a kṣatriya should be trained up, a vaiśya should be trained up, a śūdra should be trained up, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13], according to quality. Why Vedic culture has failed in India, it is simply remaining in name? Because everyone claims to become brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, by birth only, no qualification. The brāhmaṇa has no qualification of a brāhmaṇa, and because he is born of a brāhmaṇa father or brāhmaṇa family he is claiming, "I am brāhmaṇa." This is not śāstra's sanction.

So just see, here is a kṣatriya, ideal kṣatriya, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. How he is lamenting. He has done right thing; still, he is conscious that he has killed his family members, bandhu. Bandhu bandhaya, relatives. Then? Go on. Hm? Yes. What is the time? Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. All right, chant more. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730513SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.51

-

Los Angeles, May 13, 1973





Jagadīśa: (translation) "I have killed many friends of women, and I have thus caused enmity to such an extent that it is not possible to undo it by material welfare work." [SB 1.8.51]



Prabhupāda: So here is a special reference to the woman, strīṇām. Previously there was reference bāla-dvija. Eh? Previous verse? Bāla-dvija-suhṛn-mitra-pitṛ-bhrātṛ-guru-druhaḥ. Bāla. Bāla means children. Dvija. Dvija means brāhmaṇa or Vaiṣṇava, who are fully engaged in the matter of cultivating spiritual knowledge. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. One who knows what is Absolute Truth, Brahman.



So children, brāhmaṇa, and here it is said strī, woman. According to Vedic politics, the children and brāhmaṇa, old men and woman, they have no fault. They are out of all laws of the state. Their fault will never be taken as seriously. They are innocent. They require protection. Now the agitation is that woman should have equal rights with man. So that is not Vedic idea. Vedic idea is that woman should be always protected. She is not independent. Just like child. All these children, their mother is always attentive. Child is going here; she is taking care. So that dependence is required. If the child says, "I am independent," that is not for his profit. The child must be taken care of. That is good. Similarly, woman also. Just like old man like us, I am always taken care of. Similarly, a brāhmaṇa also should be taken care of, first consideration. First protection, brāhmaṇa, saintly person. That is civilization. That is human society. Not that the children, women and the brāhmaṇas should be treated like cats and dogs. No, that is not civilization.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is very much repentant: "I have killed so many men, and they are, some of them are father, some of them are brother, some of them are sons, some of them are husbands of the women. And because I have killed them, now this woman class, they have become friendless." So he is... Just see how much he is aggrieved, thinking of the condition of the woman. And people accuse that India, woman are considered just like slaves. Just see. The king is thinking of woman so seriously, and is it a fact that in India woman is taken as slaves? Who cares for the slaves? So much anxiety. And that is king. Yes. A king shall give protection to everyone, especially those who are helpless.

So woman is protected in childhood by the father, and when she is grown-up girl, youth, although the father is ready to give her protection in every respect, but she has developed by that time sex desires. Under the circumstances, it is the duty of the father to hand over the girl to a nice young boy to take her protection. This is marriage. Kanyā-dāna. According to Vedic system, kanyā, means daughter, is given in charity. To find out a suitable... Practically, I'll say, in our childhood age, my sisters were married between nine to twelve years. My eldest sister was married when she was nine years old, before my birth. She is the eldest. And my second sister was married at the age of twelve, twelve years. And my third sister was married at the age of 11 years. So by the (indistinct) 12 years, the marriage must be finished. That was the duty of the father. I remember, because my second sister was going twelve years, my mother said to my father that "I shall go to the river and commit suicide. The daughter is not married." (laughter) You see. The father was very sorry, "Yes, I am trying. What can I do?" (laughter) And then next generation, when my... I was also married man, you know. I was married when my wife was only eleven years old. And at the age of fourteen years she gave birth to first child. And next generation, when my eldest daughter was married at the age of sixteen years-it is little increased-but I was also very much upset that the daughter is sixteen years old.

But now things have changed. Nobody cares whether the daughter is married or not. But that is not good. Another difficulty is that everywhere, all over the world, the female population is greater than, on the average, than male population. So if each and every woman has to be married, then there is no sufficient number of male population. Therefore, according to Vedic rituals, those who are higher caste, just like the kṣatriyas or the brāhmaṇas, especially, others also, polygamy is allowed. Polygamy is allowed. Just like our most exalted personality, Kṛṣṇa, He has married sixteen thousand wives. He is God. (laughter) Unless you have got so many wives, how you can be God? Not that sixteen thousand wives, one wife is to be seen one day, so that the turn will come after sixteen thousand days. No. That is God. He expanded Himself into sixteen thousand forms also, so that every wife was happy to live with the husband. And for Kṛṣṇa, why sixteen thousand? If He marries sixteen millions, still, it is not sufficient. Because in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: [Bg. 18.61] "The Supreme Lord is situated in the heart of all living entities." So all living entities, if Kṛṣṇa can expand Himself to live in the heart of all living entities, and from the heart He comes out to become some woman's husband, is it very difficult for Kṛṣṇa? That is not difficult.

Anyway, the point is that Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, he, how responsible king, just think over. Arjuna was also thinking before fighting. He was arguing with Kṛṣṇa that "If I kill my brothers, all the my sister-in-laws, they'll be widow." And there was no such thing as widow-marriage in India. No. No widow can marry. Why? Because the woman population is greater than the man. If widow again marries, then the unmarried girl does not get chance to have another husband. Therefore there was no widow-marriage. Widow-marriage was especially allowed only when the girl did not see her husband at any time or she had no children. Formerly, in our days, younger days, although the girl was married at an early age, she was not allowed to see her husband unless she is grown-up fully. Unless she has attained puberty, she is not... She lives with her parents. But she knows that "I have got my husband." This consciousness is a great pleasure for a women psychologically, that "I have got husband." A very nice system. And when the girl grows up, puberty, then again another ceremony is taken. That is almost like second marriage. The girl goes to her husband, to live with her husband. This was the system.

So women were taken so much care by the Vedic civilization. Still they are taken. It is the duty of the father... Until she is married, it is the duty of the father to give her all protection. Therefore the father wants to get her married, to get relief from the responsibility. He has a great responsibility. It is called kanyā-dāya. Actually the word is called kanyā-dāya. Putra-ṛṇa. Ṛṇa means debt. If you are debtor to somebody you may not pay it, saying, "Sir, I have no money. Whatever you like, you can do." But dāya means a great burden. It must be get relieved of. Dāya means a great responsibility. Dāya. Dāya-bhāk. Just like a son inherits the property of the father... It is called dāya-bhāk, law. Similarly, this is the, I mean to say, most obligatory duty of the father, to get the daughter married. And then it is the duty of the husband next. Just like we get... When we perform marriage ceremony in our society, we get the husband promise that he takes charge of the girl for life. And the girl agrees to serve the boy for life. There is no question of divorce.

So the father hands over the charge to a nice boy. Never mind he is rich or no. That doesn't matter. He must be a responsible boy, who knows his responsibility. Not that "Today I marry, and tomorrow I go away. That's all." Not like that. Still you will find in India, even the poorest man, living with husband and wife very happily. Still you will find. I have seen (in) Ahmedabad. One day I saw in the street one husband and wife pulling on a ṭhelā, hand-cart, with great load, and the small child is on the load. That means their child. They are laborer class. But ordinary laborer class, poor man, but they are living husband and wife and children happily. Still.

So marriage is very compulsory in Vedic system because who is to take charge of the woman? They require protection. The father must take charge naturally, or the husband. And when she is old... Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu was taking charge of His widow mother. So when He took sannyāsa, so mother became very much upset: "Oh, that I have no husband, and this boy is going to take sannyāsa." Naturally. But that is a different case. For Kṛṣṇa's sake, we can forsake our obligatory duties. For Kṛṣṇa's sake. In the śāstra it is said that one who has fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he has no more any material duty. Neither he has got any obligation that he must perform. But so long he is not fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, he has to execute each and every duty as obligatory.

So the point is that Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, how much responsible king he was, that for ordinary woman, the soldiers... Take for... Soldiers or officers, commander-in-chief, they all died. Now he is thinking of their welfare activities, how to give protection to these woman. Just imagine how much responsible king. And he is thinking in this way, that "The sinful activity which I have done in this connection by killing their husbands or sons or father, even if I give some donation as welfare..." Just like in your country there is welfare department. All these helpless girls are given some donation. He says, "That is not sufficient. That... By that way, I cannot compensate what harm I have done to them." That is... That is his con... "Even if I give some money, donation, they'll not be happy, because they have lost their protection." This is called responsible king. How much they are thinking. And similarly he was thinking for the children.

Naturally... I have sometimes told you that we have got one Godbrother, German. He said that in the last war, in the first war, which started in 1914, so all the men were killed everywhere. And the women, they went to the church, either as wife or as sister or as daughter or as mother. Naturally, they prayed for their relatives to come back. But who is coming back? They were all dead. So they became atheist, that "There is no God." Because they prayed for their relatives to come back... So that is our position. We want to worship God if He becomes my order-supplier. "I will order and He will supply. Otherwise there is no God. I don't care for this nonsense God. He must satisfy my senses. I want this, and You must satisfy." Just like the Communists, they ask people in general to go to the church, and they say, "Now pray." So the Christian prayer, "O God, give us our daily bread." So when they come out, the Communist leaders, they ask, "Have you got bread?" "No, sir." "You ask us." They ask, "O my Communist friend, give me the bread." "Take bread, as many as you like."

So common men, they think that bread is coming from these rascals. But actually, bread is coming from God. So because God could not supply the bread in the church, they become Communists. This is the position. They take God as some solace, what is called, opium? Opiate. Yes. When there is no other source... And the whole over the world, they do not know, actually, what is God, what is our relationship with, what is God's function. That you will find only in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That we can say very proudly. What is God, what is the philosophy, what He is doing, what is His name, what is His address, what is His father's name-we know everything. (laughter) That is our position.

So a king must be very responsible for the citizens how they are happy. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was that type of king. Every king was like that. It was the duty of the king to see. You have read already that during Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja's time there was no excessive heat or excessive cold, neither there was disease in the country. Because the king was so perfect, so pious, so God-conscious, that these things would not disturb. And the citizens, also, would abide by the orders of the king. So everything was very peaceful. Very peaceful. So without king, not like the present government officers, all rogues and simply take taxes and let the citizens go to hell. There is no protection for anyone, either for the children, either for the brāhmaṇas or for the women. No protection. "You go to hell. If you like, we can give you some contribution. That's all." No. The king must be so responsible that he should see to the comfort of the citizens, especially the brāhmaṇas, the children and the women. This was the duty of the king.

Go on reading. Gṛhamedhī, the purport, gṛhamedhī.

Pradyumna: "The gṛhamedhīs are those whose only business is to perform welfare work for the sake of material prosperity. Such material prosperity is sometimes hampered by sinful activities, and the materialist is sure to commit sins even unintentionally in the course of discharging material duties. To get relief from such sinful reactions, the Vedas prescribe several kinds of sacrifices. It is said in the Vedas that by performing the aśvamedha-yajña, or horse sacrifice, one can get relief from even brahma-hatyā, the killing of a brāhmaṇa. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja performed this aśvamedha-yajña, but he thinks that even by performing such yajñas it is not possible to get relief from the great sins committed."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Suppose you have done something wrong. So the court fines you, "Oh, you have done this wrong." Just like one man knocked some of our student, and he died, and then he was fined twenty thousand dollars, like that. So everyone knows that "If I knock somebody or kill somebody, there is motor accident, there will be so much trouble." And when there is trouble, actually, they go and give some fine. But the accident is going on. Nobody is careful. So that is the position. Unless one is careful to his sense that "Why should I drive so fiercely or without any care that others may be injured, my car will be injured? Why shall I created this trouble? Let me drive the car very conscientiously..." So that is required. Simply atonement, or giving fine for some misdeed, that is not sufficient. One should be awakened to his knowledge about his responsibility.



So this gṛhamedhī... There are two words: gṛhamedhī and gṛhastha. I have explained many times. Gṛhamedhī has no philosophy. He is like cats and dog. Every animal has also family, wife, children. So those who have no responsibility in life, no Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they are called gṛhamedhīs, and those who live with family, wife and children, but have got this sense of responsibility, that "I am meant for developing my dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness," they are called gṛhasthas. So there is two words. So don't become gṛhamedhīs, simply having a wife and few children. That, cats and dogs they have also got. That is not required. You find inconvenience to live alone as brahmacārī-all right, you take to a wife. Live with wife. Live responsibly. Develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is gṛhastha. Not that gṛhastha like cats and dogs.

Thank you very much. (end)



730514SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.8.52

-

Los Angeles, May 14, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



yathā paṅkena paṅkāmbhaḥ

surayā vā surākṛtam

bhūta-hatyāṁ tathaivaikāṁ

na yajñair mārṣṭum arhati

[SB 1.8.52]



Translation: "As it is not possible to filter muddy water through mud, or purify a wine-stained pot with wine, it is not possible to counteract the killing of men by sacrificing animals."



Prabhupāda: So here one of the most important points is surākṛtaṁ bhūta-hatyām. Surākṛtam means things becoming impure simply by touching liquor. Liquor is so impure. Just like you have got a very big pot of milk, but if you put one drop of wine in it, it becomes immediately impure. You can analyze chemically-immediately impure. That surā, liquor, has become our daily affair. We are so impure. And bhūta-hatyā, and killing of animals. The modern civilization means large-scale arrangement for killing animals and large-scale arrangement for distilling liquor, especially in the Western countries. And India is also now following. So this is the position of the world. What is being condemned by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, that, those items at the present moment are being encouraged by the government. This is the difference between this government and Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's government. You can just imagine.



So the example is very nice. Yathā paṅkena paṅkāmbhaḥ. Muddy water, if you bring muddy water, if you want to cleanse it, precipitate, then you cannot add another lump of mud in it. No. You have to add something chemical. Just like alum. In muddy water if you put little alum chemical... Am I right, chemist?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes.



Prabhupāda: So immediately there will be precipitation and all the muddy things will be collected, and the water will be clear, original. So we are discussing about the muddy atmosphere. Things are there, sinful, muddy. But there is process also, how to counteract it. The process is also prescribed there. So at the present moment the whole world is muddy, but you cannot clear this muddy situation by adding more mud. They are trying to do that. They are not trying. The, there is Vedic method also, like that, that if you have done something wrong, you do another wrong thing. That is called prāyaścitta. Prāyaścitta. But Bhāgavata does not accept this kind of prāyaścitta. Prāyaścittaṁ vimarśanam. By this kind of reformation... Suppose you have committed theft. This is sinful activities. And you are put into the jail for six months. That does not mean that you become an honest man. That does not mean. So it is something like that. To clear the muddy water, put another lump of mud on it. This will not help. Something effective must be brought in.



That effective thing is kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā, only this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. The whole world is muddy. It is impure, full of sinful activities. So if you want to clear the situation of the modern world, then this is the only remedy:

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



There is no other way. And actually, we are seeing practically how by chanting this holy name of the Lord, Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, how nasty people are becoming purified, Vaiṣṇava, brāhmaṇa. Actually nasty. Now, here it is said that surākṛtam, a drop of wine makes the whole thing impure. And liquor drinking is our daily business. So the example is given that suppose here is one drop of wine, and the place has become impure. So if you bring another gallon of wine and just sweep over it, mop it with wine, that is not the process. You have to bring pure water and wash with it. Then it will purify. You cannot say that "Wine is also liquid. Why not cleanse it here by wine?" No.



So the Vedic conception is completely different. The... According to modern science, they put things into alcohol to sterilize. Is it not?

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Put alcohol in things.



Prabhupāda: Yes. But it becomes more impure. Anything you put into alcohol, that becomes more impure, according to this. So there are so many things. Our position jīva, is living entity, is pure by nature because it is part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa. So we have accumulated so much, so many material things by which we have become impure. And yajñaiḥ. This bhūta-hatyā. Bhūta-hatyā is also recognized here as sinful activities. As wine is sinful or impure-if not sinful, it is impure-bhūta-hatyā, killing of animal, is also sinful activities. So you cannot counteract by performing yajña, because in the yajña there is also another bhūta-hatyā.



So even there is no bhūta-hatyā... That is called pañca-sūnā-yajña, five kinds of imperceptible sinful activities. Just like when we are walking on the street, there are many ants and germs, they are being killed. I do not know, I do not wish to kill, but they are being killed. When you are igniting fire, in the fireplace, there are so many small ants. So as soon as you ignite, all those small ants-you cannot see-they die. Similarly, when you keep water, there are so many microbes and other living entities. So as you press on it, they die. Similarly, pestle and mortar. In India the system, they don't purchase...Those who are rigid family, they do not purchase these powdered spices. No. They bring whole spices and they smash it with mortar and pestle. That is very nice. So doing that smashing work, you kill so many animals. In breathing, you kill so many animals. In drinking water, you kill so many animals. This is bhūta-hatyā. You are killing. This is not intentional. You do not know. Therefore in a Vedic system there is prescription, pañca-sūnā-yajña. Pañca means five, and sūnā means bhūta-hatyā, or killing animals, sūnā. Striya-sūnā-pāna-dyūta [SB 1.17.38]. Sūnā. Sūnā means violence. So we prohibit these four kinds of sinful life: killing of animals and illicit sex... Striya, sūnā, and... Pañca-sūnā. Yes... Striya-sūnā-pāna. Pāna means intoxicants, and dyūta means gambling. So these are four kinds of sinful activities. So out of that, sūnā is one. That is also divided in many divisions, at least five. Willingly, we are not going to kill anybody, but unwillingly... Therefore there is pañca-sūnā-yajña. You have to perform yajña every day to counteract the sinful reaction of your imperceptible killings of animals. That's it. This is Vedic life.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja says that "It is not possible to counteract." But indirectly, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja says, that if you... He says simply the negative side, but the positive side is, in this age, simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, you become purified. That is the recommendation by Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. There are two kinds of, what is called, atonement. One atonement, by the prescribed method. You have done... Just like I'll give you common example. Just like you have committed theft. One atonement is that you go to the jail and live there for some time. This is atonement. If you have committed a murder, then you also be hanged. These are the laws. When the king orders somebody to be hanged on account of his committing murder, the king is not sinful. King is helpful. King is helping that rascal to atone his murdering activities. Otherwise, if he is not hanged, then next life, next time, he will be put into difficulty. Next time he will have to become animal. He will be slaughtered. These laws they do not know. Why these animals are being slaughtered? There is some nature's law. They were murderer or slaughterer in their past life as human being. Now they have assumed, they have accepted a body to be slaughtered by the laws of nature. When an animal is slaughtered in sacrifice, there is mantra. The mantra is that... The animal slaughter in sacrifice is recommended for the animal-eaters, not for all. Those who are... To restrict.

In the Vedas there is recommendation that animals can be sacrificed in yajña. So that is also another meaning. The verse is loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā. In this material world every living entity has got natural propensity for sex life, meat-eating and intoxication. There is already propensities. You haven't got to teach. Nobody teaches in the school how to enjoy sex life. Everyone knows. So these things are natural. Then why it has been taken by the Vedas? This should be the question, that "Without marriage, sex life is going on. Why this show of marriage?" People may question this. But there is need. Because Vedas have taken this marriage. Marriage is Vedic. So why Vedas have taken this marriage? No, to restrict it. Without marriage, sex life (is) unrestricted. And as soon as it comes to the Vedic principles, it becomes restricted. So the idea is to restrict. People are accustomed to this habit, and on account of this habit, they gradually become implicated with the laws of material nature. Therefore there is some restriction. Just like anyone can distill liquor at home. It is not very difficult thing. Anyone can do it. In India they do it. It is called dheno-mada. Dheno-mada means... Mada means liquor, and dheno means from rice. Just like we cook rice, so you cook rice and keep it in water for a few days or for a month, it becomes liquor. It becomes liquor. So why government has restricted, "No, you cannot manufacture liquor; you have to purchase from the licensed shop." Why? That is restriction. If the government would have allowed that "You can distill liquor and drink it," then there was no limit. Everyone would have. There is no restriction.

So restriction is required. Why? It is because it is bad. Nobody restricts that "You don't manufacture cāpāṭi." No. Because it is not bad thing. There is no such law, that "You don't manufacture nice foodstuff." No. That is very good. But when it is bad, then there is restriction. Therefore there is restriction of sex life, there is restriction of drinking wine, there is restriction of meat-eating, and there is restriction of gambling. Because these things are bad. You cannot become good by indulging in bad things. That is not possible. The same thing. Just like you cannot clear muddy water by putting another mud. That is not possible.

So the human life is meant for purification. Sattva-śuddhi. In the Bhagavad-gītā there is, abhayam... What is that? Can anyone... Abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ. Sattva-saṁśuddhi, it is very important thing. Sattva means my existence. I am eternal. So I am existing, but I am suffering. I am suffering. Just like I have got now cold affection (infection). This is not my natural state, but I have been affected by chilly cold or something like that. Therefore I am suffering. So it is my duty to cure it, to take some medicine, to go to the physician. That is called sattva-saṁśuddhi, purifying your existence. By nature, by constitutional position, every living entity is as pure as God. But God does not become impure. We become impure. Therefore we are suffering. That is the... So this impurity can be rectified in this life, this human form of life. Therefore human form of life is meant for purification. Therefore so many scriptures are there, so many teachers are there, so many rules and regulations are there. They are not meant for the animals, because they cannot be purified. They must have to come to this position by evolution of human being. Then there is chance of purification.

Therefore in this human life, if we do not purify our existence, then we go on with this impure existence. Impure existence means transmigration of the soul from one body to another, and become subjected to birth, death, old age and disease. This is impurification. So they do not know that "Death is not my obligation. Because I am impure, therefore I am dying. Birth is not my obligation. Because I am impure, therefore I am taking birth." Janma-mṛtyu... Four things: janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. Janma, birth, is due to my impure consciousness. Therefore if we purify our consciousness by advancing, by developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then we become pure. This is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, cleansing the heart. And all these purificatory methods, they are based on cleansing the heart. If I think myself that "I am something of this material product..." The scientists, they say that "I am these material things." They do not understand what is spiritual identity. And I do, I act, according to that material conception, that is impurity of my consciousness. First thing is to understand that "I am not this material body."

Therefore, spiritual education begins from this body. As Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Asmin dehe, in this body there is the spiritual spark who is the proprietor of the body. This is the beginning of spiritual education. What is, the scientists cannot imagine, or they have no idea, from there we begin our education in spiritual life, beyond their jurisdiction, beyond the jurisdiction of the scientists. And how they can understand this movement? It is beyond their jurisdiction. When they will receive one hundred or one thousands of Nobel Prize, at that time they may be able to understand that where Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement begins. They do not know even where the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement begins. Therefore, generally people cannot understand what is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. They think it is some religious sentiment. Like so many other religions, it is like that. No. It is most the scientific movement, purifying the existence of the living being so that he can eternally, blissfully live, with complete knowledge. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. To purify. Yena śuddhyet sattvam. And for such... Just like for being cured from your attack of cold and cough, you take so many medicine, go to so many physician, you spend some money. Why? You want to be cured. Similarly, if you understand that "This is my disease, repetition of birth, death, old age and disease," so you'll have to sacrifice. Just like you are sacrificing money for being cured from the diseased condition, similarly, śāstra says that this human life is meant for tapasya, tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. This human life is meant for tapasya, not for indulging in sensual gratification like the animals. Tapasya. So in the tapasya method these things are prescribed. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is mentioning them.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means training people how to become tapasvī, tapasvī, who is undergoing tapasya, regulative, so that he may be cured from this permanent disease, birth, death, old age and disease. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. The whole Vedic process is meant for that purpose, to purify the existence of the living being so that he can be saved from the repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. You read some of the purport.

Pradyumna: Aśvamedha-yajñas or gomedha-yajñas, or the sacrifices in which a horse or a bull is sacrificed, were not, of course, for the purpose of killing the animals. Lord Caitanya said that such animals sacrificed on the altar of yajña were rejuvenated and a new life was given to them. It was just to prove the efficacy of the hymns of the Vedas. By recitation of the hymns of the Vedas in the proper way, certainly the performer gets relief from the reactions of sins. But in case of such sacrifices not properly done under expert management, certainly one has to become responsible for animal sacrifice."



Prabhupāda: This is a long subject matter. But the sacrifice in yajña, recommended, that is not for killing the animal, but it is a testing, how the Vedic mantras are being properly chanted. Because an old animal put into the fire, by Vedic mantras he would come out again with young life. That is sacrifice of animals in the yajña. Therefore in this age there is no such expert brāhmaṇa who can chant the mantras properly or he can behave because the life is very abominable. Therefore, because there is no expert brāhmaṇa, so these sacrifices are forbidden in this age. Kalau pañca vivarjayet aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ devareṇa sutotpattiṁ sannyāsam [Cc. Ādi 17.164]. These things are forbidden in this age, because there is no proper men to conduct.



So in the Kali-yuga this sacrifice is recommended: yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Saṅkīrtana-yajña. This yajña will help you. Real thing is the heart, the mind. If this yajña, saṅkīrtana-yajña, cleanses your mind and heart, then you come to the platform of knowledge. Then automatically other things become effective. So in this age it is recommended that other yajñas will not be effective, neither it is recommended. But the saṅkīrtana-yajña-yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtanaiḥ-that is recommended. Everyone can join it, and he can become purified, he can become situated on spiritual platform, and his life becomes successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.9: Lectures





730515SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.1

-

Los Angeles, May 15, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sūta uvāca

iti bhītaḥ prajā-drohāt

sarva-dharma-vivitsayā

tato vinaśanaṁ prāgād

yatra deva-vrato 'patat

[SB 1.9.1]



"Sūta Gosvāmī said: Being afraid for having killed so many subjects on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira went to the scene of the massacre. There, Bhīṣmadeva was lying on a bed of arrows, about to pass away."



Prabhupāda: So the most important point is that the king was, he so responsible, he became afraid, that "I have killed so many prajā." Prajā. It is not said there, "human being." No. Prajā. Prajā means... Pra means prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa, and jā means jāyate. Just like every living entity takes somewhere birth. So considering nationalism... Just like American nation. What is the meaning of these people, American nation or Indian nation? The human being is the same-two hands, two legs, and they also eat. Everything is the same. Why this nationality? Nationality is only for the sake that that particular human being has taken birth in that particular land. That is called prajā. Prajā.



Jāyate. Now jāyate, one who takes birth... Just like the other day I was speaking... One Indian girl, she has given birth to a child in America. So because that child is born in America, she becomes naturally American national. So if this fact is to be accepted, that anyone who takes birth on the land of America, he becomes immediately American, and the American government takes charge for his protection, so why this is restricted only for the human child? If this is definition, prajā, "one who takes birth," so the animals also take birth. The trees also take birth. So many other animals, other living entities, they also take birth. So yes, therefore, they are all prajās. Not only... Miserly, you limit your prajā conception, national conception, within the human society only, you expand it. Even it is taken nationally, anyone who takes birth in this land, he is national. Either human being or animal or tree or plant. That is the definition of prajā. Prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa jāyate. Any living entity who has taken birth. Just like in America, there are so many jungles and trees. If outsider like me comes and begins to cut the trees, so will the American government tolerate? Immediately I shall be prosecuted. I can say, "What is the harm? It is a tree. I am cutting." "No, you cannot cut this tree because they are on the American land." So this conception should be prayed.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is not only thinking of the human being who were killed in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. He is thinking of all the horses, elephants, because they are also living entities. They are also prajā, national. "National," this word, we don't find in the Vedic literature, "national." It is modern invention. So if we feel nationally, then we feel for every living entity (who) is born in that land. That is real Kṛṣṇa consciousness, not sectarian, that "I feel for this living entities, not for that." So iti bhītaḥ, he was very much afraid, that "I have killed so many animals and men. So what to do?" Prajā-drohāt. Droha, droha means to become enemy. Unless you become my enemy, you cannot kill me, neither I can kill you. So droha means if you become enemy. So when the prajās were killed, the king became enemy. He is thinking, "Otherwise, how I could induce them to be killed?" He was thinking like that. Prajā-drohāt. As you, if you rebel against the king, it is also a great fault, similarly, if you rebel, revolt against the prajās, that is also great fault. Therefore he is afraid. Bhītaḥ prajā-drohāt. "Now what to do?" Sarva-dharma-vivitsayā. This is the position to approach a guru, when you are bewildered. When things are not in order, brain is puzzled... Just like Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa as guru when he could not ascertain whether he shall fight or not, bewilderment, so similarly, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja also became bewildered, that "I have killed so many prajās. What is my position? I have become so much sinful. How can I rule over the empire?"

So when all these questions puzzled him, he decided to go to Bhīṣmadeva, who was lying on the arrows' bed before his death. As I told you that Bhīṣmadeva could not be dead without..., so long he does not wish. That was the benediction given by his father, that "My dear boy, you have taken such a strong vow. So I give you one benediction." Formerly everyone was so powerful. Of course, father's benediction always there, but they were actual benedictions. Everyone was so powerful. For example, the brāhmaṇa's son who cursed Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he was only twelve years old, a boy, and because he cursed Parīkṣit Mahārāja, that "Within seven days he will have to die," so he had to die. Just a small brāhmaṇa boy, how he was powerful. And it could not be changed. Although Parīkṣit Mahārāja was competent to change it, but he did not change. He showed honor to the brahminical curse. That is discussed by his father. So those who were powerful, actually they could benedict. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. As we read in the Gurvaṣṭaka, "By the benediction of the spiritual master, one becomes benedicted by the Supreme Lord."

So this Bhīṣmadeva... When he became puzzled, he went to Bhīṣmadeva, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, went to Bhīṣmadeva. So this is the process. One must approach a superior person who is called guru. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. We, in this material world, we are confused, step by step. This is our position. Step by step. Every step. Padaṁ padaṁ vipadām. Padaṁ padam means every step; vipadām, danger. It is such a nice place, this material world, that every step there is danger. And as soon as there is danger, we are confused. So... And as soon as we are confused: "How to solve?" Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet. Therefore the Vedic instruction is "Because you are confused, because you do not know which path to follow, therefore you must approach a guru." Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. This word abhigacchet is used when there is compulsory, "You must." You cannot say that "Without going to guru, I shall chalk out my own path." No, that is not possible. Therefore this very word is used, gacchet. In Sanskrit all words are meaningful. Gacchet means it is a question of must, not that "I may and may not." Nowadays it is going on, and there is many rascals who come here in your country to preach that "There is no need of guru. You can become your own guru yourself." That is not Vedic injunction. Vedic injunction is you must go to a guru, tad-vijñānārtham, in order to understand the transcendental science. And that is natural.

When we are confused in our ordinary life, we also go to a friend, senior friend, or experienced friend, and ask him, "My dear friend, I am in this condition. I am very much confused what to do." That is natural. Similarly, when Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was so much afraid that he had killed so many prajās, he knew that "Now, still, there is a superior person, my grandfather, who is lying on the bed of arrows. Let me go there." Tato vinaśanaṁ prāgāt. Then he decided, "Let me go to Bhīṣmadeva. He can give me instruction." What is that instruction? Sarva-dharma. Sarva-dharma. Instruction on all kinds of different varieties of religious system. Sarva-dharma. We will find. Dharma... Dharma means occupational duty. Dharma means not a religious sentiment, that, as it is translated in English, "a sentiment." Just like "Animal has no soul." This is not dharma. Without any scientific knowledge, if somebody says in some religion, for eating meat, that "Animal has no soul. You can kill as many as you like," so that is not dharma. Dharma, real meaning is occupational duty, not a sentiment. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. It is just like state laws. The state laws are given by the state. You cannot manufacture laws. Similarly, dharma, which we call religion generally, you cannot manufacture by your concoction. It is stated by the Supreme Lord. That is dharma.

Just like Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the father of all living entities." Sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ [Bg. 14.4]. And He is accepting not only human society. Sarva-yoniṣu. Sarva-yoniṣu means in all species of life. Kṛṣṇa claims that "Fish, beginning from fish, aquatic life, these living entities, they are also My sons. The birds, they are also My sons. The beasts, they are also My sons. The trees, they are also My sons. The human beings, they are also My sons. The demigods, they are also My sons." Sarva-yoniṣu, "in every species of life." This is the conception of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We do not say that simply human being has soul No. Every living entity. Even a small ant, a small plant, it is living entity. By its different work, he has got a different dress only. Just like we are sitting so many persons, and we have got our different dresses according to our different choice, similarly, we get these bodies. We are all sons of God. There is no doubt about it. We (are) all spirit soul, either in the human form of body or animal form of body or tree form of body, anything. Sarva-yoniṣu. We are all living entities. But we have got different dresses. That's all. According to karma. This is the philosophy. So we cannot make that "These dressed living entities are important than the other dressed living entities." No. Everyone. The paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. Those who are actually learned, paṇḍita, sama-darśinaḥ, they are equal, equipoised: "Never mind, here is a dog, he is also living entity; and here is a brāhmaṇa, he is also living entity. By his work he has got the body of a brāhmaṇa, and here he has got the body of a dog. But as living entity, they are all equal.

So without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the philosophy of equality, fraternity, as in your country they profess, it is not possible. Artificial. Without coming to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that every living entity is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, or God, this equality, fraternity, big, big words, universal brotherhood, it is impossible. That is not possible. Therefore one has to become learned scholar, paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. Then he will be able to see equally. Just like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is thinking of all prajās, not only... Otherwise, the language would have been "human being." No. Prajā, "All, all kinds of prajā." This is universal understanding.

So deva-vrata. Deva-vrata is Bhīṣmadeva. Vrata means vow, and deva means God. So he took brahmacārī-vrata: "I'll, I remain ever-celibate. I'll never marry." It is called deva-vrata. Naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī. This is possible in high-class society, that "I shall remain celibate all the life, naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī." They do not marry. Naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī. So Bhīṣmadeva was naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī. Therefore his name is deva-vrata.

All right. Let us begin. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730516SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.2

-

Los Angeles, May 16, 1973





Pradyumna: Translation: "At that time all his brothers followed him on beautiful chariots drawn by first-class horses decorated with gold ornaments. With them were Vyāsa and ṛṣis like Dhaumya, the learned priest of the Pāṇḍavas, and others." [SB 1.9.2]



Prabhupāda: So one very important word is here: sadaśvaiḥ svarṇa-bhūṣitaiḥ. Formerly the horses were used in military division. Horses, chariot, elephants and then infantry. So not one or two, but one division of military phalanx required sixty thousand horses. Akṣauhiṇī. So many horses, so many elephants, so many chariot, and so many infantry soldiers-that will compose one division of soldiers. So "so many" means the, I exactly remember now, sixty thousand horses. So all the horses, when they are required for procession or for going to the fight, were well-decorated with golden ornaments, svarṇa-bhūṣitaiḥ. So just imagine the, all the saddles of the horse, if they are golden ornamented, how many ounces you will require to decorate the horse. And what is the price of gold now?



Dānavīr: One hundred and twenty-eight dollars an ounce.



Prabhupāda: Just see, at least fifty ounce will be required to decorate one horse. And one ounce is $120. So what is the price of fifty ounce?



Devotees: Five thousand dollars.



Prabhupāda: Such sixty-thousand horses, how much it comes? (laughter) Where is that gold? They are very much proud, advancement of material civilization, but instead of gold, we find plastic. (laughter) And the nonsense, they are very much proud of their wealth. Just see. Even they cannot decorate their wives. And woman, they require also ornament. It is psychology. Manu-saṁhitā, it has been recommended that "If you want to keep satisfied your wife, then you must give her good food, good sari and good ornament." This is the system. Therefore during marriage time, the girl is given by the father according to his means, as many saris, nice saris, beautiful costly saris, and as much as possible, golden ornaments. And those who are very rich, they, still in India, they give jewelries, means diamonds, pearls, sapphire, according to means. Those who are richer class, they don't touch gold. They must give jewelry. This is the system.



So this is the opulence. So much gold. When the Kurukṣetra Battle was finished, so the treasury was also finished. The treasury of the Pāṇḍavas, that was also finished. Because war means expenditure. So many hundred thousands of pounds and dollars required daily to finance the running on of the war. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja wanted to... (aside:) You have got that handkerchief?

Pradyumna: No.



Prabhupāda: Never mind. ...wanted to perform sacrifice. So sacrifice means he requires money, so much grains, so many ornaments, so much gold and ghee, everything required. To perform sacrifice is not ordinary thing. Millions and millions of dollars required. In the Kali-yuga, because people cannot collect such costly things... Suppose ghee. Tons of ghee was being offered to the fire. Where is that tons of ghee? Not available. Then all utensils made of gold. The altar made of gold. Where is that gold? Therefore the, not many days before, five thousand years, the Indian history, or this world history... Now it is called India, but this whole world is Bhārata-varṣa.



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja asked his brother Dhanañjaya, Arjuna, "So bring some money from somewhere. Otherwise how we can perform the sacrifices? We have finished all our treasury." So Arjuna was little perplexed. The elder brother was king, and the younger brothers, they were commanders. So Kṛṣṇa saw that His friend was little perturbed. So He immediately gave information. This is God, sarva-jña. He knows where to find out. He gave him information that formerly, one king, by the grace of Lord Śiva, he got information of a big gold mine, or gold mine mountain. So that king used to manufacture so many things of gold. Especially in sacrifice he used to give immense dishes made of gold to the brāhmaṇas. So at that time, the brāhmaṇas were also not very greedy. So the king, during the sacrifice, gave them unlimited number of dishes of gold, made of gold. So they accepted it, but when they came out of the sacrificial arena, they thought, "Who is going to carry so much load? Throw it." Just see. This is opulence. As nowadays it is our system that the plate on which you eat, that should be thrown away... Formerly, people used to eat on golden plate, at least, the royal family, and after eating they used to throw away. Not for the second use. Just like India still, it is observed, earthen plate used, as here in your country, paper plate, in India, earthen plate-once used, then it is thrown away. It cannot be used second time. Therefore in rigid Hindu family, they don't use these china clay plates. They don't use. Because it is made of earth. So when it is earthen pot, as soon as you eat, it becomes contaminated. It must be thrown away. You cannot use for the second time. That was...

So this system was formerly even for golden plates. Once used, then it cannot be used second time. It is thrown away. And "thrown away" means some poor man will collect. So there was no question of poverty. The rich men, they eat once and throw away. Their servants or other poor man... Just like these brāhmaṇas, they threw away all these golden plates. Brāhmaṇas were not required golden plate, but they were given in charity: "Brāhmaṇas, you take." They accepted, but they thought it that "It is a load. Why should I carry? Throw it." So there were heaps of golden plate lying near Himalayan mountain. So Kṛṣṇa was given information, er, Arjuna was given information by Kṛṣṇa that "You go there and collect those golden plates. Then your purpose will be served." So Arjuna went there and collected and brought it to his brother, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, for converting them into money for spending in the sacrifice. So this was the system. Therefore Arjuna's another name is Dhanañjaya. Dhanañjaya means "one who can conquer over riches." His brother was in need of money, and he brought money. Therefore, from that day, his name was Dhanañjaya, "one can conquer over riches."

So actually, human opulence means not these tin cars. Once it is dashed with another car, it is finished, no value. Human opulence means the society must have enough gold, enough jewelry, enough silk, enough grains, enough milk, enough vegetables, like that. That is opulent. That is opulence. Formerly a person was considered rich by two things: dhānyena dhanavān. How much grain stock he has got at his home. A big, big barn, filled with grains. Still in India, if I am going to give my daughter to some family, to see the family's opulence, I go to see the house, and if I see there are many, many barns' stock of grains and many cows, then it is very good. It is opulent. Dhānyena dhanavān, gavyaṁ dhanavān. A man is considered to be rich when he has got enough quantity of grains, enough quantity of, I mean to say, number, enough number of cows. Just like Mahārāja, Nanda Mahārāja, the foster father of Kṛṣṇa. He was keeping 900,000 cows. And He was rich man. He was mahārāja, king. But see the behavior. His beloved son, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, he has entrusted to take care of the calves or cows: "Go in the forest." He is well dressed with ornament, and nice dress, everything. All the cowherds boys, they are very rich. They have got enough grains and enough milk. Naturally they will be rich. But not that the cows and the calves will be taken care of by some hired servant. No. They would take care himself.

That was children's sport, to go to the forest, take the calves and cows and carry some tiffin. Eat there, dance there, play there, and again come in the evening. Then they will take bath and change their dress and take their meals and immediately go to sleep. This was the boy's, children's, engagement. So how they would grow healthy because they go outside and play and work and very happily, they enjoy the company. So there is no question of becoming contaminated. Yāmuna-tīra-vana-cārī. Yāmuna-tīra, on the bank of the Yamunā... Just like we go to the seaside, the beach, similarly, there is bank of Yamunā, very nice river, and there are trees. So these boys, Kṛṣṇa and His friends, with their cows they will go and loiter on the bank of the Yamunā and sport and frivolities, everything, so nicely. So there was no question of education at that time. After the child is grown up, healthy, nice, then he goes to school. Otherwise first of all eat sumptuously milk, butter and yogurt, and play sufficiently in open air with friends, take care of the cows. This is labor. But it is sporting, very nice. So these things were taught by Kṛṣṇa Himself, although He was the son of king. Then when He was also grown-up, His real father took Him charge, Vasudeva. Then He was... As kṣatriya... He belonged to the kṣatriya family. All other education was given, how to fight, how to rule, everything.

So this kṣatriya, this Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, they also kṣatriyas. So when they were going to see Bhīṣmadeva, they were going there in royal style, with chariots, with horse, and decorated with golden ornaments and the brāhmaṇas, Vyāsadeva and other. All the kṣatriyas, kings, would be always accompanied by hoards of brāhmaṇas. As soon as they required any instruction, immediately consult the brāhmaṇas, and they gave good advice: "Do like this." This is the business of the brāhmaṇa. And the kings, they would not do anything without consulting. Don't think that because there was monarchy, they were all autocrat. No. If the brāhmaṇas would not agree, then they won't do. The brāhmaṇa's community, all saintly persons and learned scholars, brāhmaṇas... There was a committee, and the king would take their advice how to manipulate the political affairs or administration, and they would consult standard books. Just like nowadays the rascals, every day they are changing some law. Somebody told me, where? In Africa, every week there is change of the cabinet, every week. Means so full of rascals. So one rascal will fight with another rascal. So there is no stability of government. All these rascals, politicians, they are trying to occupy the post: "I shall become president, I shall become secretary, and then I shall exploit the state like anything." This is the motive. Their manifestation, that "I am going to give you heaven. If you select me president, then I shall give you heaven within three minutes." (laughter)

So these promises, they simply promise. Actually, there is nothing. But king was very responsible, as we are discussing. Now, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was thinking of the woman: "Now their husbands and their sons or their fathers, so many have died. Now how to take care of them?" He was perplexed. So responsible, for children, for the brāhmaṇas, those who are helpless. Women, children, brāhmaṇa and old men and cows, they must be taken first care. That was the king's duty. Children. And who is taking care of the children? Who is taking care of the women? And who is taking care of the brāhmaṇas? There is no brāhmaṇa. Even there are some brāhmaṇas, we are creating now, who is taking care of us? It was the duty of the government to see to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, "Oh, such an important movement is going on? Our first attention should be how this movement can go on." So nice character, so nice behavior, so nice knowledge, so nice consciousness of God, so pure, and the government has no attention. They are thinking it is something sentimental. And all the politicians, going to the brothel and drinking and dancing naked, they are all first-class men. This is the position of the society. No care for the living entities who are very important. Just like in this verse, vipra. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is always accompanied by brāhmaṇas. Without brahminical culture, what is the value of the society? There is no value. It is animal society.

Therefore Bhagavad-gītā recommends, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Here you cannot find all one class of men. That is not possible. There is those rascals who are trying to have a classless society, no class, all one. That is rascaldom. That is not possible. There must be classes. That is scientific. Why? Because this material nature is being conducted under three modes: first class, second class, third class. Goodness, passion and ignorance. So how you can make classless society? There must be divisions. There must be classes, color, colorful. So it has to be scientifically arranged, how all classes can cooperate for one purpose and they develop very nicely in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]. Mayā sṛṣṭam means anything created by God, you cannot nullify it, you cannot reject it. That is not possible. You have to accept it and possibly utilize it. Therefore devotees, they take it for granted, even there is distressed condition of life, they take it that "It is created by God. I am now in distress. It is creation of God. So why shall I hate it? Let me tolerate. Let me undergo this distressed condition of life."

Just like some of you are suffering from cough. Now there has been some hygienic law disregarded. So I have caught cold and cough. So why shall I deride upon it? It must be created either you say by bodily nature or by God. So so long it is there, let me suffer patiently. It has come, it will go. That is the instruction in the Bhagavad-gītā: āgamāpāyinaḥ anityāḥ. Distressed condition, or happiness also, so-called happiness... Here there is no happiness. Everything is distressed condition. But we are so fool that we consider distressed condition as happiness. This is called māyā, distressed condition as happiness. For example, suppose you have to go to see a friend, and nowadays, friend or anything, not less than ten miles. So you have to go ten miles, and then see your friend, and then do your work. So I am taking the trouble of going ten miles to see a friend or thirty miles to see a medical practitioner, but I am very much proud of my car, that I have got a car. I don't consider that although I have got car, still, I have to waste so much time. I have to take so much trouble. And there is every possibility of accidents. So many calamities are awaiting me. But we think that "Now we have discovered this horseless carriage, we are advanced." Similarly, if you study every item, you will find that although you have created by the modern scientific advancement a little comfort of life, side by side, we have created many discomforts. That we do not find.

That is the ways of this material nature. The ways of material nature is that you cannot remain in comfort. That is not possible. By laws of nature... Tri-tāpa-yatana, three kinds of miseries, adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika, they must be there always. Just like I am your spiritual master. You have kept me very nicely, to your best capacity, but I am coughing. I am coughing. So even if we are situated in one kind of comfortable position, then another uncomfort will come and attack. That is called tri division. Adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. Or there is no cough, or there is no trouble, but you receive on very unsatisfactory letter from a friend; you become very sorry. This is called adhyātmika, pertaining to the mind, pertaining to the body. Adhyātmika. Adhibhautika: troubles offered by other living entities; and adhidaivika, trouble offered by the higher authorities. Just like excessive heat. You cannot control. Excessive cold.

So in this material world we have to work very hard under these three kinds of miserable conditions of life, and we are actually doing that. Still, we are thinking that we are happy. And after all, after doing this, we have to change this body. That means death. We cannot avoid it. But still, we are thinking that we are happy, and we have no sense to try to understand actually what is the standard of happiness, where that happiness can be had, if it is possible. These things are understood and answered by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That is the importance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness. All-round. It is not one-sided, that we are thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Thinking of Kṛṣṇa means thinking of everything, because Kṛṣṇa is everything. Without Kṛṣṇa, there is no other thing. Ahaṁ kṛtsnasya, what is that...? There is that verse? In the Seventh Chapter? Prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā.

Pradyumna: Ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ...



Prabhupāda: Ah, prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā. In this world there two things, prabhava and pralaya. Prabhava means generation, generating, and pralaya means annihilation. Two things. Everything, whatever you take, it is generated at a certain point and it will end at a certain point. So Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā. That is the ultimate cause. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. We don't take simply generation. Generation, maintenance and annihilation, three things. Just this body is born at a certain date, it remains for a certain period, and then it is annihilated. So everything material means it has a beginning, it is born or it is manufactured at a certain point, it keeps for some time, then it will be destroyed. Therefore the Vedānta-sūtra says, janmādy asya yataḥ. Janma-sthiti-pralaya [SB 1.1.1].



So to understand Kṛṣṇa means to understand everything, how it is generated, how it is maintained, and how it is annihilated. That is full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



730517SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.3

-

Los Angeles, May 17, 1973





Pradyumna: Translation: "O sage amongst the brāhmaṇas, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, also followed, seated on a chariot with Arjuna. Thus King Yudhiṣṭhira appeared very aristocratic, like Kuvera surrounded by his companions, the Guhyakas." [SB 1.9.3]



Prabhupāda: So Sūta Gosvāmī, he is explaining in the assembly of learned brāhmaṇas. The Naimiṣāraṇya meeting took place some five thousand or more than that, at least five thousand years ago. But the, all the members who assembled there, they were all very learned scholar and brāhmaṇas. Therefore they are addressed as viprarṣe. Not only brāhmaṇa, but they were ṛṣi. Ṛṣi means saintly person. They were rājarṣi, rājarṣi. Saintly person can become, anyone, provided he lives like a saintly person. It doesn't matter whether he is a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya. Generally, brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya, the first and second status of the human society, they can live as good as the saintly persons within the forest or Himalaya. At home they can live. So another place these brāhmaṇas were addressed as dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ, "best of the brāhmaṇas." A brāhmaṇa is already the best man, but if he becomes a saintly person, then it becomes still more magnified.



So in another place these brāhmaṇas were addressed, ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ: "You are all brāhmaṇa, the topmost of the human society." There are divisions of the human society. First-class men, second-class men, third-class men, fourth-class men, that, in the Vedic civilization. Not that all, all one class. No. Why? There must be a division. That I have already explained. So the qualified brāhmaṇas, they are first-class men. The topmost class. And the second-class men, the kṣatriyas. And the third-class men, vaiśyas, mercantile, simply "Where to get money?" And they are, according to Vedic civilization, third-class men. But at the present moment those who are acquiring money somehow or other, they are first-class men. It doesn't matter what is his qualification. If he has acquired some money some way or other, then he is a first-class man. This is Kali-yuga. In the Kali-yuga there is no honor for qualification. There is honor for money only. That's all.

So it is stated that without money, you cannot get justice even. In the court of justice, everyone is expected to get proper behavior, but in the Kali-yuga it is stated (that) even in the court of justice, you cannot get justice without money. That's a fact. If you have no money, then you cannot appoint a good lawyer. And sometimes you have to bribe the judge also. This is the position now. Now in your country so many big, big men have been arrested or something like that for their dishonesty. So Kali-yuga is so polluted that the minister is dishonest, the judge is dishonest, and what to speak of ordinary men. So only thing is that you get money some way or other. Then you can pass on as a nice gentleman, polished. You keep yourself always polished, and within you may be full with all dirty things, but if you have got your pockets filled up with coins and notes, then you are nice. Formerly it was not like that. One must be qualified. Varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ.

Vibhāgaśaḥ. There must be division. But people are very much anxious to make classless society, no division. And that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness society. We have no such division. Division means under the jurisdiction of the three modes of material nature. That is division. Otherwise, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, these divisions are calculated when one is under the control of the material nature. But if you become devotee, the material nature has no more any control over you. That is the difference between a perfect Kṛṣṇa conscious person and a perfect, I mean to say, mundane person. The difference is that a Kṛṣṇa conscious, a devotee, is no more under the influence of the three modes of material nature. But ordinarily, everyone should be..., is-"he should be" not.(?) He is under the control. Therefore they are called dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ, the best of the brāhmaṇas. Even a brāhmaṇa is also under the control of material nature. But the same brāhmaṇa, when he becomes a Vaiṣṇava, a devotee, he becomes the best of the brāhmaṇas. Ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ. Or he becomes ṛṣi. Viprarṣe. Rathena. Rathena. They were not walking, all these respectable personalities, brāhmaṇas and bhagavān.

Bhagavān api. Here Kṛṣṇa ... The author could have mentioned the name, kṛṣṇa api. No. He's especial: bhagavān api. All others' name is mentioned. Yudhiṣṭhira's name is mentioned. Dhanañjaya, Arjuna's name is mentioned. Other's name is mentioned. But when it comes to the terms of Kṛṣṇa, He is mentioned as Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhagavān. This word I have explained many times. Bhaga means opulence, all fortune. That is called, from the bhaga, the word bhāgya has come. One who is very fortunate person, he is called bhāgyavān. Not this bhaga. So bhaga means opulence, and vān means one who possesses opulences. So Kṛṣṇa possesses all the opulences, six opulences: all strength, all influence, all beauty, all knowledge, all-everything complete. So Bhagavān means one who has complete opulence, six opulences in complete, pūrṇam. Pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇam adaḥ [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. That is Bhagavān. That is Bhagavān. There are so many rascal come as incarnation of God, Bhagavān, but you have to taste whether all the opulences are complete there. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya. First thing is riches. So whether one has got all the riches. Then he will be Bhagavān. And nobody can say that "I have got all the riches." I may have something more than your riches, but I cannot say that "All the riches..." So if you find out somebody, somebody like you or me, and if he possesses all the riches, all strength, all influence, all knowledge, all beauty-then He is Bhagavān. That Kṛṣṇa possesses.

There is no comparison of Kṛṣṇa's opulences. I have several times given the example. Say, in the human society there is marriage. So Kṛṣṇa married 16,800 wives. And for each wife a palace, marble palace, bedecked with jewels, and the furniture made of ivory and gold, and bed and curtains, they're all made of silk. So... And the... Not only palace, but also garden attached to the palace. And the flower trees, pārijāta flower. The pārijāta flower was brought from the heaven. This pārijāta flower is not visible in this world. From heavenly planet Kṛṣṇa brought it. His wife Satyabhāmā, He requested... He... Both of them, Satyabhāmā and Kṛṣṇa, went to the heavenly planet. So generally woman, they are after something. So (laughs) (she) requested the husband, "Kṛṣṇa, I want this flower." "All right." So He gave her one flower. So He also told, "Why the flower? I shall take the tree so that you'll get flower daily." So when He was doing so, Indra came. Indra is the king of heavenly planet. "No, Sir, you cannot do that. (laughter) You cannot take this tree to the lower planet. No, I cannot allow."

And so Kṛṣṇa said, "No, My wife wants it. I must." That is Kṛṣṇa. (laughter) How He is complete, just like a hen-pecked husband (laughter) to satisfy the wife in every respect. When He plays the part of a child before mother Yaśodā, He plays everything perfectly. When He plays the husband... He doesn't require any wife or mother. He is Supreme. But when He plays the part of a husband, He plays it perfectly. The wife may think that "How much my husband is attached to me!" So she remains very much satisfied. Kṛṣṇa is not attached to anyone, but that is Kṛṣṇa's superexcellence, that although He had to satisfy 16,800..., 108 wives, everyone was satisfied and everyone is thinking that "Kṛṣṇa is very much attached to me than His others wife, other wives." This is Kṛṣṇa's play.

Therefore Bhagavān, full, in every respect, any field of work: fighting, opulence, household life, renounced life also. If you study the life of Kṛṣṇa, you will find everything in complete. Beauty, knowledge. Now Kṛṣṇa gave us a little knowledge, which is known as Bhagavad-gītā, and five thousand years ago this knowledge was given, but is still going on, all over the world. In our movement we sell Bhagavad-gītā the most. Is it not? We sell our Bhagavad-gītā As It Is everywhere and in large number. Because it is full knowledge, not partial. Everything is complete. Can you show any book in the world which has so much sale and which is so much perfect? There is no book. And I am not..., because we are Kṛṣṇa devotees we are eulogizing like that, but any scholar, any philosopher, any scientist will say like that: "Oh, there is no comparison of this book." I do not know exactly, but one gentleman told me that Professor Einstein, he was also reading Bhagavad-gītā daily. Hitler was reading. Such, such big, big men. But I know many scholars, even Muhammadans, they also read Bhagavad-gītā.

So that is the test of knowledge, Kṛṣṇa's knowledge. Therefore Bhagavān. Just try to understand Bhagavān. Bhagavān is not so cheap that any rascal comes and he says that "I am Bhagavān. You worship me," and another rascal comes and... Not like that. Don't take it cheaply. Bhagavān is not ordinary thing. He must be complete in everything. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is mentioned here, bhagavān api. Api. Why api? In Sanskrit composition each word has meaning. Api means "Although He is Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, still, He was going to see Bhīṣmadeva." So just consider the position of Bhīṣmadeva. He was lying on deathbed with all these... Of course, the Pāṇḍavas, they were their grandson. It is their duty. But why Kṛṣṇa should go there? Therefore it is said bhagavān api: "In spite of His being the Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of God..." He was also going to show respect. How much great He was, just imagine. And all the brāhmaṇas, all the sages. That will be mentioned. There will be list of great personalities who were present.

So Bhīṣma was such a great personality. He is not ordinary man. Just like when a big person dies, all the selected person of the city, they come to offer their homage... So here he is not dead, but he is going to die. Because Bhīṣma would not die unless he desires, "Now let me die." Then he would die; otherwise not. So he was lying down on the deathbed, but was expecting to see Kṛṣṇa at the last stage. So therefore he was so great. And Kṛṣṇa was also going.

Now you can chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730522SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.40

-

New York, May 22, 1973



Pradyumna: "Translation: Let my mind be fixed upon Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose motions and smiles of love attracted the damsels of Vrajadhāma (the gopīs). The damsels imitated the characteristic movements of the Lord (after His disappearance from the rāsa dance)." [SB 1.9.40]



Prabhupāda: Purport.



Pradyumna: By intense ecstasy in loving service, the damsels of Vrajabhūmi attained qualitative oneness with the Lord by dancing with Him on an equal level, embracing Him in nuptial love, smiling at Him in joke, and looking at Him with a loving attitude. The relation of the Lord with Arjuna is undoubtedly praiseworthy for devotees like Bhīṣmadeva, but the relation of the gopīs with the Lord is still more praiseworthy because of their still more purified loving service. By the grace of the Lord, Arjuna was fortunate enough to have the fraternal service of the Lord as chariot driver, but the Lord did not award Arjuna with equal strength. The gopīs, however, practically became one with the Lord by attainment of equal footing with the Lord. Bhīṣma's aspiration to remember the gopīs is a prayer to have their mercy also at the last stage of his life. The Lord is satisfied more when His pure devotees are glorified, and therefore Bhīṣmadeva has not only glorified the acts of Arjuna, his immediate object of attraction, but has also remembered the gopīs, who were endowed with unrivalled opportunities by rendering loving service to the Lord. The gopīs' equality with the Lord should never be misunderstood to be like the sāyujya liberation of the impersonalist. The equality is one of perfect ecstasy where the differential conception is completely eradicated, for the interests of the lover and the beloved become identical.





Prabhupāda: So Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu said ramyā kācid upāsanā vrajavadhū-vargeṇa yā kalpitā, and there is no better method of worship than the system invented by the gopīs. So gopīs invention of worshiping Kṛṣṇa was to remain always Kṛṣṇa conscious without any material profit. That is the super excellence of (the) gopīs. They never expected any return from Kṛṣṇa. That was not their business. "Kṛṣṇa, we have done so much for You, You cannot give me this benediction?" No, they never asked like that. That is the first-class worship. "Kṛṣṇa, You take whatever you like from us, but we do not ask anything, neither we have any need." This is gopīs' worship. We have got everything to give You and we have no need to ask You. This is gopīs' worship.



Generally, they worship God, needy ārtaḥ arthārthī. Ārtaḥ means diseased, arthārthī means in need of money. People generally go to church (or) temple when they are suffering from some ailments or need of money, these two classes. Another two classes, jijñāsuḥ jñānī. Jñānī means who is after pure knowledge and jijñāsuḥ means inquisitive-what is the nature of God. These are, they are higher section but they are not bhaktas. Just like there are many philosophers, they also talk of God, but they are not bhaktas. But because they are talking of God, they are getting some benefit. Just like if you handle with fire, you perceive some warmth automatically. So these four classes of man they are not bhaktas, devotees, ārtaḥ, arthārthī, jñānī, and jijñāsuḥ. But because they come to Kṛṣṇa for some benefit, somehow or other they offer their service, because praying is also another service. There are nine kinds of services: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam, arcanaṁ vandanam [SB 7.5.23]. Vandanam, this is also service. But because this service is rendered for some motive to mitigate the sufferings, ārtaḥ arthārthi, or to satisfy some inquires, they are not pure devotion.

So the gopīs' activities, they are the supreme platform of pure devotion. There is no other business, there is no other business. Gopīs, they are not interested to know philosophically whether Kṛṣṇa is God. Although they are seeing every step, Kṛṣṇa is God. Mother Yaśodā is that Kṛṣṇa is God. Gopīs also gopī-jana-vallabha giri-vara-dhārī. Kṛṣṇa is lifting the Govardhana Hill, who can do it except God? They are seeing it, still they do not know that Kṛṣṇa is God. Kṛṣṇa is wonderful, that's all. They do not like to know whether Kṛṣṇa is God or not. They want to love Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa may be God or not God, it doesn't matter. Just like if you love somebody, what he is, is he rich man, poor man, educated or non-educated? There is no consideration. Love has no such thing, consideration. Similarly, gopīs' love for Kṛṣṇa was pure. There was no consideration that Kṛṣṇa was God, therefore they wanted to dance with Him. No, Kṛṣṇa wanted to dance with them, therefore they came to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is now calling by the vibration of His flute at this dead of night. So, all these young girls, they are all married-some of them are mothers-so immediately (they) left their home. That is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Some of them were cooking, some of them were feeding, breast-feeding the children, some of them were feeding the husband or the father. In this way everyone was engaged, but as soon as Kṛṣṇa's flute was heard at dead of night, they left home immediately. All the guardians. Generally in India for young girls, the guardians are the father, the husband, the brother, all male members they forbid, "Where you are going? Where you are...?" Nobody cares. No love for so-called children, no love for home, no love for brother, father or no respect. Kṛṣṇa. That is gopīs' super-excellence. So that is being explained, and Bhīṣmadeva, at the point of his death, he is relishing. These are to be learned. Unless we are practiced to think of Kṛṣṇa always, how at the time of death we can think of Him? Therefore Kulaśekhara says:

kṛṣṇa tvādiya-padapaṅkaja-pañjarāntam

adyaiva me viśsatu mānasa-rāja-haṁsaḥ

prāṇa-prayāṇa-samaye kapha-vāta-pittaiḥ

kaṇṭhāvarodhana-vidhau smaraṇaṁ kutas te

[MM 33]



Mahārāja Kulaśekhara king, a great devotee, is praying to Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, this is the opportune time. Now I am healthy. I am quite in good health so let me die immediately, thinking of You, because my whole purpose is to think of You, of Your pastimes, at the time of death. So generally, at the time of death, kapha-vāta-pittaiḥ, the whole system becomes disarranged. There are coughing, there are headache, there is some pain, this is general system. Sometimes they are so intolerable that the man who is going to die, he cries. The system within the body is so complicated that at any time it can be disarranged, and it becomes a great source of pain. So, at the time of death means, the arrangement becomes so dangerously painful, that one leaves this body, "No more." This is death. This bodily arrangement becomes so painful. Just like one commits suicide. When the situation is too much painful he wants a rescue by committing suicide. Similarly, when the bodily pains are too severe, then the living entity can not live in this body. Tyaktvā deham, he gives up this body. So we have to give up this body, that we forget.



People have become so misguided, they are memorizing. In our country some astrologer has said that one big politician, he has become one of the two dogs in Scandinavia! Now here for this material body, they have erected museum, and statues, and being worshiped by so many methods, but the spirit soul-which was the politician actually, not this body-he has taken birth as a dog. This is the understanding. Where the politician has gone and how what he is doing, they do not know. But they are concerned with the body. My Guru Mahārāja used to say, (aside:) yes? "That one man is drowned, and another brave man comes-I'll save him." As he jumps over the water and brings the coat and shirt, "Now this man is saved." So what people will say, what a nonsense he is, he has brought his coat and shirt and the man is saved? Similarly, these rascals, they are dealing with the coat and shirt of the living entity but they have no knowledge in the university or anywhere where the soul has gone.

These rascals have no knowledge. They are simply concerned with this external body. Those who are interested only with this external body, not those who are, ninety-nine percent population, they are interested in this bodily concept of life. Perhaps we are the only institution in the world which is teaching that you are not this body. This is the wonder of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness movement. We are the only institution throughout the whole world that we are teaching people that "My dear sir, you are not this body. You are different from the body, and after death you get another body." Tathā dehantara-prāptir. Simple education in the Bhagavad-gītā. They do not understand. There are big, big scholars, rascals, all rascals. Our difficulty is these rascals are going on as scholar, dehātma-buddhiḥ. Their life is bodily concept of life and they are passing as scientists, scholars, leaders, politicians and they are leading us andhā yathāndhair. They are blind and they are leading us, so we have, we are also put into difficulty. So only this Kṛṣṇa Consciousness movement can save the human civilization and get him raised to the platform of the gopīs. We have got such nice thing, these gopīs' unalloyed Kṛṣṇa love. That is wanted.

Thank you very much. (end)



730614SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.48

-

Māyāpura, June 14, 1973



(Translation and first part of lecture missing from recording.) [SB 1.9.48]

Prabhupāda: ...this class, when it is held in Los Angeles, this full hall would have been compact. This is the difference between India and foreign countries. They are receiving this message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness very seriously. Here they are rejecting. Indians, they're rejecting. There is a proverb: āpanār dhana bilāye diye bhikṣā māge parer dvāre(?). They have lost their own culture, and they are now beggars. They are going to beg from door to door in the foreign countries. When I was speaking in Berkeley University sometimes in the year 1966, one Indian student stood up and he said, "Swamiji, what this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement will do? We require now technology." So I replied, "Yes. You are after technology. So you are a beggar. I am not a beggar. I have come here to give something. That is the difference. I have come here to give some culture, and you have come to imitate the Western civilization by technology. That is the difference. You'll remain a beggar, I shall remain a giver. That is the difference." So still I am maintaining that position of giving, not taking. Before me, so many swamijis went there. They did not give, but they took something and came here and advertised themselves as foreign-returned sannyāsī and exploited the people. They lost even their original dress. Everyone knows, I have never changed my dress. Rather, I have given the dress to the foreigners, and they have taken it. The Ramakrishna mission people came to request me that I dress myself in coat, pant, hat. Because they are doing. Their so-called swamis, they are dressed in coat, pant, hat.



So this is a culture. This culture is meant for the human society. Fortunately this culture developed on this land of Bhāratavarṣa. Unfortunately, people are so much bewildered that they are giving up this culture. That is the most regrettable portion of, of our movement. Anyway, my mission was that I shall go to America, and if some of the American boys and girls, younger section, would accept it, then I'll bring them here to show these rascals that how great this culture is. So portion of the population, they are realizing now.

Now here is a word: Gāndhārīṁ ca tapasvinīm. Gāndhārī, the wife of Dhṛtarāṣṭra... He (She) is qualified herewith as tapasvinīm. Tapasvinīm. She was a householder, wife, having children. Not only children; she had one hundred sons. But still she is addressed here as tapasvinī. Tapasvinī means one who undergoes austerity. Because this human life is meant for practicing austerity. Human life is not meant for extravagancy. Tapasya. Tapo divyaṁ yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. This is the principle of human civilization. Śuddhyet sattvam, existence. Our existence... We are eternal. Every living entity is eternal, but we are subjected to birth and death. Why? Because we are not pure. Just like when you are impure, some disease infects. If you are pure, follow the hygienic principle, you'll not be infected. Similarly, this existence, material existence, we, every one of us, part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa originally, the same purity qualitatively...

So Kṛṣṇa is the supreme pure. We are also pure, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Just like a small particle of gold is also gold. The value is gold. It is not iron or something low-grade metal. The same. Similarly, as Kṛṣṇa... Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said Kṛṣṇa is aja. He never takes birth. Bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san. Although He is the Lord of all living entities, still, by His desire, He appears. Our appearance in this material world is also the same desire, but that is not independent. Our desire... (aside:) Who is talking there? He must stop. That portion is simply talking-camp. Just like these frogs or toads, they're talking whole day and night, ca-ca ca, ca-ca ca. Actually we have got tongue, and these frogs, they have got also tongue. So they are using their tongue, ca-ca ca, inviting snakes: "Please come here and eat me." That is their business. Nature's way. So if we simply talk like the frogs without any kṛṣṇa-kathā, then we are inviting death very soon. So don't waste your time, ca-ca ca. That is my request. It is our habit because we are no better than frogs also. We are also living entity. But we have got the chance to stop this ca-ca ca and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. This chance we have got. The frogs, they haven't got that chance. They cannot chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That is the difference between the frog and myself. So similarly, if we waste our time in that ca-ca ca, then we are no better than the frogs. We are no better than the frogs.

So don't make ca-ca ca when you assemble together. That is my request. If you have got time, spare time, simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma... That should be your business. This is tapasya. Tendency is to crow, to make vibration like these frogs. That is our tendency. Because we are also conditioned souls, and the frogs, or any animal, they are also conditioned souls, conditioned by the material nature. Therefore tapasya, austerity, is required to nullify, to counteract this conditional state of living. Now we are conditioned. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. We are conditioned by these four principles: birth, death, old age and disease. This is our condition. The scientist rascals, they are trying to improve the condition of living, but what is the improvement? There is death, there is birth, there is old age, and there is disease. No improvement. If you want to improve your condition, if you want to come back to original constitutional position, then tapasya, then you require to undergo austerity.

Tapo divyaṁ yena śuddhyet sattvaṁ yasmād brahma-saukhyam anantam [SB 5.5.1]. If you undergo tapasya... Therefore we prescribe this tapasya: no illicit sex. Our tendency is to have illicit sex. That is the condition of this material nature. But we have to deny it. That is tapasya. Tendency's there. Tapasya means I have got some tendency, but voluntarily I have to check it. That is called control, tapasya. My tongue is dictating: "Oh, let us go to some place and eat such-and-such thing." But if you can control the tongue... "No," that is tapasya. "No, you cannot eat this. You cannot be allowed to eat anything and there's no and except Kṛṣṇa prasādam." That is tapasya. Not that "My tongue has dried up. I must drink a cup of tea," and I take it. "No. It is intoxication, prohibited. So I shall not take it." That is tapasya. And that tapasya, what for? Tapasya divyam, tapo divyam [SB 5.5.1]. Otherwise, there are many men, they're also undergoing austerities for some material purpose. There are many men who wants to accumulate some money, begins business from low standard, works very hard day and night. In your country, there are many examples. Just like Mr. Henry Ford. So that is also tapasya. They underwent severe conditions of life to accumulate some money. After death or at the end of life, they'll be called: "Oh, here is a millionaire. He started his business with a farthing. Now he's millionaire." He wants that credit. No. Not that kind of tapasya. Because that accumulation of wealth, millions of dollars, will be finished after this body is finished. After death, he cannot take away the millions of dollars with him next life.

But they do not know that there is next life. Next life he may become a dog, and what this millions of dollars will help him? That he does not know. Therefore tapo divyam [SB 5.5.1]. Take austerity, penances, for reviving your original consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For that purpose, you undergo austerity. Otherwise, if you simply undergo austerities, penances, hardship, for some material gain, then it is waste of time, defeat, parābhava. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jātaḥ. Because he's a fool, rascal, he does not know what for hardship should be taken. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He also underwent tapasya. The whole universe became trembled. Brahmā came: "Why you are undergoing such severe tapasya?" On one finger he stood up, and undergoing tapasya. Brahmā came: "What is your purpose of this tapasya?" "Sir, I want to be immortal." "So that is not possible. You cannot become immortal." Then in so many ways he wanted to become immortal. What is the purpose of becoming immortal? There are many trees standing for ten thousands of years. That is very successful life, to stand in a place for ten thousands of years without any movement? Or prolonging life for many thousands of years? Brahmā lives also for many millions of years.

So people are misled in this way. They undergo hardship for some temporary gain, which is condemned. Śāstra says that if you take hardship, if go under, undergo tapasya, it must be for realization of God. Tapo divyam [SB 5.5.1]. That will give you permanent happiness. And if you accept hardship for anything material, it may give you temporary so-called happiness, but with the end of your body, everything will be finished. Therefore this tapasvinī, this Gāndhārī... Tapasvinī. She has been described as tapasvinī. She wanted to be a faithful, chaste wife. What is the result? If a woman becomes faithful, chaste wife, then the next life there is chance of her becoming a male. Because according to Vedic literature, to take a birth as woman is low-grade. Striyaḥ śūdrās tathā vaiśyā ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā the... As there are higher grade and lower grade births, so according to Vedic understanding, the women, the body of woman is lower grade birth. Therefore if she's fortunate to have a good husband, devotee, and if she becomes faithful to that husband, then her life is successful. That is called tapasya.

So Gāndhārī did it. Gāndhārī... In India still, marriage does not take by canvassing all of a sudden. The father and mother, especially in aristocratic family, royal family, even in Western countries, the father, mother select the husband or wife. Even in England, the Kind Edward VIII, he was intimately in friendship with a common girl. So the state would not allow him that "You can marry a common girl." So at that time the prime minister, one Mr. Baldwin, he said to him that "Either you have to give up the company of that common girl or you have to give up this empire." So out of sentiment, he gave up the empire. Later on he was very sorry. And his second brother, George VI, he... George VI means the father of the present Queen, Elizabeth. So still this is current in aristocratic family, that the husband and wife should be selected by the parents.

So Gāndhārī, she was the daughter of Afghanistan, Ghandahar. Still, the name is there Gandahar. Gandhar. Formerly the name was Gandhar. So Gāndhārī means the daughter of Gandhar country. So when she was informed that her would-be husband is a blind man-Dhṛtarāṣṭra was blind from birth-so immediately she practiced austerity. Voluntarily she closed her eyes with cloth that she would also live as blind. "My husband would be blind. So, although I'm not blind, I must live also as blind." This is the beginning of austerity, Gāndhārī. So Gāndhārī was so faithful, one of the most exalted chaste wife mentioned in the śāstras, Gāndhārī, that in all conditions she followed the husband. At last, when everything was finished in the Battle of Kurukṣetra, no Kaurava, none of the sons or grandsons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra was living, neither of the Pāṇḍavas, still, Gāndhārī was faithfully serving her husband. And Dhṛtarāṣṭra was living with the nephews, Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers. They were keeping the uncle very comfortably as elder uncle, all respect. But Vidura came there, and he criticized him, that "You have no shame. You all along remained enemy to your nephews. Now your nephews have killed all your descendants, and you are living here just like a dog. They are giving you some morsel of bread and you are eating and living here. You have no shame. You have become old." So he became very sorry: "My dear brother, what shall I do?" "Please come immediately along with me, and come to the forest." So Dhṛtarāṣṭra went according to the instruction of Vidura. Gāndhārī followed. Gāndhārī never said that "I am now old. I have lost my children. These nephews, they're taking care of me. Why shall I go with my husband?" No. She also went.

So there are many good qualities in Mahābhārata about Gāndhārī. Therefore she is described here as tapasvinī. Tapasvinī. Very chaste faithful wife. Ideal wife. Gāndhārī. Tapasvinī. So what is the purport? Read it.

Pradyumna: "Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Gāndhārī, the father and mother of Duryodhana and his brothers, were the elder uncle and aunt of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. After the Battle of Kurukṣetra, the celebrated couple, having lost all their sons and grandsons, were under the care of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. They were passing their days in great agony over such heavy loss of life and were practically living the life of ascetics. The death..."



Prabhupāda: Yes. The... Because he was elder uncle, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was coming in the morning to offer obeisances, and one morning, when he came, he saw there is no Dhṛtarāṣṭra and aunt. So became very much disappointed, because he was conscious that they were living in very aggrieved condition. "So might be I have offended them. So therefore they have left my home." That is also, you'll find. Then Nārada came, that "Don't bother. They have gone to the forest to live as ascetic. Don't try to bring them back." Go on.



Pradyumna: "The death news of Bhīṣmadeva, uncle of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, was another great shock for the king and the queen, and therefore they required solace from Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was conscious of his duty, and he at once hurried to the spot with Lord Kṛṣṇa and satisfied the begrieved Dhṛtarāṣṭra with kinds words both from himself and the Lord also. Gāndhārī was a powerful ascetic, although she was living the life of a faithful wife and kind mother. It is said that Gāndhārī also voluntarily closed her eyes because of the blindness of her husband. A wife's duty is to follow the husband cent percent, and Gāndhārī was so true to her husband that she followed him even in his perpetual blindness. Therefore in her actions she was a great ascetic. Besides that, the shock which she suffered because of the wholesale killing of her one hundred sons and her grandsons also was certainly too much for a woman. But she suffered all this just like an ascetic. Gāndhārī, although a woman..."



Prabhupāda: Ascetic means who voluntarily suffers all kinds of suffering. Titikṣavaḥ, the exact word.



titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ

suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ

sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ

[SB 3.25.21]



Sādhu means that he must be tolerant. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. You know how much tolerant he was. So titikṣavaḥ. So titikṣavaḥ, titikṣavaḥ is the qualification of a brāhmaṇa. Śamo damas titikṣā. Tolerant. You cannot expect any peaceful life in this material world. That is not possible. Therefore in all conditions, in order to execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you must be tolerant. Tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna that there will be some material pleasures and... Not pleasure, displeasures. So pleasure is also here, displeasure. They do not know. So Kṛṣṇa advised: tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. Āgamāpāyino 'nityās tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. "These, such things come and go. Don't bother much. Try to become tolerant and execute your own business." Similarly we live together. There may be some inconvenience. You are brought up in a different standard in Europe and America, and in India it may be difficult because you haven't got all the facilities. But you learn tolerance. Execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That should be our business. Tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata.



mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata

[Bg. 2.14]



So for life of austerity... Kṛṣṇa consciousness life means the life of austerity, tapasya. It is not extravagancy. So we have to learn titikṣā. That is one of the qualifications of the brāhmaṇa. Then?



Pradyumna: "Gāndhārī, although a woman, is no less than Bhīṣmadeva in character. They are both remarkable personalities in the Mahābhārata."



Prabhupāda: That's all. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





730615SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.9.49

-

Māyāpura, June 15, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



pitrā cānumato rājā

vāsudevānumoditaḥ

cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa

pitṛ-paitāmahaṁ vibhuḥ

[SB 1.9.49]



Translation: "After this, the great religious king, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, executed the royal power in the kingdom strictly according to the codes and royal principles approved by his uncle and confirmed by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: This is very important verse: the king's duty and how a king is recognized. The first recognition was made by Dhṛtarāṣṭra, his uncle. Why? Because there was fight between two section of cousin-brothers, the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas. So the Kauravas were all killed. The Pāṇḍavas also, except the five brothers, their sons were all killed. So it is not that by force... There was force, but it was dharma-yuddha. Kṣatriyas, they would claim by strength, by fight, not by high-court judgment. By strength, by bodily strength.



So the Pāṇḍavas proved their bodily strength, and Dhṛtarāṣṭra was under the impression that because actually the kingdom belonged to him, but on account of his becoming blind, he could not inherit on the throne. Defective in the body. A king should be all complete. So not a blind man can be king. That is not possible. So after the death of his younger brother Pāṇḍu, he thought, actually the kingdom belonged to him. Now, after the death of his brother, his sons should inherit. That was the political conspiracy of the battle of Kurukṣetra. Now everything finished, decided by the battle. Dhṛtarāṣṭra accepted, "Yes, my dear nephews, you can become king now. We have tried our strength, and you have come out victorious. Therefore I also confirm that you become king." It is said, pitrā cānumataḥ. Not that against the will of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira accepted the throne. No. He took permission: "My dear uncle, now you decide whether we shall become king or you shall remain king." So he said, "No, you become king. Now your right is confirmed."

Then again, it was confirmed by Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. Because a king is representative of God. King is not ordinary person. Just like spiritual master is representative of God, similarly, king is also representative of God. The father is also representative of God. These are the statements of the śāstras. Because they will guide. The king will guide. The spiritual master will guide. The father will guide. What is that guidance? That guidance is how one can become Kṛṣṇa conscious by education, by culture. This is guidance, not that to guide them how to become hippies. This is not guidance. This is misguidance. Guidance means... The whole system of human civilization is guide the people to become God conscious. This is the Vedic civilization, not to make them dog conscious, cat conscious, animal conscious. No. (aside:) Sleeping. You are feeling sleepy? Why not sleep? But don't make like that.

So people... Animals, they do not know that the goal of life is to understand God, Viṣṇu. Animals cannot know, cannot... Even they are instructed, they cannot know it. That is not possible. But the human beings, however fallen he may be, if he is properly guided, if he is properly instructed, he can become God conscious. This is the special privilege of the human life. Animal cannot do. You can train one animal how to dance. That also you can do. So many things. Just like in circus, the animals are trained up to do so many things. But an animal cannot be trained to be God conscious. Sometimes also, by proper guidance, the animal also becomes, but that is very rare case. So it is the king's duty to see that his citizens are becoming God conscious. That is king's duty. First of all father's duty, spiritual master's duty, ultimately, king's duty. King's, king's duty.

Therefore it is said, dharmeṇa, cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa. Dharmeṇa means "by religious principles." What is that religious principle? Religious principle means to guide everyone to become God conscious. This is religious principle. Dharmeṇa. Therefore varṇāśrama-dharma. In the Vedic culture the varṇas and āśrama, they are accepted as dharma. Dharma means duty which you must execute. That is called dharma. Compulsory. If you don't do it, then you will suffer. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. And wherefrom this dharma comes? It comes from Bhagavān, God. He gives these dharmas. And the king, the spiritual master, being representative of God, it is their duty how to guide people to develop that God consciousness. This is called human civilization, dharmeṇa. So it is the king's duty to observe his dharma, kṣatriya. Kṣatriya's duty is to give protection to the citizens, security of life and property, and guide them gradually to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is kṣatriya's duty. Brāhmaṇa's duty is to guide the kṣatriyas, whether he is actually executing his duty according to śāstra. That is brāhmaṇa's duty. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Similarly, vaiśya's duty is to see economic development of the state, and the śūdra's duty-because śūdra means fourth-class men; they have no intelligence-therefore their duty is to serve the three higher classes, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya. This is the system. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. According to quality and work-brāhmaṇa's quality and brāhmaṇa's work; kṣatriya's quality and kṣatriya's work; vaiśya's quality and vaiśya's work.

Quality means education, culture. Just like a medical practitioner. When he passes his examination in the medical college, that is his quality. Or a lawyer. When he passes his examination in the university, that is his quality. But simply by passing the examination, if he sits down at home, then he cannot be called a medical practitioner. He must work as a medical man. Not only... (aside:) You sit down properly, not like that. Not simply acquiring the quality, but he must work as a brāhmaṇa. Then he will be accepted as a brāhmaṇa. Now everything is thrown away. If somebody happens to take birth in a brāhmaṇa family, he becomes a brāhmaṇa. All others, śūdra. And he may do all nonsense, and still he is brāhmaṇa. That is not... It is the duty of the state to see whether you are qualified as a brāhmaṇa. "You are claiming as brāhmaṇa. Whether you are actually qualified as a brāhmaṇa? Whether you are working as a brāhmaṇa?" It is the state's duty to see. It is the king's duty. He may not misguide others.

Just like nowadays a so-called brāhmaṇa is working as a cobbler, and he is claiming to become brāhmaṇa. Not like that. It is the... Just like a medical man. A medical man, if he wants to practice, then he must get certificate from the medical board, registration. The medical board will see whether he is qualified as a medical man, whether he has passed medical examination. Then he will be allowed to practice as a medical man. So whenever a medical practitioner gives you a prescription along with his name, he gives his title, M.D., B.S. and registered number. That means he is approved. Then he can practice. This is common sense affairs in the every state, a lawyer is given certificate by the government. Then he is allowed. Similarly, it is the duty of the state or of the monarch to see that one who is claiming as a brāhmaṇa, whether he is qualified, whether he is acting as a brāhmaṇa. Similarly, a man claiming kṣatriya, whether he is qualified as a kṣatriya and he is acting as a kṣatriya. Similarly, the vaiśya. And śūdra is general. Śūdra means one who has no education, no culture. That is called śūdra. So that is the remnants. First of all, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśyas, and others, those who have no sufficient brain, they are counted as śūdra. Still, śūdras have also prescribed duties. If there are others, those who are less than śūdras, or even the śūdra qualities are wanting, they are doing anything and everything without any control, they are called mleccha-yavana. Mleccha-yavana. This is the pañcama, fifth-grade. First grade, brāhmaṇa; second grade, kṣatriya; third grade, vaiśyas; fourth grade, śūdras; and all others, rejected, fifth grade, they are called caṇḍālas, caṇḍāla.

But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so nice that even caṇḍālas can be also raised to the platform of brāhmaṇa. Caṇḍālo 'pi dvija-śreṣṭho hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ. Even if a caṇḍāla is trained up as a devotee, he can be better than a qualified brāhmaṇa. These are the shastric injunctions. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ [SB 2.4.18]. The yavanas' names are there also. Yavana-mleccha means generally they are meat-eaters, especially cow meat, cow flesh eaters. They are called yavana-mlecchas. So the higher caste, they cannot become meat-eaters. Meat-eating is there. That is for the lower class, not for the higher class. If anyone gives up meat-eating or the bad habits of lower class, illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication, gambling, and if he's trained how to become a qualified brāhmaṇa, then he can be accepted. That is sanctioned in the Bhagavad-gītā. These rascals, they say that these mlecchas and yavanas cannot become brāhmaṇa. Because we are making brāhmaṇas from the mlecchas' and yavanas' section, they are protesting. Some of them are protesting that "Swami Bhaktivedanta is ruining Hindu religion." The rascals, they do not know that I am acting strictly according to śāstra. The śāstras says... Kṛṣṇa says Himself, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ: [Bg. 9.32] "Anyone born in low-grade family.' Pāpa-yoni, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya, "if he takes to Me according to regulative principles," vyapāśritya, "according to the principle," te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim, "he is immediately becomes eligible to be promoted," parāṁ gatim, "the highest perfection of life." One thing is pāpa-yoni. So there is no restriction that pāpa-yoni shall remain always pāpa-yoni. Why? They should be given enlightenment. That is brāhmaṇa-ism. Brāhmaṇa means liberal, and just the opposite word of brāhmaṇa is kṛpaṇa, miser. A brāhmaṇa should give chance to everyone, even to the pāpa-yoni, how to become brāhmaṇa. That is real brāhmaṇa. And the rascal who thinks that "I shall remain simply brāhmaṇa; others shall remain mlecchas and yavanas," he is not brāhmaṇa; he is śūdra, because his mind is so crippled. He does not want to see others to become brāhmaṇa. He is miser, kṛpaṇa. Kṛpaṇaḥ phala-hetavaḥ.

So our this movement is not for the kṛpaṇas. It is meant for the brāhmaṇas. We want to become ourself brāhmaṇa, and we want to make others also brāhmaṇa. Because there is need of brāhmaṇa at the present moment. The whole human society is now running by the śūdras, all śūdras. Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In this Kali-yuga, everyone is a śūdra. Maybe born of a brāhmaṇa family, but because he has no culture... The first culture is garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. If garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is not observed even in a brāhmaṇa family, he becomes immediately śūdra. This is the statement of the śāstra. So nobody is observing garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. Therefore, according to śāstra, everyone is a śūdra. Now because everyone is śūdra, therefore he cannot be trained up as brāhmaṇa? No. He can be trained up. Caṇḍālo 'pi dvija-śreṣṭho hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ. If that śūdra or caṇḍāla can be turned into a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ, then under training he can become better than brāhmaṇa.

So these are the principles of the state, to see. Therefore it is called cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa. Dharmeṇa, to establish dharma. Cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa. How? Pitṛ-paitāmaham. The king, Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, his father Pāṇḍu, his father, his father... This is the descendance. When Mahārāja Parīkṣit was born and the name-giving ceremony was going on, and all the learned brāhmaṇas, they predicted that this boy would be such, such-and-such powerful like such-and-such king, such-and-such munificent like such-and-such great... That description is there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira inquired whether this boy will be loving his prajā like his forefathers. That is the first inquiry. Therefore to follow the tradition of the pitṛ-paitāmaham, forefathers... The kings... Formerly all the kings, they were following the footsteps of their forefathers. Just like Mahārāja Parīkṣit, grandson of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, when he saw that one black man was trying to kill one cow, he immediately took his sword, and he said, "Do you think that because there is no Arjuna, no Yudhiṣṭhira, you shall do anything you like?" Forefathers, remembering forefathers. "Still I am there. I am his representative. You cannot do it." So forefathers.

So the monarchy, as soon as it becomes a personal property... The kings thought that "This kingdom is mine. I can do whatever I like, and still, the kingdom is mine." Then the monarchy was failure. Then from the whole world, the monarchy is now wiped out. But the so-called democracy is no good. Because democracy means by votes. So the votes are given by the rascal śūdras. So what is the meaning of electing somebody if the vote givers are also rascal and fool, and the vote-taker is a big food, big rascal, that's all? He manages something, somehow or other to take the votes. Therefore, you see, dacoit is going on. The government is there, and at night you are not secure. You have to take care of yourself, whether dacoits are coming or not. And they are coming. So what is the meaning of this government? If the dacoits are there, rogues are there, thieves are there, miscreants are there, so what is the meaning of government? No. At the present moment the government means that the same rogues and rascals come to become minister and take fat salary and sleep, and you take care of yourself. That is going on.

So it is not that kind of kingdom. Here it is said, cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa. Cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa pitṛ-paitāmahaṁ vibhuḥ. He was so great, powerful. According to the tradition of the pitṛ-paitāmaham, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, recognized by his uncle, recognized by Kṛṣṇa, took up the reigns of the government, and dharmeṇa, according to the..., strictly to the shastric principle, he ruled over. This is king. So in the Bhāgavata you will find everything, politics, sociology, religion, culture, philosophy, science, everything you will find. It is not that simply dogmatic, something saying, some miracles. No, it is not like that. It is a great science, scientific. Therefore in the beginning it is said, nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3]. Nigama. Nigama means the Vedic literature. Nigama. So the essence, the quintessence of Vedic literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam... Veda means knowledge, I have several times explained. So Veda contains all kinds of knowledge. Āyur-veda, the knowledge about medical science. Dhanur-veda, the military science. Āyur-veda, Dhanur-veda, Yajur-veda. Veda means knowledge.

So it is kalpa-taru, nigama-kalpa-taru; the Vedic knowledge is just like kalpa-taru. Kalpa-taru means desire tree. Anything you want from that tree... Just like here in this material world we can get mangoes from the mango tree, pineapple from the pineapple tree. If we ask the pineapple tree, "Give me mango," that is not possible. But in the spiritual world there are trees. That is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā. Cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. That is kalpa-vṛkṣa. You can get from any tree whatever you like. That is spiritual. So nigama-kalpa-taru. The kalpa-taru, the Vedas. The very word, referred, kalpa-taru, means it is not material. It is coming from the spiritual world, Veda. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo vedānta-kṛd vedānta-vid ca aham.

So Veda is coming from the spiritual world. Therefore you cannot find any history of the beginning of Vedas, because it is beyond the story of creation. Therefore Vedic knowledge is perfect. Any knowledge within this material world, that is defective, with four kinds of defects: mistake, illusion, imperfectness and cheating. But Vedic knowledge is not like that. Vedic knowledge is perfect. Therefore, amongst the learned society, if you give evidence from the Vedas, it is accepted. Immediately accepted. Just like in the law court, if you give reference from the lawbooks section, it is accepted. Similarly, Vedic knowledge is so perfect that if you refer to some verse in the Vedas, in the Upaniṣads... Just like raso vai saḥ. "Saḥ, that Kṛṣṇa, is reservoir of all pleasure." Raso vai saḥ. So yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante. These things are... There are so many statements.

So dharmeṇa rājyaṁ cakāra. Not whimsically, not by the high-court decision, no. No. There was no need of high-court decision if it is confirmed by the superiors. Just like Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra confirmed, "Yes, my dear boy, you can become king." Kṛṣṇa confirmed, "You can become king." So he became king. Fighting was also there. The fighting also, they came out victorious. But still, it was confirmed by Yudhiṣṭhira and Kṛṣṇa. Then he took over the charge of the government and he ruled the citizens, dharmeṇa, as it was done by his predecessor forefathers.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.10: Lectures





730616SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.1

-

Māyāpura, June 16, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



śaunaka uvāca

hatvā svariktha-spṛdha ātatāyino

yudhiṣṭhiro dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ

sahānujaiḥ pratyavaruddha-bhojanaḥ

kathaṁ pravṛttaḥ kim akāraṣīt tataḥ

[SB 1.10.1]



Translation: "Śaunaka Muni asked: After killing his enemies who desired to usurp his rightful inheritance, how did the greatest of all religious men, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, assisted by his brothers, rule his subjects? Surely he could not freely enjoy his kingdom with unrestricted consciousness."



Prabhupāda: So here the most important word is yudhiṣṭhiro dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was known as Dharmarāja, very strictly following religious principles. So he killed... For his sake, sixty-four crores of men were killed in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. So he was not happy although the battle, the fight, was religious fight. It is not whimsical. Just like in the modern days the politicians, they fight unnecessarily to fulfill their desire... Just like in our country, unnecessarily they divided Pakistan, and to fulfill the whims of the leaders, they are fighting with nobody's gain, neither there is any religious principles.



So fighting whimsically by the politicians, that is not sanctioned. There must be dharma-yuddha. Dharma-yuddha means religious fight, fight on religious principles. So what was the religious principle? (aside:) Hm, where is that mat? (Bengali) Saccidānanda. Here it is said, hatvā ātatāyinaḥ. Ātatāyī means aggressor. If somebody comes to your home to kidnap your wife, to take by force your property or to set fire in your house, he is called ātatāyī. He should immediately be killed. It is not that nonviolence nonsense. If somebody is coming to attack you unnecessarily, you must kill him first. It is not Vaiṣṇavism... "Oh, this man is coming to kill me. Right. All right, let me embrace him." No. That is not the rule. When there is ātatāyī, aggressor, you must fight, you must kill. That is religious.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ, he was so strictly followers of religious principles that when even Kṛṣṇa advised him that "You go and say some lies to Droṇācārya. Because Droṇācārya will not believe anyone, you say and go there that 'Your son Aśvatthāmā is dead.' " And Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja hesitated, that "How can I say this lie?" Of course, this is too much following religious principles. This is also another instruction. When Kṛṣṇa said that "You go and speak the lies," he should have done immediately. That is dharma. Because dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharma means which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is dharma. You cannot manufacture dharma. Just like nowadays so many dharmas have been manufactured. They are not dharma. Dharma means the order which is given by the Lord. That is dharma. Just like Kṛṣṇa said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. We have manufactured so many dharmas: Hindu dharma, Muslim dharma, Christian dharma, Parsee dharma, Buddha dharma, this dharma, that dharma. They are not dharma. They are mental concoction, mental concoction. Otherwise, there will be contradiction. Take for example, the Hindus think cow-killing is adharma, and the Muslims think that cow-killing is their dharma. So which is correct? Whether cow killing is adharma or dharma?

So these are mental concoction. Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā says, ei bhāla ei manda saba manodharma, "Mental concocted." Real dharma is what is ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is dharma. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up your all manufactured dharma. Here is the real dharma." Śaraṇaṁ vraja. "Just become surrendered unto Me, and that is real dharma." Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Just like law. Laws can be manufactured or can be given by the government. You cannot make any law at your home. That is not law. Law means the order given by the government. The supreme government is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat [Bg. 10.8]. There is nobody better than Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the order given by Kṛṣṇa is dharma. Our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that dharma. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You give up all other so-called dharmas, this dharma, that dharma, so many dharmas. Simply just surrender unto Me."

So we are preaching the same principle, and that is confirmed by Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Caitanya Mahā... Āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa, yāre dekha tāre kaha kṛṣṇa-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. This is dharma. Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not manufacture any new system of dharma. No. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te, kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne [Cc. Madhya 19.53]. So the only difference is He is Kṛṣṇa Himself. The only difference is that Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly orders that "You give up all nonsense; simply surrender unto Me." This is Kṛṣṇa. Because He is Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is giving directly order. The same Kṛṣṇa, because people misunderstood Him... Even big, big scholars, they say, "It is too much that Kṛṣṇa is ordering like that." But they are rascals. They do not know. They cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore because people misunderstood Him, Kṛṣṇa came as a devotee to teach how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa perfectly. Kṛṣṇa came. Just like sometimes my servant gives me massage. I say by giving his head massage, "Do like this." So I am not his servant, but I am teaching him. Similarly, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself, but He is teaching perfectly how to approach Kṛṣṇa, how to serve Kṛṣṇa, The same principle. Kṛṣṇa said, "You surrender unto Me," and Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, "You surrender to Kṛṣṇa." So on principle there is no change. On principle there is no change.

So here Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ, of all the followers of religious principle, he is the foremost, variṣṭhaḥ. So he was very sorry that "For my sake, for enthroning me, oh, so many people have given their lives." Not only his cousin-brothers, the soldiers... And, because at that time, five thousand years ago, these kings or the emperors of Hastināpura were ruling all over the world... This planet was called Bhārata-varṣa, the whole planet. Not this now, a small tract of land. The whole world was called Bhārata-varṣa. Formerly it was called Ilāvṛta-varṣa. Since the reign of Mahārāja Bharata, this planet is called Bhārata-varṣa. So the Pāṇḍavas or the Kurus, they were the rulers of the world. As such, when there was fight between the two section of cousin-brothers, from all parts of the world, somebody joined this side, somebody joined that side. So I think in the Mahābhārata it is stated that sixty-four crores of men were killed, and many disappeared. Nobody knows about their whereabouts. So actually, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ, he was so great, stalwart, foremost followers of religious principle. He was very, very sorry that "For my sake so many people let down their life." So he was not happy.

Therefore in our śāstra, when you commit some necessary sinful activities, to counteract it, a fasting, fasting is recommended. Therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was observing fasting, taking little necessities. Therefore śaunaka Muni is inquiring that sahānujaiḥ pratyavaruddha-bhojanaḥ kathaṁ pravṛttaḥ kim akāraṣīt tataḥ: [SB 1.10.1] "Then he was undergoing some prāyaścitta system; then how did he take the reigns of ruling over the kingdom?" That was his inquiry, Śaunaka Ṛṣi. Actually, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was first of all, in the beginning... The first beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was in front of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Śukadeva Gosvāmī explained, and Sūta Gosvāmī was in that meeting also. So he learned explanation of Bhāgavatam from Śukadeva Gosvāmī. This is called paramparā system. Now, generally the professional reciters of Bhāgavatam, they do not follow the paramparā system. They make business. Just like we are reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, we are discussing about the warfares, the professionals, they will go immediately to rāsa-līlā, as if these things are not necessary. Anyone who hears Bhāgavatam from these professionals, they do not know what are the other subject matter in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Because they haven't got the chance to hear. They do not discuss. Whenever there is recitation of Bhāgavatam, it means they are discussing some rāsa-līlā. Because the rāsa-līlā is very palatable to the rascals. They think that Kṛṣṇa is ordinary young boy, and the gopīs are young girls, and as they read novel and dramas, one man, one woman, their activities, they think Bhāgavata is like that. They think... Arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matiḥ. They think like that. The gopīs, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs, it is most confidential part of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It is to be relished by the liberated soul, not these ordinary persons who have got sex attraction. They are unfit for hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, rāsa-līlā. Unfit.

So unfortunately, these professional reciters, they do not begin Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the very beginning, where Vedānta-sūtra is discussed. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. So Bhāgavata begins with this word of Vedānta-sūtra, janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ svarāṭ. So it is the, in the beginning, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the explanation of the Vedānta-sūtra. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has recommended, therefore, one should learn Bhāgavatam from a person who knows Vedānta-sūtra. Śruti-gṛhītayā, bhaktyā śruti-gṛhītayā. Bhakti should be generated, śruti-gṛhītayā, by studying Vedānta-sūtra. Bhakti is not sentiment. Bhakti is the transcendental science. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, jñānī viśiṣyate(?). You should be in full knowledge what is Kṛṣṇa, not that accepting Kṛṣṇa as something fictitious. Even big, big scholars-Dr. Radhakrishnan, Gandhi-they cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. How they can understand? It is not understandable by the fools and rascals.

manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

[Bg. 7.3]



So to understand Kṛṣṇa is not so easy thing. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu. Out of many millions of persons, all rascals and fools, animals, what they will understand Kṛṣṇa? Therefore Kṛṣṇa personally says, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. Siddhi. Siddhi means perfection. All over the world we are touring, all full of rascals and fools. Nobody is trying to make his life perfect. What is that perfection? Paramāṁ siddhim. That perfection is,



mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ

[Bg. 8.15]



To go back to home, back to Godhead, that is the highest perfection of life. Nobody knows what is Godhead. Nobody knows how to go back to Him. So to understand Kṛṣṇa and to become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, it is not very easy thing. Very, very difficult. But Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, mahā-vadānyāvatāra, He has distributed this Kṛṣṇa science and love of Kṛṣṇa in such an easy way that by His mercy even a most rude person can also understand, if He takes the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was a kṛṣṇa-bhakta, and therefore, he is explained, is dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ, the most foremost personality, because he knows... He agreed to fight with his cousin-brothers because Kṛṣṇa wanted. Kṛṣṇa, when Arjuna said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, there is no need of fighting. Because the other side, they are my brothers, nephews, I better prefer to give them the kingdom. I shall beg and live, but I don't want to fight with my brother," so immediately Kṛṣṇa condemned it: kutas tvā kaśmalam idaṁ viṣame samupasthitam: "What nonsense you are speaking? You must fight." Then still he was unwilling to fight. Therefore the whole Bhagavad-gītā was spoken to him. And after explaining Bhagavad-gītā, He inquired from Arjuna, "Whether you are now determined to fight?" Yathecchasi tathā kuru [Bg. 18.63]. This liberty was given to Arjuna: "I have explained to you everything. Now whatever you like, you can do."

So Kṛṣṇa does not force anyone to become kṛṣṇa-bhakta, but He gives the chance. He explains everything, that "If you become kṛṣṇa-bhakta, or surrendered soul, then you will be happy. Otherwise you will not be happy." This is Kṛṣṇa. Kuru. He says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. He does not force. Now it is our choice, whether we shall surrender to Kṛṣṇa or not. These are the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that one's ultimate goal of life is to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is the ultimate goal of life. But they do not know it. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know. They think for some worldly happiness and go to some demigods... That is condemned in the Bhagavad-gītā, kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ yajante anya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]. They have lost their intelligence, those who go to worship other demigods for some paltry benefit, temporary benefit. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. Those who are, brain substance is not very much in good quantity... Brain substance, instead of brain substance, there is cow-dung. Such people go to worship the other demigods. There is no necessity. There is no necessity. Of course, we do not show any disrespect to any demigods. We offer all respect. But we do not accept that Kṛṣṇa and all other demigods are on the same level, as the Māyāvādī says, that "Either you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra or chant 'Durgā Durgā,' 'Kālī Kālī,' it is the same." This is rascaldom. This is rascaldom. Harer nāma. Śāstra says, harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam. Śāstra does not say that "You chant this name, that name, any dog's name, cat's name, and it is all right." Śāstra does not say. Śāstra says,

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



So yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ na sa siddhim avāpnoti: [Bg. 16.23] "Anyone who avoids or disregards the injunction of the śāstras and acts whimsically, he will never get perfection." Na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim. Therefore our principle is, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means we strictly follow Kṛṣṇa. Our leader is Kṛṣṇa. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). So everyone requires a leader. I have talked many times that "Leader must be followed." When I was talking with Professor Kotovsky in Moscow, I asked him, "Where is the difference between your philosophy and our philosophy? You are following Lenin. We are following Kṛṣṇa. So we have to follow one leader. You cannot avoid it." So he was silent. He could not reply. So to become perfect, to achieve perfection, one has to follow a leader. So why should we follow the misleaders, the rascal leaders? Let us follow the perfect leader, Kṛṣṇa, and become perfect.



Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730617SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.2

-

Māyāpura, June 17, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



vaṁśaṁ kuror vaṁśa-davāgni-nirhṛtaṁ

saṁrohayitvā bhava-bhāvano hariḥ

niveśayitvā nija-rājya īśvaro

yudhiṣṭhiraṁ prīta-manā babhūva ha

[SB 1.10.2]



Translation: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the maintainer of the world, became pleased after reestablishing Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira in his own kingdom and after restoring the Kuru dynasty, which had been exhausted by the bamboo fire of anger."



Prabhupāda: The two words, vaṁśaṁ kuroḥ... Vaṁśa means dynasty of the Kurus. Another word, vaṁśa-davāgni. Vaṁśa means bamboo. So this dynasty is like bamboo. One bamboo, automatically, many bamboos grow side by side. So this dynasty also grows like that. One man, one woman, united, they beget children. They beget children. In this way, dynasty expands. So the expansion of dynasty and the bamboo growing, practically the same thing. Bamboo, they are also living entities, and another thing is davāgni, forest fire, davāgni. The bamboos, when they collide by air, there is heat. Electricity is generated, and the fire takes place. That is the cause of forest fire. Nobody goes to set fire in the forest. Nowadays, of course, in your country they are doing like that. But generally the forest fire takes place by this collision of the bamboos. So this world is like that. Therefore we sing, saṁsāra-dāvāgni. Saṁsāra-dāvā... What is that?



Devotees: Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **.



Prabhupāda: Ah. Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka **. So this world, you may try to keep yourself very peaceful, silent, but there will be set fire automatically, the nature. Because the natural law is that it will not allow you to live peacefully. That is not possible. Just like in prison house, it is not that you will go to the prison house and live very peacefully. No. Because prison house is meant for the criminals.



So anyone who is in this material world, they are criminals. They are all criminals. Why?

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



As soon as... Our business is to serve Kṛṣṇa. We are constitutionally made like that. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. So these rascals, nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa, eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, when he forgets Kṛṣṇa, "Why shall I serve Kṛṣṇa? I shall become Kṛṣṇa," that is māyā. As soon as you forget the service of the Lord... That is your business, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Just like this finger is part and parcel of my body. The finger's business is to carry out my order. I say, "Finger, come here." It comes immediately. I say, "Finger come here," it comes immediately. That is the business of the part and parcel of the body. I desire the leg now should go upstairs: the leg immediately goes. Similarly, we being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, our only duty is to carry out the order of Kṛṣṇa. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66].



So as soon as we forget our duty or we want to imitate... Just like these Māyāvādīs, they want to imitate Kṛṣṇa. They want to become Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can become Kṛṣṇa. These rascals, they think that by mystic yoga process one can become God. Simply rascaldom. Nobody can become God. God is never made. God does not become. God is always God, not that one is not God, and he becomes God by some mystic yogic power. This theory is going on amongst the Māyāvādīs, that by the mystic yoga practice, one can become God. So we don't want such cheap God. They may become God, so-called God, but we are concerned with the real God, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, when He was three months old, He was God. He did not practice any mystic yoga to kill Pūtanā. Svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca. God's intelligence, power, is natural. Although Kṛṣṇa was on the lap of mother Yaśodā like a little baby, but the full potency of God was there. Svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā. How to kill Pūtanā, how to kill Aghāsura, Bakāsura, Kṛṣṇa knows perfectly. All the Kṛṣṇa's friends, they were entering within the mouth of Aghāsura. Kṛṣṇa is observing, "Now My all friends have entered the mouth of the Aghāsura, and how to kill this demon?" The last, He entered. And at the end of the throat, He began to expand Himself. Just see how He knows to do His business. Svābhāvikī.

Kṛṣṇa was a boy also, little boy. Nobody taught Him how to kill this Aghāsura, Bakāsura. But He knows. Svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca. He expanded Himself within the throat, and the demon was choked up, and he died. Similarly, the Keśī demon came as a horse and Kṛṣṇa pushed His hand within the mouth of the horse. If you want to control horse, you have to control his mouth. Horse is controlled by the mouth. Therefore you have seen the harnesses are fit, fixed in the mouth, and the driver controls the mouth, and the horse goes. So Kṛṣṇa was a boy. How He knew it that "This demon has come in the shape of a horse. So if I have to control him, I will have to control his mouth." So He pushed His hand within the mouth of the horse, and the horse felt just like an iron bar and hot iron. So he died. Similarly, when Kṛṣṇa fought with that bull, what is that asura?

Devotees: Ariṣṭāsura.



Prabhupāda: He knew that to control the bull you have to control the horns. So He took up the horns and killed him. This is svābhāvikī, natural. He knows everything.



So here it is said that prīta-manā īśvaraḥ. Īśvaro prīta-manā babhūva, "Īśvara became pleased." Īśvara is always pleased. He is never displeased. But when He sees that people are devotees, people are acting as part and parcel of Him, He is more pleased. That is bhakti. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. How God is pleased, that you can understand by discharging devotional service. Whether God is pleased or not pleased, how you can understand? Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. You cannot understand what is God, what is Kṛṣṇa. Generally, all people, they do not know what is God. And what to speak of understanding whether God is pleased or not pleased. They do not know what is God. This is the position of the world. They do not know what is God, neither there is any education to understand, although the human life is meant for understanding God. That is human life. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. The animal life, their inquiries are... In the morning... Just like birds, they chirp, "Where we have to go now to find out our food? Where we shall eat today? Where we shall go?" That is their questions and answers. Similarly, we also, human beings, we go to the share market, "What is the value? What is the price of this commodity? What is the price of that commodity? " For eating purpose. Not these questions. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. The human life should be engaged in inquiring about Brahman. "What is the Absolute Truth? What is my position in relationship with the Absolute Truth? What is my duty towards the Absolute Truth? What is my ultimate aim of life?" These questions must be discussed. Perhaps these questions are being discussed by the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and no other movement. They do not know. The Māyāvādīs, they deny the existence of God. They become themselves God.

So the fact is that we have to see that īśvara, the Supreme Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is prīta-manā. That is gopīs'... The gopīs' life is like that. They want to see Kṛṣṇa always, prīta-manā, satisfied. That is our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosophy, how to see Kṛṣṇa prīta-manā. That is our business. Here in the material world, everyone is trying to see himself, "How much satisfied I am?" Prīta-manā. He is... Everyone is trying to become happy himself. Just... Bhakti-mārga, or the path of devotional service, is just the opposite, to see how much Kṛṣṇa is prīta-manā, satisfied.

So here it is stated that vaṁśaṁ kuror vaṁśa-davāgni-nirhṛtam. When everything was finished... Kṛṣṇa knows how to kill the demons, setting fire. Just like you... Some way or other, if there is fire in the forest, automatically, so many trees, so many animals, so many other things, they become devastated, burned into ashes. So Kṛṣṇa, by the policy of Kṛṣṇa, all the demons were brought together in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, and set them... The fire was set, fighting, and they died. When Arjuna was hesitating to fight, Arjuna was at last informed that "Why you are hesitating? It is all My plan. You fight or don't fight, it doesn't matter. These people are not going back home. They will die here." Nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savyasācin: "You just become only a nimitta, an immediate cause. Everything is arranged. But if you fight, you get the credit. I want to see My devotee gets the credit. Everything I am doing." Everything actually. Just like this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is quickly spreading all over the world within four, five years. Is it my credit? No. It is credit of Kṛṣṇa. But because I tried to do this business, people automatically giving me the credit. They say, "Swamiji, you have done wonderful." I have done nothing wonderful. It is Kṛṣṇa's business. Kṛṣṇa-śakti vinā nahe nāma-pravartana. Without Kṛṣṇa's strength, nobody can spread. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is always ready to help us, provided we are also ready to cooperate with Him. If we cooperate with Him, what Kṛṣṇa desires, if we want to do little, immediately Kṛṣṇa will help you. If you work one percent, Kṛṣṇa will help you ten percent. Again, if you work one percent, Kṛṣṇa will help you another ten percent. But the cent percent credit you get, by the help of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa gives you intelligence. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam, buddhi-yogaṁ dadāmi tam [Bg. 10.10]. If you are engaged satatam, twenty-four hours, without any other engagement... Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66], giving up all other nonsense business... Sarva-dharmān. Simply if you are engaged in Kṛṣṇa's business... Prīti-pūrvakam, with love. Not as hackneyed: "Oh here is the duty, chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa. All right, Harekṛṣṇaharekṛṣṇaharekṛṣṇa..." (Prabhupāda chants very quickly and indistinctly) Not like that. With prīti, with love. Chant every name, "Hare Kṛṣṇa," and hear. Here is Kṛṣṇa; here is Rādhārāṇī. That kind of chanting, quality. Not "Harekṛṣṇaharekṛṣṇakṛṣṇakṛṣṇaharehare..." Not like that. Not like that. Prīti.

Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti [Bg. 10.10]. That prīti is required. That is the essential quality. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Real thing is bhakti. Kṛṣṇa is not hungry that you will give Him some good food and He will eat it, never mind in which you can give. "Oh, here is puri, halavā. Kṛṣṇa must eat." Kṛṣṇa is not hungry for your puri, halavā. But if there is bhakti, if there is love, then He eats. Tad aham aśnāmi: "Then I eat if there is bhakti, love." "Kṛṣṇa, what can I do for You? I am so teeny, You are so great. Still, I have tried to do something. If You kindly eat." This is mantra. Real mantra is that not so many formalities of mantra. Kṛṣṇa does not say, "One who offers Me with the Vedic mantras..." Never says. Kṛṣṇa says bhaktyā, "with devotion."

So others may criticize you, that "These American Vaiṣṇavas, they do not know how to do this, how to do that." Let them criticize. But Kṛṣṇa says bhaktyā. "You remain perfect devotee." Then your life is perfect. Kṛṣṇa does not say that the Indian devotee who discriminates between touchable and untouchable and big, big paṇḍitas or deva-gosvāmī, not dāsa-gosvāmī... Kṛṣṇa does not discriminate like that. Kṛṣṇa says bhaktyā, yo me bhaktyā prayacchati. Kṛṣṇa wants to see how much sincere devotee you have become. That is His business. Kṛṣṇa does not see, "Oh, whether you are coming from brāhmaṇa family or śūdra family, this family or...?" No. Therefore in the śāstras it is forbidden: vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhiḥ. Vaiṣṇava does not belong to the material caste. He is transcendental, because He is rendering service to Kṛṣṇa on the transcendental platform. He is not in the material platform. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. That is guṇa. These brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, they belong to the category of the three guṇas: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. But those who are pure devotees, they are transcendental to these three guṇas. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. They transcend. They do not belong to these guṇas. No. Māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena se... [Bg. 14.26]. Anyone who is engaged in devotional service, avyabhicāreṇa, without any deviation, just to the rules and regulations, just to the standard, then immediately, sa guṇān samatītya etān, the plural number... All these guṇas, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa... He is above brāhmaṇa. Vaiṣṇava is above brāhmaṇa.

So this world is creation of Kṛṣṇa. Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate. Aham ādir hi devānām [Bg 10.2]. So we may think that Brahmā created this universe, but not..., that is not the fact. Kṛṣṇa said, aham ādir hi devānām: "I am prior to all the demigods." He is the origin of the demigods. Aham ādir hi devānām. Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate. Everything emanates from Him. So therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is bhava-bhāvana. Bhava-bhāvana. This world is called bhava-saṁsāra, bhava-saṁsāra. Bhava means become. There is another nature, spiritual world, that is not bhava, that does not become. It is always existing, nitya. Nitya-loka. Vaikuṇṭha-loka. But this material world is called bhava. Bhava-saṁsāra. Bhava means it appears and again disappears. Everything here-just like your body, my body-it has appeared at a certain date and it will disappear at a certain date. Similarly, the whole universal body also, it has appeared at a certain date and it will disappear at a certain date. So bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It becomes manifested, again it becomes disappeared. Therefore it is called bhava-saṁsāra. But still, although it is temporary, the arrangement is so nice, pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate.. [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. Everything is complete. It is not false.

The Māyāvādīs, they say this world is false. We don't say that. Why it is false? It is perfectly created by Kṛṣṇa. Why I discredit Kṛṣṇa, "Oh, it is false"? No. It is not false. It is reality, provided you know how to utilize it. When you think that you are the enjoyer of this world, that is false. You are not the enjoyer. Enjoyer is Kṛṣṇa. That is reality. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Then it is reality. As soon as you think, "This is mine. This is my ahaṁ mameti... [SB 5.5.8]." Ahaṁ mameti, "I am this body, and anything in relationship with this body is mine," that is moha. But as soon as you come to the understanding... (creaking sound in background) What is that?

Brahmānanda: Bullock cart.



Prabhupāda: All right. So bhava-bhāvana. Kṛṣṇa... This world is created by Kṛṣṇa, and He wants to see it is properly maintained. And who will maintain? His own representative. Not the demons. Therefore king is supposed to be a representative of Kṛṣṇa. He will maintain this world properly. A Vaiṣṇava, he knows how to utilize everything for Kṛṣṇa. The aim of this creation is giving these conditioned souls another chance for liberation. That is the purpose. When the whole world is annihilated, then all the living entities again enter into the body of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Then, when there is again creation, then the living entities again come out, according to their past position. We do not accept this rascal theory, Darwin's, that from lower-grade life they... There is a promotion like that, but in the creation everything is there. All the 8,400,000 species, they are all there. Although the gradations are there. So according to the past karma, karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1], everyone comes out again, gets a different type of body, and begins his work. Again another chance. "Yes. You come to the point of human understanding. Try to understand your relationship with Kṛṣṇa and get yourself liberated. Go home, back to home, back to..." If you lose this opportunity-this creation is made for that purpose-then again you remain. Again, when everything is annihilated, you remain in dormant stage, millions of years. Again you become created.



So there is a great science. Everyone should try to understand what is the responsibility of human life. And to teach this responsibility, to keep men, the human society, in their responsibility, a good king is required like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. Therefore king is supposed to be the representative of God. So after killing these demons, Kuru, kuror vaṁśa-davāgni-nirhṛtaṁ saṁrohayitvā bhava-bhāvano hariḥ niveśayitvā nija-rājya īśvaro yudhiṣṭhiram...

When He saw, "Now Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is situated on the throne for the control of the world," He..., prīta-manā babhūva ha, He became satisfied: "There is My real representative, and he will work nicely."

So these two things are going on. Those who are trying to capture the governmental power for his personal ambition, they will be killed. They will be killed. This way or that way, they will be killed. And persons who are taking responsibility for maintenance of the government as representative of Kṛṣṇa, they will be blessed by Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa will be pleased. So at the present moment, the so-called democracy,... Nobody is representative of Kṛṣṇa. Everyone is demons. Everyone is a demon. So how you can expect peace and prosperity under this government? This is not possible. If you want... We have got to think politically also, because after all, all living entities are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa wants their welfare so that they may come back to home, back to Godhead.

So it is the duty of the Vaiṣṇava to see that people are gradually educated to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So perhaps it would be better if we can..., we also capture political power. As there are many parties, Communist party, Congress party, this party, that party, so there must be one Kṛṣṇa's party. Why not? Then people will be happy, if Kṛṣṇa's party comes to the governmental post. Immediately there will be peace. In India, in India there are so many slaughterhouses. There are... It is said that ten thousand cows are being killed everyday, in the land were one cow was being attempted to be killed, immediately Mahārāja Parīkṣit took his sword, "Who are you?" In that land, now ten thousand cows are being killed every day. So you expect peace? You expect prosperity This is not possible. Therefore if some day Kṛṣṇa's representative takes the governmental power, then he will immediately stop all these slaughterhouses, all these brothels, all these liquor houses. Then there will be peace and prosperity. Bhūta-bhāvana, Kṛṣṇa will be pleased, "Here is My representative."

So there are so many things to understand from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, full knowledge, all knowledge, as it is required by the human society. So we have to study from all angles of vision, not simply by sentiment. This is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Thank you very much. (end)



730618SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.3

-

Māyāpura, June 18, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



niśamya bhīṣmoktam athācyutoktaṁ

pravṛtta-vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ

śaśāsa gām indra ivājitāśrayaḥ

paridhyupāntām anujānuvartitaḥ

[SB 1.10.3]



Translation: "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, after being enlightened by what was spoken by Bhīṣmadeva and Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the infallible, engaged himself in matters of perfect knowledge because all his misgivings were eradicated. Thus he ruled over the earth and seas and was followed by his younger brothers."



Prabhupāda: So here is a responsible monarch, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. It is not that some rascal gets some votes and some way or other he sits on the president's chair and secretly doing all nonsense. Just like your President Nixon is now detected, so many things. The monarchy was not like that. Here it is clearly said, pravṛtta-vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. Vijñāna-vidhūta. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was thinking that "For me, so many people have been killed. So I have become very, very much sinful. I am not fit for sitting on the throne, such responsible throne." But his misgivings were dissipated by the words of Bhīṣma.



Bhīṣma, he is authority. Next to Kṛṣṇa, Bhīṣma is one of the authorities. There are twelve authorities. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ kapilaḥ kumāro manuḥ, prahlādo bhīṣmo janakaḥ [SB 6.3.20]. They are the authorities of piety, religion. They are... Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. We cannot decide what is actually piety, religion. But if we follow mahājana, great authorities, then certainly we are unmistaken. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, now all the Pāṇḍavas along with Kṛṣṇa, they have come to Bhīṣmadeva for taking his last instruction. He was lying on the bed of arrows for death. So his father's benediction was that Bhīṣmadeva would not die unless he desires to die. He was a very avowed brahmacārī, truthful. And Bhīṣmadeva recommended in the rājasūya-yajña that "Kṛṣṇa is greater brahmacārī than me. Although I am brahmacārī, but Kṛṣṇa is greater brahmacārī." Why? "I am brahmacārī. I have avoided association of woman, but Kṛṣṇa, He was young boy and He had so many young girlfriends, still, He was not sexually agitated. He is the greatest brahmacārī." That is the recommendation given by Bhīṣmadeva. When Śiśupāla was criticizing Kṛṣṇa, Bhīṣmadeva supported Kṛṣṇa, that "What kind of brahmacārī I am? He is greater brahmacārī than me. I think I could not save myself, keeping myself amongst the young girls. No. But Kṛṣṇa can do so. He is real brahmacārī." So therefore His another name is Acyuta, "never falls down," "infallible."

Every living entity is fallible. Only Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead... Brahmā is fallible, what to speak of others, demigods. Brahmā was attracted by seeing the beauty of his daughter. Lord Śiva was fallible when he saw the beauty of Mohinī-mūrti. So what to speak of others. And Indra, Candra, they are all fallible. Only Kṛṣṇa is infallible. All others fallible. Therefore pravṛtta-vijñāna, bhīṣmoktam atha acyutoktam. Acyuta. Kṛṣṇa was addressed by Arjuna in the battlefield, "Acyuta." Senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me acyuta [Bg. 1.21]. Acyuta. Acyuta means... He was addressing Kṛṣṇa as Acyuta because he was feeling rather little hesitation that "Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has voluntarily accepted the position of my driver, and I have to ask Him, 'Mr. driver, please take me there.' I have to order Him, and He has to carry." Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has taken the subordinate position of carrying order of Arjuna. Therefore he purposely addressed Him, "Acyuta, my dear friend Kṛṣṇa, don't mind I am ordering You, but You have promised to carry out my order. You are infallible; so kindly do not take into mind, I am ordering You."

This... Every word used in śāstra has got so deep meaning. Senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya... He could address Him, "Kṛṣṇa." No, "Acyuta. You are correct to Your promise always." And again, another place, Kṛṣṇa says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. Kṛṣṇa asked Arjuna that "You declare to the world that My devotees will never be vanquished." Why Kṛṣṇa asking Arjuna to declare? He could declare. He could declare, but the meaning is that sometimes, for the sake of His devotee, He breaks His promise. For the sake of His devotee. Just like Bhīṣma. Bhīṣma promised, "Kṛṣṇa, tomorrow either Your friend Arjuna will die, I am determined now, or You have to break Your promise." Because Kṛṣṇa said, "I will not fight." But when Arjuna was practically devastated by the arrows of Bhīṣma, he fell down, his chariot broke, everything shattered. Now Kṛṣṇa saw, "Now Arjuna is going to die." So immediately Kṛṣṇa took the wheel of the chariot and went to the front of Bhīṣma: "Now you stop; otherwise I will kill you." So this is fighting. So Bhīṣma saw, "Now Kṛṣṇa has broken His promise. I stop." So to keep the promise of Bhīṣma, that Bhīṣma promised, "Either Arjuna will die, or Kṛṣṇa, You will have to break Your promise," two things, so Kṛṣṇa said, "Yes, I am breaking My promise. Don't kill Arjuna." Therefore, for the sake of devotee, He sometimes break His promise.

But if His devotee promises, "I shall do it," Kṛṣṇa will give him all protection: "Yes, it must be done. In all circumstances it must be done." This is Kṛṣṇa. If His devotee promises something, that "This must be done," Kṛṣṇa gives all protection. Therefore here it is stated, ajitāśrayaḥ. You cannot be successful without being ajitāśrayaḥ. Ajita. Ajita means Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can conquer Him. Ajita. Jita means conquered. Nobody is there who can conquer Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa also can be conquered by His devotees. Just like the gopīs, they conquered Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, I mean to say, accepted that "My dear gopīs, the service which you have rendered, I cannot repay. You have conquered Me. There is no possibility of My repaying you your service. You better be satisfied with your service. That's all." So Kṛṣṇa's name is Ajita, Acyuta. These are Kṛṣṇa's different names.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, not that "Here I am getting the opportunity of becoming a prime minister or president. Let me jump over," like monkey. Not like that. Not like that. He... He was convinced by the instruction of Bhīṣmadeva, by the instruction of Acyuta, when he saw that "If I sit down on the throne to rule over the world, I will be right in my position." And that is Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. Not only Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, all the kings who was emperor of the world, they were of the same nature, same nature. Therefore they were called rājarṣi. Imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam, rājarṣayaḥ [Bg. 4.2]. The Bhagavad-gītā, it meant for the rājarṣis. King, but they are saintly person. Therefore they are called rājarṣi. Rāja and ṛṣi, both, combined together, rājarṣi. So all the kings in those days, they were all rājarṣis. Not this rascal president.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira ruled over the earth. Now, it is clearly stated, paridhyupāntām, "up to the limit of the seas." That means all the seas-the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean, the biggest oceans, the Indian Ocean. That means the whole world. Here is the proof, that formerly the emperors in Hastināpura, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, he ruled over the whole world. There was only one flag. That is also stated. Up to the time of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, there was no division. The whole world was Bhārata-varṣa, and the emperor of Hastināpura, they ruled over, paridhyupāntām. Anujānuvartitaḥ. He was not alone. His brothers, Arjuna, Bhīma, Nakula, Sahadeva, great fighters, great commander-in-chiefs, generals, they were at his command. Anujānuvartitaḥ. Whatever Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira will order... Otherwise, how could he manage such great empire? He had generals and commander-in-chiefs like Arjuna and Bhīma, indefatigable. Nobody could conquer Arjuna or Bhīma also. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, personally he did not fight. His brothers were sufficient to fight for himself, as in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. He was not fighting, but his brother, Arjuna and Bhīma, was fighting. So well-equipped, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, completely, scientifically. Vijñāna-vidhūta. Vijñāna means scientifically. Jñāna and vijñāna. Jñāna means ordinary knowledge, and vijñāna means practical knowledge. Just like in science, B.A.C., one has to pass the theoretical examination and practical examination. Without passing practical examination, theoretical you may know: hydrogen and oxygen makes water. No. In the laboratory you have to pass the examination, how to transform into water, two gases, hydrogen and oxygen. This is vijñāna.

So he eradicated his ideas. He was thinking that he was wrong. So when everything was clearly explained by Bhīṣmadeva, vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ, scientifically. Sentiment... In the śāstras there is no question of sentiment. In the Vedic knowledge, everything is vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. Education means to purify the knowledge, because we are all born animals. Abodha-jāta. Abodha. Abodha means one who has no knowledge. The animals, children, they have no knowledge. Just like we see the behavior of small children and household cats and dogs, their behavior is almost the same, no distinction. Because in that stage everyone is abodha-jāta, born fools and rascals. But the animals, there is no chance of educating them. Whereas human children, there is chance of educating them. Therefore, in the human society, there are educational institution. Children are sent there for education, and they become learned scholars later on. And if they are fortunate, by good education, they become vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. Vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. By instruction of high personalities, mahājana... Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Bhīṣma is also one of the mahājanas, a great authority.

So this is the position of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, that completely being confident, completely being freed from all ignorance, then he sat on the throne. Just imagine what is the position of this monarch and these rascal so-called presidents. Sanātana Gosvāmī presented himself... Sanātana Gosvāmī and Rūpa Gosvāmī, he presented, both of them presented themself by Caitanya Mahāprabhu as nīca-jāti. Nīca. Nīca means lowest, lowest grade; jāti, born. But actually they were born of very high-grade brāhmaṇa family of Karnatak. But why they presented themselves as nīca-jāti? Because that is explained in Bhakti-ratnākara, that because their behavior on account of mixing with the Muhammadan kings degraded, therefore they considered themself as nīca. That is confirmed by the śāstras. You may take birth in high brāhmaṇa family, but by association and culture, if you become degraded, then you have to be designated as such degraded person. Not that you become degraded, at the same time, you keep yourself as brāhmaṇa. That is not possible. Yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ syāt varṇābhivyañjakam. In the śāstra it is said that there are symptoms of varṇa. Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā you will find the symptoms, who is a brāhmaṇa. So these are the symptoms. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. So if you don't find these symptoms, then how one can become brāhmaṇa? That is not possible.

Therefore in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are trying to develop the symptoms of brāhmaṇa. Not by birth; to educate them, how to become śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam. So therefore you all, you should know that... You are not born in the brāhmaṇa family. It may not be very hard word, but actually it is mleccha-yavanas. Mleccha-yavanas means the cow flesh eaters, meat-eaters. They are called mleccha-yavanas. Especially mleccha means cow-eaters. So you are coming from the mleccha-yavanas' family, but you are being accepted as brāhmaṇa. Why? For the symptoms. You are being trained up to acquire the symptoms, śamo damas titikṣā. If you think that "Now I have got the sacred thread, I have become victorious," no. You must always examine yourself, "Whether I am possessing all the symptoms?" Otherwise, you are no good. Simply by a thread, you do not become... Sūtram eva hi dvijatvam. Just like Kali-yuga, it is said a sūtram... Sūtram means this thread. If some way or other one gets this thread, he thinks himself he has become brāhmaṇa, no. To become brāhmaṇa is not so easy thing. One must acquire all these qualities. Śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam āstikyaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam. Unless you...

So you must be always alert whether you are fixed up in the symptoms. Then you are qualified brāhmaṇa. Otherwise you are again the same category as in India. Some of them, they are simply claiming to become brāhmaṇa on account of being born in a brāhmaṇa family, No. That is not the sa... Just like Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī. Actually, they were born in brāhmaṇa family, but they knew that "We have lost our culture, due to association with the Muhammadans always." Therefore he presented himself, nīca-jāti. Nīca-jāti, nīca-karma, nīca-saṅgī. So if we deteriorate in our symptoms of brāhmaṇa, then that is not brāhmaṇa, that is not qualified brāhmaṇa. Therefore... It is a vijñāna. Vijñ\ ana-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. Everyone is uneducated. Everyone is born rascal and fool. He should be enlightened, elevated, by vijñāna-vidhūta. Vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. This can be achieved when one is interested in the matter of self-realization, if one is interested. Ātma-tattvam. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. If one is not interested in understanding his identification, what he is, ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. As Sanātana Gosvāmī presented himself before Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his question was, "Ke āmi?" Tad-vijñānārthaṁ gurum eva abhigacchet. Strictly according to Vedic principles. Sanātana Gosvāmī approached the spiritual master, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, tad-vijñānārtham. What is that? "What I am?" To understand this, tad-vijñānārtham, the ātma-tattvam, self-realization.

So to become a disciple of spiritual master, unless there is awakening of this knowledge, to know "What I am?" there is no need of making a show, accepting a spiritual master. There is no need. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. For whom guru is needed? Guru, spiritual master, is not a farce, that "Let me have a guru, nice guru. Then I become perfect." And if you do not follow the instruction of guru... First of all, you must have a bona fide guru. And if you follow, then your life is perfect. So two things must be correct: the guru must be correct and the disciple must be correct. Then the business will be correct. And either of them, if guru is incorrect or the disciple is incorrect, there will be no action. So therefore Bhāgavata says, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. Who shall approach? Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. According to Vedic instruction, everyone should approach a guru. But who is that everyone? One who is jijñāsu. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. One who is inquisitive to understand "What I am? Am I this body or something else?" That is beginning of spiritual instruction.

Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gītā the first instruction to Arjuna was to know that beyond this body, there is the soul.

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



The first instruction. The so-called spiritual institution, spiritual system, but they do not know that what he is, what they are. The bodily identification. Anyone who is bodily identified, there is no question of spiritual instruction. He is an ass. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke, sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. The first spiritual instruction is, one must be convinced thoroughly, vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ, that he is not this body. "I am not this body. Ahaṁ brahmāsmi." This realization, "I am spirit soul. I am part and parcel of the Supreme Brahman." Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Brahman. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12].



So mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūtaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. Kṛṣṇa says, "All the living entities, they are My part and parcels." So when the living entity understands that "I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahman. So I am not Parabrahman. I am the of the Supreme Brahman..." The Māyāvāda philosophy, they mistake this: "Because I am Brahman, therefore I am Supreme Brahman." No. Supreme Brahman is Kṛṣṇa. I am Brahman, because I am part and parcel of the Supreme Brahman. Just like in your country, in America, you are American and the president Nixon is also American. Because you are American, therefore you are not President Nixon. That is rascaldom. President Nixon is different. Similarly, because you are Brahman, that does not mean you are Parabrahman. Parabrahman, is Kṛṣṇa. There must be distinction between the Parabrahman and the individual Brahman. This is dvaita-vāda philosophy. And the Māyāvāda philosophy, they say, "Because Parabrahman is Brahman, I am also Brahman; therefore we are one." No. You are one qualitatively, Brahman. As Brahman you are one. But as Parabrahman and Brahman, you are different. This is acintya-bhedābheda, Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy, simultaneously one and different. As Brahman we are one, but as Parabrahman... Vibhu and aṇu. The Supreme is vibhu, all powerful. I am aṇu, infinitesimal. Infinite and infinitesimal.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, when he was firmly convinced of his position, then he took charge, took charge of ruling over the whole world. Not... Just like at the present moment, India is a small tract of land, and that is also being divided now. Bangladesh has gone out. Pakistan has gone out. Some day some other province will... Not that. The whole world. He took charge of ruling over the whole world. śaśāsa gām indra iva. Indra. Indra is the king of heaven, heavenly planets. So as Indra is powerful... Nobody can even... Indra is never defeated. Sometimes there is fight between the devāsura, asura and deva. But when there is fight between the deva and asura... Deva means the demigod, and asura means the atheist class. They are always existing, the atheist class, two classes of men, atheist class and theist class. Viṣṇu-bhakto bhaved daiva āsuras tad viparyayaḥ. Those who are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu, Vaiṣṇava, they are demigods, and anyone else-all demons. Except Vaiṣṇava, everyone is a demon. You can say, "Now I am devotee of Lord Śiva. How can I be demon?" Yes, you are demon. Because Rāvaṇa was a great devotee of Lord Śiva, but he is described as a demon, rākṣasa. Rākṣasa. Hiraṇyakaśipu was a great devotee of Lord Brahmā. Still, he is described as rākṣasa, demon.

So if you are devotee of the demigods, you can become powerful for some time. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu became. He took benediction from Lord Brahmā that "I shall not die at daytime, at nighttime, on land, on sea, on the sky. I shall not be killed by any animal, by any demigod, by any man, by any..." So many ways, definition by negation. "Not this, not this, not this." First of all he wanted, "Make me immortal." Brahmā said, "I am not immortal. How can I make you immortal? That is not possible." Then he thought, "I am intelligent enough. I shall indirectly become mortal. I shall not be killed in this way, I shall not be killed in this way. No animal can kill me, no man can kill me, no demigod can kill me. I shall not die at night, I shall not die in daytime, not on the land, not on the sea, not in the sky." In this way, whatever imagination he could manufacture, he settled up, "Now I am immortal." But Kṛṣṇa is so cunning and intelligent that He kept all the promises of Brahmā; still, he was killed, Hiraṇyakaśipu. He was not killed at daytime. He was not killed at night. He was not killed in the sky, not on the land, not on the sea-on the lap. Hiraṇyakaśipu, he did not think that "I will have to die on the lap of the Supreme Personality of Godhead." That was his fortune. Anyway...

So this is the way. And here it is said, śaśāsa gām indra iva. Indra. Indra, the demigods, they are always protected by Viṣṇu, always protected. Whenever there is fight between the demigods and demons, Lord Viṣṇu takes the side of the demigods. Therefore Indra is ajita-āśraya. He is confident that "I am protected by Lord Viṣṇu, Ajita." Similarly, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira also, when he was assured that "I am also protected by Kṛṣṇa, I am also enlightened by the instruction of Bhīṣma; my brothers, such big brothers, Bhīma, Arjuna, they will follow my instruction," in this way, when everything was in complete, vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ, then he accepted the throne. This is monarchy. This is king.

Thank you very much. (end)



750313SB.TEH

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.3-4

-

Tehran, March 13, 1975



Prabhupāda:



kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ

sarva-kāma-dughā mahī

siṣicuḥ sma vrajān gāvaḥ

payasodhasvatīr mudā

[SB 1.10.4]



niśamya bhīṣmoktam athācyutoktaṁ

pravṛtta-vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ

śaśāsa gām indra ivājitāśrayaḥ

paridhyupāntām anujānuvartitaḥ

[SB 1.10.3]



That how Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, he was unwilling to accept the kingdom because he thought that "For me so many men have been killed in the battlefield of Kurukṣetra. So I am so sinful, I am not fit for the throne." But all the great personalities like Bhīṣmadeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa, and Vyāsadeva, and all of them requested, "No, there is no fault of you. It was fight. It was right. So you can reign over." There it is said, niśamya bhīṣmoktam athācyutoktaṁ pravṛtta-vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ. He understood that "When such great personalities are giving their opinion, that it was no wrong on my part," then he agreed. Śaśāsa gām indra ivājitāśrayaḥ. Gām indra iva ajitāśrayaḥ. Indra, the king of heaven, he ruled over this planet as perfectly as the heavenly king Indra does. How? Ajitāśrayaḥ, completely being devotee. So the king can rule over the country... Why country? The world, world over. If he takes shelter of Kṛṣṇa, Ajitā means Kṛṣṇa conscious, God conscious, such person, as they are advised in the śāstra, then they can rule over the any part of the world or the whole world exactly like Indra, the king of heaven. He is ruling over perfectly. Paridhyupāntām anujānuvartitaḥ. So in this way Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira... (reading:) "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, after being enlightened by what was spoken by Bhīṣmadeva and Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the infallible, engaged himself in matters of perfect knowledge because all his misgivings were eradicated. Thus he ruled over the earth and seas and was followed by his younger brothers."



So an ideal king like Yudhiṣṭhira, he can rule over not only over the land, over the seas, all over the planet. This is the ideal. (reading:) "The modern English law of primogeniture, or the law of inheritance by the firstborn, was also prevalent in those days when Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira ruled the earth and the seas." That means whole planet, including the seas. (reading:) "In those days the king of Hastināpura, now part of New Delhi, was the emperor of the world, including the seas, up to the time of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the grandson of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. His younger brothers were acting as his minister and commanders of state, and there was full cooperation between the perfectly religious brothers of the King. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was the ideal king or representative of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa..." The king should be the representative of Kṛṣṇa. (reading:) "...to rule over the kingdom of earth and was comparable to King Indra, the representative ruler of the heavenly planet. The demigods like Indra, Candra, Sūrya, Varuṇa, Vāyu, etc., are representative kings of different planets of the universe. And similarly Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was also one of them, ruling over the kingdom of the earth.

Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was not a typically unenlightened political leader of modern democracy. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was instructed by Bhīṣmadeva and the infallible Lord also, and therefore he had full knowledge of everything in perfection. The modern elected executive head of the state is just like a puppet because he has no kingly power. Even if he is enlightened like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, he cannot do anything out of his own good will due to his constitutional position. Therefore, there are so many states over the earth quarreling because of ideological differences or other selfish motives. But a king like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira had no ideology of his own. He had but to follow the instruction of the infallible Lord and the Lord's representative, and the authorized agent, Bhīṣmadeva. It is instructed in the śāstras the one should follow the great authority and the infallible Lord without any personal motive and manufactured ideology. Therefore, it was possible for Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira to rule the whole world, including the seas, because the principles were infallible and universally applicable to everyone.

The conception of one world state can only be fulfilled if we can follow the infallible authority. An imperfect human being cannot create an ideology acceptable to everyone. Only the perfect and the infallible can create a program which is applicable at every place and can be followed by all in the world. It is the person who rules, and not the impersonal government. If the person is perfect, the government is perfect. If the person is a fool, the government is a fool's paradise. That is the law of nature. There are so many stories of imperfect kings or executive heads. Therefore, the executive head must be a trained person like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, and he must have the full autocratic power to rule over the world. The conception of a world state can take shape only under the regime of a perfect king like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. The world was happy in those days because there were kings like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira to rule over the world." Let this king follow Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and show an example of how monarchy can make a perfect state. There is instruction in the śāstras, and if he follows, he can do that. He has got the power.

Then because he was so perfect king, then, a representative of Kṛṣṇa, therefore, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Parjanyaḥ means rainfall. So rainfall is the basic principle of supply of all necessities of life, rainfall. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. If you want to make people happy, both man and animal... There are animals also. They are... These rascal state executive, sometimes they make a show of benefit for the men but no benefit for the animal. Why? Why this injustice? They are also born in this land. They are also living entity. They may be animals. They have no intelligence. They have intelligence, not as good as of man, but does it mean that regular slaughterhouse should be constructed for killing them? Is that justice? And not only that, but anyone, if he comes to the state, the king should give him shelter. Why distinction? Anyone takes shelter, "Sir, I want to live in your state," so he must be given all facilities. Why this, "No, no, you cannot come. You are American. You are Indian. You are this"? No. There are so many thing. If actually they follow the principle, the Vedic principles, then the ideal king will be a good leader. These are... And nature will help. Therefore it is said that during the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ sarva-kāma-dughā mahī [SB 1.10.4]. Mahī, the earth. You get all your necessities from the earth. It does not fall from the sky. Yes, it falls from the sky in the form of rain. But they do not know the science, that how things are coming from earth by the different arrangement. Under certain conditions the rain falls and astral influence. Then so many things are produced, the valuable stones, the pearls. They do not know how these things are coming. So therefore, if the king is pious, to help him the nature also cooperates. And the king, if the government is impious, then nature will not cooperate. That we have also information in the Fourth Canto, I think. King? What is that? Pṛthu, Pṛthu Mahārāja, yes.

Nitāi: Pṛthu Mahārāja. When the earth was not supplying...



Prabhupāda: Yes. He was going to punish the earth. And he (she) said, "This is my duty. All the demons there are. I must restrict supply." So these people, they do not know. They think that simply by resolution in the Parliament they will make all, everything. And they may become all rascals. This will not make the world happy. They will simply deteriorate more and more. They do not know. Here it is said, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa also said, annād bhavanti bhūtāni [Bg. 3.14]. Kṛṣṇa never says, "The factory will make the people healthy and strong," never says. And these rascals are after factories. Then how the people will be happy? Ugra-karma. Everyone will be unhappy, dissatisfied, rogue, bachelor growth. Where Kṛṣṇa has said that "Open factories for economic development"? Nowhere you will find, neither in the śāstra... Here it is said that all economic development will be complete simply by regular rainfall. Kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Kāmam means all necessities of life. They do not know. The modern people, scientists, philosophers, politicians, they do not know this. Kāmam. Kāmam means necessities of life. We have got so many things. But how it will be supplied? It is clearly said, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. And how parjanyaḥ will be regular? Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. Where is that program? Where is yajña? In the Kali-yuga other yajñas are very difficult to perform. There is no money. There is no qualified brāhmaṇa. Therefore this yajña... Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Those who have got brain substance, not cow dung, they will take this process, yajñaiḥ. Let everyone chant Hare Kṛṣṇa home to home. Whatever they have got, all right. Just begin chanting. Just see what happens. We are trying to introduce this chanting. But the rascals will not take it. What can be done? There is no loss if they chant Hare Kṛṣṇa worldwide. Where is the loss? But still, they will not. And everything can be had. Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. Mahī. Kṛṣṇa, He is... The mother... Kṛṣṇa, how He has arranged this mahī? Everything is coming. Actually you will find that the rose flower is coming, the mine is coming, the gold is coming, the coal is coming, the petrol is coming. Everything is there in the mahī. And who has arranged it? Just see. Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. And if there is regular waterfall, then you get everything supply. And by performing yajña, you get regular waterfall, rainfall. And in this age all other types of yajña is not possible. Kalau...



harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



So introduce this. What is their loss? If everyone, home to home or work to work, factory to factory... Let them... Let there be factory, but chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Let all the factory members be engaged in chanting and the... supply them prasādam. Just see. There will be no more strike. There will be no more Communistic movement. Everything is there, provided they take it. Everything will be all right. So this is not a sentimental fanaticism, religious movement. This is scientific movement for the good of the whole world. That we have to convince by our character, by our behavior. Then people will accept it. They think it is another type of religious... So religious means fanaticism. It is not that. Just like they fought, the Mohammedans and the Christians. There was fighting? What is that?



Nitāi: The Holy Wars?



Parivrājakācārya: Crusades.



Prabhupāda: Crusades. These Britishers created this religious fight between Hindus and Muslims. Before that, there was no in the history, religious fight, in the history of the whole India. The Mahābhārata, Kurukṣetra fight was... That was political fight. That was not a religious fight on the basis of that "You are Hindu. I am Muslim. Therefore we must fight." There was no such fight. In the material platform your interest, my interest, sometimes clash. There may be fight. But why fight on religious, mean God consciousness? If everyone is God conscious, where is the question of fight? So that's all right. You can take it. (end)





730619SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.4

-

Māyāpura, June 19, 1973





Devotee: (leads chanting, etc.)



kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ

sarva-kāma-dughā mahī

siṣicuḥ sma vrajān gāvaḥ

payasodhasvatīr mudā

[SB 1.10.4]



"During the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the clouds showered all the water that people needed, and the earth produced all the necessities of man in profusion. Due to its fatty milk bag and cheerful attitude, the cow used to moisten the grazing ground with milk."



Prabhupāda: So due to good king, in... There is a maxim in Bengali: rājera doṣe rāja naṣṭa, rājya naṣṭa, gṛhiṇī doṣe gṛhastha naṣṭa(?). This is very important instruction. If the king of the state is an impious man, sinful man, that kingdom will never be happy. Naṣṭa. Everything is spoiled. As much as in a family, if the housewife is not good, contaminated, then there is no good life in the family. In Western countries especially, and in this country also, nowadays, there is no peace between husband and wife, and there is no, practically, no family life. In Western countries there is divorce. Here also the divorce law is introduced. And no family is happy. Gṛhiṇī doṣe gṛhastha naṣṭa. So king must be very pious.



So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira... We have studied a few verses about Mahārāja... So the beginning is dharmeṇa. Here it is:

pitrā cānumato rājā

vāsudevānumoditaḥ

cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa

pitṛ-paitāmahaṁ vibhuḥ



So he was Dharmarāja Yudhiṣṭhira. He was ruling dharmeṇa. Dharmeṇa means just according to the desire of the Supreme Lord. This is dharma. Dharmam. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Dharmeṇa means, religious principle means to act according to the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is religious principle. It is not that you manufacture some dharma: "We are Hindus," "We are Muslims," "We are Christians." These are not dharmas. Nobody cares for God. Nobody carries out the order of God. Nobody knows what is God. Nobody knows what is relationship with God. So where is dharma? The, all bogus. Therefore Bhāgavata says: dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra [SB 1.1.2]. This so-called cheating type of religious system is kicked out in Bhāgavatam. Real dharma. What is that real dharma? Paraṁ satyaṁ dhīmahi. Namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. This is dharma. Namo bhagavate vāsu... Beginning. Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, Vyāsadeva is offering respect. Why? Now satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi. He is the Supreme Truth. What is that Supreme Truth? Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. That Supreme Truth from whom everything emanates. And this is confirmed in the Bhāgavatam, uh, Bhagavad-gītā: mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ [Bg. 10.8]. This is confirmed. The Vedānta-sūtra gives hint that the Absolute Truth, Brahman, is that which is the original source of all emanations. That is Absolute Truth. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. What is Brahman? Brahman means the original source of everything. So this is the Vedānta-sūtra. And Kṛṣṇa says:



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



So when one becomes budha... Budha means well aware of everything. Then he understands Kṛṣṇa is the source of everything. He's the Supreme. So... And dharma, as it is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in reference with the Ajāmila-mokṣaṇa, that Yamarāja said: dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Nobody can manufacture dharma.



So here Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja ruled over this planet, Bhāratavarṣa, dharmeṇa. Here it is said, cakāra rājyaṁ dharmeṇa. Exactly... And here also it is confirmed, that bhīṣmoktam acyutoktam. Niśamya bhīṣmoktam atha acyutoktam. So if such kind of king is there, then everything is all right. Everything. And establishing such pious king... Here it is stated, yudhiṣṭhiraṁ prīta-manā babhūva, īśvara, īśvara, niveśayitvā nija-rājya īśvaro yudhiṣṭhiraṁ prīta-manā babhūva. And Kṛṣṇa, why He took part in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra? He wanted that these rascals should be removed, the Duryodhana and company. And Yudhiṣṭhira must be there. Therefore He personally supervised the warfare. He took the reigns of Arjuna's chariot to give him direction: "Kill all these demons. Even Bhīṣma. Even Droṇācārya. Kill all of them, because they have taken side of the wrong side. Kill them." That is Kṛṣṇa's order. "Although Bhīṣma is respectful, respectable, Droṇācārya's respectable, your guru, your grandfather, and such great personality, certainly they are respectable. But because they have taken side of the wrong side, they must be killed. They must be." This is the instruction.

So dharma is so strong. Dharma means to abide by the order of Kṛṣṇa. That is dharma. If we remain faithful to Kṛṣṇa, and what Kṛṣṇa says, if we do that, that is perfect dharma. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. That is first-class religious system. We do not decry any system of religion. We do not say that Hindu religion is better than Christian religion. In what way Hindu religion is better than Christian religion? The followers of so-called Christian religion, they're also set of nonsense, and so are the Hindus. Why we should give preference to one class of rascals and fools than the other class of rascals and fools? We have no such idea, "The Hindus are greater than the Muslims or the Christians," or "The Muslims or the Christians..." We do not con... We want to see, test how much he's devotee of God, how much he has developed his God consciousness. Then we accept that he is, here is dharma. That is the test. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6].

I told you sometimes, I think, in New York Airport. So seeing us, the sādhus, one young man came to me. So he introduced himself, "Sir, I am Christian. I faithfully discharge my religious principles." So I, I told him, "No, no. You do not faithfully discharge your religion." So he was surprised that without talking with him, immediately I charged that "You don't follow your Christian religion." "No, why do you say like that?" "Do you eat meat?" "Yes, sir." "Then you are not a Christian. You are not a Christian. Because in the Christian religion the first commandment is 'Thou shalt not kill.' So you are encouraging killing. How you are a Christian? You are not a Christian." The actually everyone is very proud of becoming Christian, Hindu, Muslim, but nobody is following. Nobody's following. All bogus.

Because if they would have followed... We don't say follow this religion, that religion. If actually they would have followed, then the symptom would have been they had become devotee of God, lover of God. And as soon as he becomes lover of God, he becomes fully qualified with all good qualifications. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. This is the test. He hasn't got to be trained up how to become honest, how to become clean, how to become this, how to become that. If he becomes a lover of God, Kṛṣṇa, then all the good qualities automatically reveal. Just like when you are out of diseased condition, all your healthy symptoms are revealed, manifest. It doesn't require to bring them separately, to bring them separately. It is already there. Because every living entity is part and parcel of God, Kṛṣṇa, he has got all the good qualities of Kṛṣṇa, very minute quantity. The Gosvāmīs have analyzed: seventy-eight percent. Not in full, but in minute quantity. It is not joke. Seventy-eight percent of the qualities of Kṛṣṇa is there in living entity. And Kṛṣṇa means all-good; they're all good qualities.

So actually when one becomes a devotee, he is qualitatively one with Kṛṣṇa. Because one cannot become devotee without acquiring the Kṛṣṇa qualities. You cannot go into the fire without being fire. Without being Brahman, you cannot approach Brahman. Just like if you want to be secretary of a very big man, so you must have necessary qualification. Not that any, any man can become secretary of a big man. So when one becomes devotee, it is the statement of śāstra: yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā... Akiñcanā-bhakti [SB 5.18.12]. Akiñcanā-bhakti means without any motive. That is akiñcanā-bhakti. "I'll become devotee because I'll get this opportunity to exploit Kṛṣṇa." That is not devotion. When one shall be ready to be exploited by Kṛṣṇa, then he's a devotee. Not that with a motive, that "I shall become a devotee and exploit Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and aggravate my position as sense gratifier." No, that is not devotion.

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Brs. 1.1.11]



That is uttamā-bhakti. And that, when one attains that uttamā-bhakti, then he's first-class follower of religion. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir a... [SB 1.2.6]. It doesn't matter whether you are Christian or Muhammadan or Hindu; we want to see whether you are lover of God, you are a devotee of God, you can sacrifice everything for God. Then you are religious. Otherwise, I..., there is no question of religion.



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was that type of religious man, dharmeṇa. And as soon as you become, then ajitāśraya. Your shelter becomes under the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. It is not story. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ [Bg. 18.66]. It is not story. Kṛṣṇa says, confirms: "You just become My devotee, and I'll give you all protection." Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati [Bg. 9.31]. So many assurances. "Immediately I give you protection." Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mo... If I am released from all reaction of my sinful activities, then where is my difficulty? Difficulty's there so mo..., so long one is sinful. We suffer the reaction of sinful activities. But if there is no sin, I become purified, then where is suffering? There is no question of suffering.

So the king, being the head, naradeva... Therefore king's another name is naradeva. He's God. King is considered as God, representative of God. Caitanya Mahāprabhu, yes, Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sanātana Gosvāmī gave certificate to Nawab Hussain Shah that "You are representative of Kṛṣṇa." When Nawab Hussain Shah was inquiring about Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "This person is not ordinary person. We are kings. Sometimes when we give in charity so many men flock around us. But here is a person, wherever He's going, thousands of men are following Him. So He's not ordinary person." After all, he's a king. He has got intelligence. Even from diplomatic point of view, he can understand. So he inquired from his minister, Sanātana Gosvāmī, "So who is this person?" So Sanātana Gosvāmī replied that "Whom you accept as (indistinct), the profit is His. It is your fortune that during your reign, He has taken birth in Bengal. You are governor, you are the king of Bengal. And why you are asking me? You are king. You are representative of Kṛṣṇa. You ask your mind and you'll understand what He is." He gave the certificate immediately. Not that "Oh, you are Muhammadan. What you can know?" No. Muhammadan, Hindu, doesn't matter. If one is king he must be blessed by Kṛṣṇa. He has been given the opportunity to become... And if the king also remembers that "I am representative of God. God has given me this post to rule over this country, to make them dharmic, to follow, to understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then that is my duty, first duty," then everything is all right.

The rascal, so-called kings, they think that "It is my property. Let me tax the people to the extreme and take the money and enjoy in drinking and enjoying women." Therefore the monarchy's finished. But what is the benefit by finishing this monarchy? The democracy, that is another set of rascals. There was one rascal. Now hundreds of rascals. That is the benefit. Hundreds of rascals, they go and form the democratic government, minister. There is dacoitry. There is rising of the rogues and thieves, and they're enjoying fat salary. So at the present moment we are in a very precarious condition so far the government is concerned. People may say that I am speaking against government, but I am just comparing the government of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and the present. If, if... I am not doing anything in my imagination... These are the things. Actually that is the thing. And if the king is right, if the king is dharmic, proper representative of God, then supply, there is no limit of supply. Take.

We have got experience. In sometimes we find in this mango season profuse mango. People cannot end it by eating. And sometimes there is no mango. Why? The supply is in the hand of Kṛṣṇa through His agent, the material nature, this earth. The earth can produce profusely if people are honest, God conscious. There cannot be any scarcity. Therefore it is said that kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. God gives. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). So God, Kṛṣṇa, fulfills all our desires. Now in Bengal we are seeing some rains. In other parts of India, there is no rain. Last time I had been Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, all dry. People are... In Bombay also. People are very much unhappy. There is famine, declaration of famine. So if there is no parjanya, rains, then everything finished. Your so much, so many schemes, ten-years plan, five-years plan and so many plans, they will all dry up. The rascals, they do not know. And how parjanya becomes possible? Yajñād bhavati parjanyo parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. You perform yajña. There will be parjanya. The rain falling is not in your hand. You may be great scientist and calculate so much hydrogen and so much oxygen, mixed up, there is water. Now mix up and bring water where there is no rain.

So these so-called scientists, philoso..., all of them are rascals. We should take instruction from śāstra. Kṛṣṇa says: parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. If you perform yajña... Yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ. We have to perform yajña. Yajña means to satisfy Viṣṇu. That is yajña. Viṣṇu, the Supreme Lord's another name is Yajña-pati. So yajñārthe karmaṇaḥ anyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. Therefore everything should be done for yajñārthe, for satisfying Viṣṇu. But na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. These rascals, they do not know that their real interest is to satisfy Viṣṇu, not his sense. These rascals, they do not know it. They think, "Some way or other, if I can satisfy my senses, then my life is perfect." But you cannot satisfy your senses without satisfying the Lord's sense. If there is no water, no grain, no food, how you can satisfy your senses, rascal? So if you satisfy the senses of the Lord, then your senses will be satisfied automatically. Tasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭa. But if you neglect to satisfy the senses of the Lord, and if you want to satisfy your senses, that will not be done.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was always prepared to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. He was sorry that so many people were killed in the battle, but he was happy: "Kṛṣṇa wanted. Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, that's all right. That's all right. Never mind, so many people have been killed." But personally he was not happy, but Kṛṣṇa was satisfied. Kṛṣṇa wanted. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. So He has finished all the duṣkṛtām. But finishing duṣkṛtām, everyone got svarūpa. They were all liberated. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa is all-good. Either He delivers the devotees and kills the nondevotees, the action, resultant action is the same-both of them become liberated. Svarūpa. That is also stated. Everyone... Because died seeing Kṛṣṇa in presence in the battlefield. Either this party or that party, it doesn't matter. Everyone died seeing Kṛṣṇa. so they were all liberated. It is not an ordinary thing, that in the presence of... We have to remember Kṛṣṇa at the time of death. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind, in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, He's personally present. Anyone is dying, he's seeing Kṛṣṇa. So what is the question of liberation? Everyone is liberated.

So kāmaṁ parjanyaḥ, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Whatever you get, all the necessities of your life will be available if there is sufficient rain. Because after all, the earth produces... This is the system. There is rainfall, proper rainfall, and the earth produces. Not only food grains. Also jewels also, produced. Those who are astronomers, they know. Under certain constellation of the star, if the rain falls on the head of a snake, there is jewel. If the rain falls on the head of an elephant, there is jewel. Then in the sea also, the pearls, they are produced. It is all due to rains. So kāmaṁ vavarṣa. Kāmaṁ vavarṣa. We require so many things. Kṛṣṇa is prepared also to supply. Nature is there. But even Kṛṣṇa wants to supply, if you do not become devotee, nature will restrict, "No." That is the proof. When there was less supply... The Mahārāja Pṛthu wanted to kill Pṛthivī. She explained that "Why you are after me? It is my duty. Now there are only demons. I don't want to give food to the demons. I want to give foodstuff to the devotees." She said. So nature's restriction of supply will be there when people become demons, nondevotees. When people become demons, then nature will stop supply. There will be famine, pestilence. This is the way.

So during the time of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, they were not demons. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira..., Mahārāja Parīkṣit... Mahārāja Parīkṣit, when he wanted to kill Kali, he gave him two chances, that "Either you get out of my kingdom, or I shall kill you." So Kali said, "My lord, I am also your subject. My activities are very heinous. That is my nature. I am meant for that purpose. But I am also your subject. So why you want to drive me away? You give me some place where I shall go if you don't like me." Then he gave him place: yatra pāpaś catur-vidhā, striyaḥ sūnāḥ pāna dyūta yatra pāpaś... "Where there are four principles of sinful activities, namely, illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling, you can go there." So Kali could not find a single place where these things are going on. That is the during the reign of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So he became very much distressed. Therefore, under his plan, he also wanted to drive away Mahārāja Parīkṣit so that he can advance his activities, Kali's activities.

So one brāhmaṇa boy cursed him, influenced. The boy was influenced by Kali. His father repented, "Oh, you rascal boy, what you have done?" One side, that a boy, born of a brāhmaṇa, only twelve years old, he could curse even a big king like Mahārāja Parīkṣit, and that is invocable. It cannot be nullified. Of course, Mahārāja Parīkṣit could nullify, but he accepted. So even a brāhmaṇa boy could curse. But this was wrong. His father repented later on, "What you have done, childish? Such a king." So as soon as Mahārāja Parīkṣit was moved from the scene, the Kali-yuga began in full force. Therefore sometimes it is said that the brāhmaṇas are responsible for introducing Kali-yuga. So that is not actually fact. In due course of time, everything will happen.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was so pious that during his reign time, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. There was regular rainfall and everything was produced nicely. Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. Sarva-kāma. The, another side is that you don't require industries, trade. You don't require. If you have got land and cow, then everything is complete. This is basic principle of Vedic civilization. Have some land. Have some cows. Dhānyena dhanavān gavayaḥ dhanavān. Not industry. There is no need of industry. Because you want some food, nice food, nice milk, nice fruit, that will be produced by nature. You cannot manufacture all these things in the factory. So therefore the..., at the present moment, the big, big factories, they are the activities of the asuras, ugra-karma. All the people are dragged in the city, industrial area, to engage them in the produce of iron bars, big, big iron bars, Tartiron(?) iron industry, and so many other industry. Capitalists, they have drawn all the innocent people from the village. And they think that "We are getting fat salary." But what is the use of fat salary? One side you get fat salary; another side you have to purchase three rupees a kilo rice. Finish your salary. This is going on. Let them produce their own food. Let him have some land. Let him produce his own food. Let there be cows. Let cows become happy.

Now here is very important word, that payasodhasvatīr mudā, udhasvatīr mudā. They were very jolly because they can understand whether they are going to be killed or not. Because they have got, they're animal, they have got sense. I have seen in your country, almost all cows are crying, crying. Because in the beginning, all the calves are taken away and slaughtered in their presence. Perhaps you know. So what is the position of the cow? I have seen when we purchase cows, the calves are already taken away. The cow was crying, regular tears were gliding down. So they can understand that... Who cannot understand? Suppose if you are taken in the concentrated camp? Just like the Germans did. What is the meaning of concentrated...? That he'll be killed after some days. So how you can be happy? If you are already informed, condemned to death, and kept in a concentration camp, will you be happy? Similarly, when these people take these cows to the slaughterhouse, animal stock room, go down, they understand. Very recently, about few years ago, some..., that animal stock store was some way or other broken and all the cows began to... Perhaps you know. It was published in the... And they were shot down. Shot to death. They were fleeing like anything, that "We shall save ourselves."

So if the cows are not happy, if they are always afraid, that "This rascal will kill us at any moment," then how they can be happy? There was no such thing. Therefore it is said: mudā. Mudā. Happy. And as soon as the cows are happy, you not only get sufficient milk, but the pasturing ground, I mean to say, ground, becomes moist with milk. So much milk supplied. Here it is stated, payasā udhasvatīr mudā. Yes. There is another description. Formerly, Kṛṣṇa's cows, when they were passing on, the whole road will be moistened with milk. Milk supply was so sufficient. Simply manufacture butter, milk products, dahi... Distribute. Kṛṣṇa was distributing amongst the monkeys even: "Take," the monkey, "come on."

So by Kṛṣṇa's grace if we actually become dharmic, follow Kṛṣṇa, the milk supply will be so profuse that everyone, even the animals can take the butter and yogurt. That is wanted. That is civilization. Produce sufficient quantity of grains, let the milk, cows, supply sufficient quantity of milk. All economic question solved. There is no use of industry. No use of man's going fifty miles to work. No, there is no need. Simply land and cows. Here is the statement. Kāmaṁ parjanyaḥ, vavarṣa parjanyaḥ sarva-kāma-dughā. Everything you'll get from the land. Even luxury articles. What can be more luxurious article than the jewels? The jewels are also produced. The medicine is produced, the minerals are produced, gold is produced, diamond is produced from the earth. Sarva-kāma-dughā. You get everything. Make your civilization very perfect, very luxurious simply by satisfying Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)



731125SB.LON

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.4

-

London, November 25, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ

sarva-kāma-dughā mahī

siṣicuḥ sma vrajān gāvaḥ

payasodhasvatīr mudā

[SB 1.10.4]



Translation: "During the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the clouds showered all the water that people needed, and the earth produced all the necessities of man in profusion. Due to its fatty milk bag and cheerful attitude, the cow used to moisten the grazing ground with milk."



Prabhupāda: Kāmam. Dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41]. In the human society, to make everything very regulated, the prescription is dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa. Dharma means to be situated in one's position. That is called dharma. Dharma is not a kind of faith. Faith is sometimes blind. That is not dharma. Just like we say, varṇāśrama-dharma. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]. Varṇa. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsī. This combination of eight makes dharma, constitutional position. Everyone is animal. So if one is not trained up in these eight principles of human society, so that is not dharma; it is sentiment. But that does not stand very long. It will vanquish. But if dharma is accepted on the principles of this varṇāśrama-dharma, that is... For material purpose. That is not for spiritual purpose. Although there is hint of spiritual life, still, they are prākṛta.



So dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Dharma means to stay in one's constitutional position. That is dharma. Artha means keeping oneself in one's constitutional position to get livelihood, artha. Without artha, livelihood, kāma, the sense gratification, or fulfilling the needs of life...That is kāma. Just like devotees, they have also got kāma. We are trying to become devotee. This is also one kind of kāma, but this is spiritual kāma. It is not material. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has described, kāma kṛṣṇa-karmārpaṇe. Because there is kāma, and when the kāma is not fulfilled... Generally, materially, kāma means lust, desire. So if our kāma, lust or desire, is not fulfilled, the next position is krodha. Kāma krodha lobha moha mada mātsarya bhaya. These are different associates, one after another. If your desire is not fulfilled, then you become angry. Then after becoming angry, you become very greedy. Then you become bewildered, then become illusioned, then you become fearful.

Therefore there must be some regulative principle to fulfill our desire. And how the regulative principles come to be fulfilled? Here it is said, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Vavarṣa means showering, showering. And parjanyaḥ means rain. Parjanyaḥ, rain. So our all needs are showered from up. Therefore we pray. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. God. Rain is not under you control. Rain, it comes from sky, through the clouds. It is not under you control. When there is scarcity of rain, it is not your so-called science can produce rain. No. That is not possible. Drought. Drought, so many places, last two-three years. So kāmān, our necessities of life, from material point of view, it is fulfilled by rainfall from the sky. If there is no rainfall, you cannot produce anything. Kāmaṁ vavarṣa...

This is the description during the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was the king of this earth, and he was so pious that on account of his piety, Kṛṣṇa supplied everything sumptuously, sumptuously. Now, have you ever experienced...? Now, here it is stated, siṣicuḥ sma vrajān gāvaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Now, we are hankering after milk, but in those days, during Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time, milk was so sufficiently produced that before milking the cow, it supplied milk so sufficiently that the... What is called? Grazing ground? Pasturing ground, they become muddy. They become muddy with milk. Now, with the scarcity of grain, the earth also does not become muddy. It becomes dry earth. But in those days, with milk it was muddy. Just imagine how much milk was... And how it is possible? Siṣicuḥ sma vrajān gāvaḥ payasodhasvatīr mudā [SB 1.10.4]. The milk bag was so fatty and full with milk. Why? mudā, they were so happy. They were so happy. So if you keep the cows happy, then cow will supply large quantity of milk. If the cow knows that you are going to kill it, she is always afraid, always fearful: "Oh, this man will kill." They can understand. I have seen in New Vrindaban. One cow, she was crying because her calf was taken away. So she was feeling so sorry. Now in our New Vrindaban, we see how the cows are happy, how they are dealing. They are not afraid. This is our duty, to keep the cows happy. Just like I want to see my wife and children happy, similarly, it is the duty of the human society to see that the cows feeling very happy. This is human civilization. Otherwise it is tiger civilization, meat-eaters. Meat is not eaten by human being. It is eaten by the dogs, by the tigers, by the animals.

So we have created a society for killing cows and eating the meat and maintaining slaughterhouse in the name of religion. This is going on. So how we can be happy? There cannot be happiness. It is not a sentiment. Therefore this is most sinful activity, meat-eating, cow killing. Most sinful activity. And you have to suffer for that. Unfortunately, these rascals, they do not know that what is the result of this sinful activity. They think the life will go on, and there is no more life. "After finishing of this body, everything will be finished." Atheistic theory. Bhasmī-bhūtasya dehasya kutaḥ punar āgamano bhavet. Kutaḥ. "Oh, who is coming?" But that they do not know, rascals. We get information from Kṛṣṇa, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ: [Bg. 2.13] "Oh, you have to accept another body after finishing this body." But they are not responsible. They are so irresponsible, they do not care for the next life, the result of pious and sinful activities.

So it appears that how much strictly the cow protection was there so that the gāvaḥ, payasodhasvatīr mudā. They were... You'll see Kṛṣṇa. He is always with cows, and how the cows look very happy with Kṛṣṇa. And Kṛṣṇa is personally teaching how to protect cows. He became a cowherd boy. He was king's son, Mahārāja Nanda; but His business was to take the cows and the calves daily to the pasturing ground. And it was very sportive engagement with the cowherd boys. The cows were grazing, and the boys, they took their meals in a pot, tiffin carrier. Not tiffin carrier in those days. Some way or other. And they used to eat them, distribute amongst the friends. Sometimes a tiffin carrier was stolen by one boy, and he was searching, and then it was... So just like the boys do. This was the children's life, to take protection, to give protection to the cows, to the calves. The small children, up to six years, seven years old, they used to take care of the calves, and the elderly men, the used to take care of the... Or elderly boys, they used to take care of the grown-up cows. So the cows were fed very nicely. Vrajān. Therefore Vṛndāvana is called Vrajabhūmi, "where there are many cows." It is called Gokula. Gokula. Go means cows, and kula means group. Gokula. Govardhana. Govardhana Hill. Because the cows were grazing on the hill, and profuse grass was being grown, and they are enjoying. So there should be arrangement. Just like here we see, there are so many open fields and the cows are grazing. But they cannot be happy because they know that they are simply raised for being killed. They cannot be happy.

So our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not a sentimental movement. It takes care of all-found social organization. It is not something like religious sentiment. Everything should be take care of. Therefore we say cow protection, cow protection. Here it is said, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ sarva-kāma-dughā mahī [SB 1.10.4]. Mahī means land, bhūmi. Agnir mahī gaganam ambu marud-diśaḥ... Mahī. This is mahī. In another, Brahma-saṁhitā, it is said, mahī.

agnir mahī gaganam ambu marud-diśaś ca

kālas tathātma-manasīti jagat-trayāṇi

yasmād bhavanti vibhavanti viśanti yaṁ ca

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



This mahī word is used there is Vedas, Brahma-saṁhitā. What is that mahī? Agnir mahī. You require fire. You require land. You require sky. Agnir mahī gaganam ambu. You require water. Agnir mahī gaganam ambu marut. You require air. You require space. These are requirements. Agnir mahī gaganam ambu marud-diśaś ca kālas tathātmā. Ātmā, ātmā means this body, ātmā means the mind, and ātmā means the soul. So in the Brahma-saṁhitā you see, agnir mahī gaganam ambu marud-diśaś ca kālas tathātma-manasīti jagat-trayāṇi yasmād bhavanti. Yasmād bhavanti. All these things, wherefrom they are coming? They do not know. Can the scientist say wherefrom so much water has come, so vast ocean, seas? But it has come from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

[Bg. 7.4]



Bhinnā me prakṛtiḥ. It is Kṛṣṇa's energy, Kṛṣṇa's energy.



So the mahī, the land, the land is there. Just like in America or in Australia there are so much land. In Africa, so much land lying vacant. But they do not know that this land can produce all the needs of life. Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. Sarva-kāma, whatever you want. Actually we are getting... Just like this Western civilization has created so may slaughterhouse for eating purposes. But wherefrom they are getting? From mahī, from the land. If there is no pasturing ground, grazing ground, wherefrom they will get the cows and the bulls? That is also... Because there is grass on the land and the cows and bulls eat them, therefore they grow. Then you cut their throat, civilized man, and eat, you rascal civilized man. But you are getting from the mahī, from the land. Without land, you cannot. Similarly, instead of cutting the throat of the cows, you can grow your food. Why you are cutting the throat of the cows? After all, you have to get from the mahī, from the land. So as they are, the animal which you are eating, they are getting their eatables from the land. Why don't you get your eatables from the land? Therefore it is said, sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. You can get all the necessities of your life from land. So dughā means produce. You can produce your food. Some land should be producing the foodstuff for the animals, and some land should be used for the production of your foodstuffs, grains, fruits, flowers, and take milk. Why should you kill these innocent animals? You take. You keep them mudā, happy, and you get so much milk that it will moist, it will make wet the ground. This is civilization. This is civilization.

That was being maintained during the time of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. That is being described. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira maintained this standard of civilization. Just see how the economic problems will be solved simply by one movement, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Try to understand. Mahī. Because mahī will produce everything. Just like here in this Letchmore Heath there are so many, so much land lying vacant. You produce you own food. Why you are going to London, to the factories? There is no need. This is wrong civilization. Here is land. You produce your food. If you produce your food, there is no need of going hundred miles, fifty miles on your motorcycle or motor to earn your livelihood. Why? There is no need. Then you require petrol. And petrol there is scarcity. Then you require so many parts, so many That means you are making the whole thing complicated unnecessarily. Unnecessarily. There is no need. Simply you keep to the land and produce your food, and the cows are there. They will supply you milk. Then where is your economic problems. If you have sufficient grains, sufficient vegetables, sufficient milk from the land where you are living, where your economic problem? Why you should go to other place? That is Vedic civilization. Everyone should remain in the spot and produce everything as he requires, and God will help you. Because you can produce from the land anywhere. The rainfall is there. If you have got land and the rainfall is regular, then you can produce anything. Kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. And how the rainfall will be possible? How regular rainfall? That is described in the Bhāgavata. Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. Is there a Bhagavad-gītā here? Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ.

We are trying to give as much possible happiness to our students. Otherwise unless he is, one feels happy, how... It is little difficult. Unless one is very advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one cannot adjust things. Therefore our policy is that... What is called? Yogo bhavati siddhi. Yuktāhāra-vihārasya. Yuktāhāra-vihārasya yogo bhavati siddhi. We are yogis, but we are not that kind of yogi, unnecessarily giving trouble to the body. No. Yuktāhāra. you eat. You require to eat. You eat. Don't starve. Don't unnecessarily fast. But don't eat voraciously. That is bad. That is not yukta. You eat, but don't eat voraciously: "Because there is something very palatable, let me eat voraciously," and then again fall sick. An if you cannot digest, then you will sleep. You will sleep only. Therefore don't eat more, but eat whatever is necessary. Yuktāhāra. Yuktāhāra-vihārasya yogo bhavati siddhi. Eat whatever necessity, whatever you can... "One man's food, another man's poison." One man eats, say, so much voraciously. Another man cannot digest. If he imitates, "Oh, he is eating so much? I will also eat so much." No. He can digest it, let him eat. But if you cannot digest, don't eat more. That is required. Then what is that verse?

Pradyumna:



annād bhavanti bhūtāni

parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ

yajñād bhavati parjanyo

yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ

[Bg. 3.14]



Prabhupāda: That's it. Everything is cycle. If you execute your prescribed duties as a brāhmaṇa, as a kṣatriya, as a vaiśya, or as a śūdra, as a brahmacārī, as a gṛhastha, as a vānaprastha, or as a sannyāsī... Divisions are there. Division must be there. Just like government. For executing nicely the governmental business, there are so many departments. Not that one department, only king, queen. Then government... Why the government is spending so much money, maintaining so many building? Simply queen's palace, that Buckingham, that is sufficient? No. There must be departments. So these are departments, this brāhmaṇa, this kṣatriya, the vaiśyas, the śūdras. Just like in your body there are departments. This department, brain, head. Therefore it is called head, head office, head office. Why do you refer to the head office? It has come from this head. Why Godhead? The Supreme Godhead, the Supreme. Therefore we say, "Godhead. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more superior person than Me." So the divisions required. The divisions required.



So for these divisions, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra... Without the divisions... So what is... Read the verse again.

Pradyumna: Annād bhavanti



Prabhupāda: Annād bhavanti, huh?



Pradyumna: ...bhūtāni.



Prabhupāda: Ah, bhavanti bhūtāni. Annād. Anna means food grains. Either animal or man, they must eat sufficiently. Either you eat grass or you eat rice or wheat or oats, or..., something must be... So they are are called anna. In Sanskrit language it is called anna. Anna means foodgrains. So annād bhavanti bhūtāni [Bg. 3.14]. Every living entity lives. Nowadays there are scarcity of foodgrains. Even the human being cannot eat sufficiently. But formerly the kings, they used to maintain elephants. They were supplied very nice cāpāṭis. Do you know that? Still there are kings, they have elephants. Therefore elephant can be maintained by very rich man. If suppose, if somebody comes, he says, "Take this elephant, I give you free," will you take? Will you accept? You know that elephant will devour you, your all your means or income and all family income, because you cannot maintain elephant. (laughs)



Therefore in India sometimes, when, a hundred years ago, some students would come in England, especially London, and make a European, English wife... In old days they are doing that. So people would say that "This man is maintaining one white elephant." Because a European wife means very much expenditure. So one Mr. P. R. Das, he was high-court judge. So he was taking bribe on account of maintaining white elephant. He married one European wife. The expenditure very high. In those days for Indian it was a fashion to get a European wife. So this man married one European wife, and his expenditures was very, very heavy. So high-court judge, he was getting only four thousand rupees, and his expenditure was ten thousand rupees, and therefore he was taking bribe. He admitted. So when he was detected by the chief justice, he was dismissed from the post. But this is the position. You should not expend more than your income.

So kāmam, yes, what is that? Annād, annād bhavanti bhūtāni. Bhūtāni means embodied, those who have taken, accepted, the living entities. They live by eating anna, either animal or human being. You require anna. Produce foodgrains. Foodgrains or grass or anything, as the animals eat and man eat, you must produce. And that production is there on the ground, not you factory. Not in the Birmingham factories. There are many factories in Birmingham? You cannot produce foodgrains there. Therefore it is said, annād bhavanti bhūtāni.

Then, next?

Pradyumna: Parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ.



Prabhupāda: And parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. Parjanya means if there is waterfall, rainfall, then you can produce anna. Parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. One after another. You require foodgrains, and for producing foodgrains, you require sufficient rainfall. Parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ. Then?



Pradyumna: Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. And the the rain supply be regular if you perform sacrifice. Therefore, what is that next?



Pradyumna: Yajñād bhavati parjanyo yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ [Bg. 3.14].



Prabhupāda: Ah, yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ. Yajña, karma. Karma means, according to the varṇāśrama, brāhmaṇa should work according to his own position. They will chant Vedic mantra. That is also one karma, activity. They must understand what is Vedas; they must explain. That is brāhmaṇa's business. And kṣatriya's business, karma... This is called kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam. Brahma-karma svabhāva-jam. Vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam. Śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam. By nature, one has got a particular type of work. So yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ, what is that?



Pradyumna: Yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ.



Prabhupāda: Ah, karma-samudbhavaḥ. If everyone is doing his duty nicely as a brāhmaṇa, as a kṣatriya, as a vaiśya or as a śūdra, then no..., there is no question of that you are do... Everyone has to do his work according to his capacity. Just like in ordinary life also, we do not see that everyone is able to do everything. No. There are certain class of men. If you want some help for repairing your electric wiring, you must call for an electrician, not a carpenter. But when you want to repair a door, you require a carpenter. That is Vedic division. Therefore there was caste system. Everyone... I have seen in India still. In you country also you'll find. The potters, during Diwali system, they make small dolls. So I have seen the potter's house. The children, five or ten years old, they are also making small dolls, small dolls. Because by tradition, by family, the father is making doll, the mother is making doll, and the children also learning. Similarly, the weaver, you will find. You supply the... Still there are this system. You supply. Gandhi wanted to introduce this system. You produce your thread and give to the weaver, and waver will give you cloth. Why you are looking after this Manchester cloth? By this movement... (end)





730620SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.5

-

Māyāpura, June 20, 1973



Devotee: (leads chanting, etc.



nadyaḥ samudrā girayaḥ

savanaspati-vīrudhaḥ

phalanty oṣadhayaḥ sarvāḥ

kāmam anvṛtu tasya vai

[SB 1.10.5]



"The rivers, oceans, hills, mountains, forests, creepers and active drugs, in every season, paid their tax quota to the King in profusion."



Prabhupāda: So everything in nature has to give something. That is the order. Everything that we see, nadyaḥ, the river... Why God has created the river? It has got a function. Similarly samudrāḥ, the oceans, similarly the hills, mountains, girayaḥ, savanaspati, vegetables. All these vegetables which are growing, each and every vegetable, creeper, has some service, we do not know. Because we do not know the use of these vegetables, creepers, we go to the doctor, physician. Otherwise, if somebody is ill, the medicine is there. We do not know how to utilize it. Still in remote villages, in forest, they do not come to the physician, doctors. The bils, the aborigines, they know so many drugs. For toothache, we go to the dentist and they extract the teeth, but I have read in Ayurvedic medicine, there is a drug, a root. Only if you touch this side of the mouth, all the germs collected within the teeth will come out. I have seen it. Sometimes in the year 1931 or '32 I had a very severe tooth pain. So I was taken by my servant in the jungle to some, this vaidya. They cured me, and the dentist could not. I attended so many times to the dentist. I have got my practical experience. And in the Ayurvedic literature there is mention some drug, the root only if you touch here, the germs collected in the teeth, they will come out in the corner of the teeth some germs-sometimes it is itching; there is all germs-so they will come out. Sometimes pains in the toe. All they are germs. The germ theory is all right, but they want to cure these germs in different way. But by nature's way there are so many drugs and roots and creepers that can cure all the diseases.



Similarly the river, the river has its function to supply water all the year. During rainy season the water is collected on the top of the hill. It is stocked there by God's arrangement, and they come down. Just like we, by power pump, we get water down to the top of the roof and stock there. Similarly, on high level of hills and mountains water is stocked. Sometimes they are stocked in ice form, not in liquid form. So according to the seasonal changes the ice becomes melted and the water is supplied. It comes through the river. The same thing is there, but because we have now turned to become demons, the river sometimes overfloods, killing so many men and animals, at the loss. Actually everything is meant for kāmam, for supplying our necessities. And as soon as you are disobedient to God, demons, nature will give you punishment. Instead of supplying you water, water is there, it will overflood. You will be in trouble.

So these rascals, they cannot see how nature is strong and it is controlling everything.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



Everything is perfectly being done by nature. Nature is appointed by Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: [Bg. 9.10] "Under My control." So prakṛti will work very nicely provided you are also nice, Kṛṣṇa conscious. If you are not nice, then daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. "My māyā, My prakṛti, My energy, is very strong, duratyayā." These rascals, they are trying to control this flood, government. So much money they have wasted, but still in this quarter there are havoc. Therefore daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā. You cannot control the nature's way. That is not possible.



How nature can be controlled? Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. This is the law of nature. If you become disobedient to God, then prakṛti or nature will give you trouble in so many ways. And as soon as you become submissive, surrender to Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there will be no more natural disturbances. I have heard in 1900, 1898-I was born in 1896-so I have heard, I have seen also, I remember, in Calcutta there was a very virulent type of plague epidemic in 1898. So Calcutta became devastated. All people practically left Calcutta. Daily hundreds and hundreds of people were dying. I was one year old or one and a half year old. I have seen what was happening, but there was plague epidemic. That I did not know. I, later on, I heard from my parents. So one bābājī, he organized saṅkīrtana, Hare Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana. When there was no other way, so he organized saṅkīrtana all over Calcutta. And in the, in saṅkīrtana, all people, Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Parsi, everyone joined. And they were coming, they were going road to road, street to street, entering in every house. So that Mahatma Gandhi Road, 151, you have seen. The saṅkīrtana party we received very nicely. There was light, and I was very small, I was also dancing, I can remember. Just like our small children sometimes dances. I remember. I could see only up to the knees of the persons who were joined. So the plague subsided. This is a fact. Everyone who knows history of Calcutta, the plague was subsided by saṅkīrtana movement.

Of course, we do not recommend that saṅkīrtana should be used for some material purpose, that is nāma-aparādha, nāma-aparādha. Shama sa bhakti kriya (?) pramāṇa. Saṅkīrtana, you can utilize saṅkīrtana for some material purpose, but that is not allowed. That is nāma-aparādha, because nāma, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa, they are identical. You cannot utilize Kṛṣṇa for your personal, material benefit. That is aparādha. Kṛṣṇa is the Lord. You cannot engage the Lord for your service. Similarly you cannot utilize the holy name of the Lord for some material purpose. That is not allowed. So anyway, because ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. If you wanted some material benefit by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, you'll get it, but that is nāma-aparādha. You won't get the ecstasy of loving God. That is the aim of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra: how you shall elevate yourself to the platform of loving God. That is required. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. Not for utilizing the holy name for some material purpose. But this happened, we have got experience, I have heard, I have seen.

So, everything-the rivers, the seas, oceans, the mountains, the hills, the forest, the creepers, the vegetables-sarvāḥ kāmam anvṛtu, according to seasonal changes everything has got meaning. So if we are honest, if we are, because the, just like in prison house, jail, although the prisoners are criminals, condemned, still there is arrangement for your comfort also, by the government. There is arrangement of supplying food and all other necessities of life. Recently in Ahmedabad when I was visiting, the prison authorities also invited us for kīrtana. So I saw the criminals, prisoners. Savarmati. Savarmati jail, yes, where Gandhi was also imprisoned during the political movement. So Gandhi's room, where Gandhi was staying they showed me, and I sat down there. So, there is very good arrangement for the comforts of the prisoners, if they abide by the laws. Similarly, although this material world is just like prison house, prison house, we living entities, we have come here as punishment.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

(Prema-vivarta)



Now we are under the control of this external energy, material energy. We have become controlled, just like we become controlled by the prison authorities when we are criminals, not ordinarily. Ordinarily we are free. Those who are not within the walls of prison house, they are free. They are acting wherever they like they are going, but within the law. Similarly we have got freedom. There are living entities, their number is greater. Nitya-mukta, ever liberated. They live in the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭha planets. Nitya-mukta. Nitya-mukta means eternally liberated. They never come down in this material world. And we are nitya-baddha-ever conditioned, eternally conditioned.



Eternally conditioned means... We cannot be eternally conditioned, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Our natural position is ever liberated, eternally liberated. But because we wanted to imitate Kṛṣṇa, we wanted to become Kṛṣṇa, as the Māyāvādīs want to do, therefore in the spiritual world, Kṛṣṇa is the only enjoyer. Ekam eva aditiyam(?). Aham, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Sarva-loka, not only of the Vaikuṇṭhalokas, planets, but these planets also. Everywhere, Kṛṣṇa is the supreme proprietor. Therefore he is the supreme enjoyer. We cannot be enjoyer. We each can simply be servitor; that is our natural position. Just like a dog, when it serves a nice master, he's happy. Otherwise, it is street dog. Nobody cares for it. Street dog. A street dog has no position. Sometimes they are killed. Similarly, when we live under the full protection of the Supreme Lord, that is our healthy condition, that is our real life. And as soon as we give up this position to be subordinate, to be predominated by the Supreme Lord, then we are bewildered. We are thrown into this, under the control of this material nature, and according to our work we get different bodies. There are 8,400,000 forms of bodies and we get one body after another. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. This is called ever conditioned. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. In this way, we are wandering from one species of life to another, one planet to another. In this way the brahmāṇḍa, this universe is very very big and there is immense opportunity. You become sometimes demigod, sometimes dog, sometimes cat, sometimes tree. In this way, we are wandering.

But this human form of life, especially those who are born in India... Now it is not limited within India. By the grace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu... His prediction, pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma. Now the Kṛṣṇa's, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mercy is being distributed all over the world, all parts of the world. That is the prediction of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So this is the opportunity of getting out from the control of the material nature, by accepting bhakti-latā-bīja, accepting this very principle, that we are not masters, we are subordinate. We are jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109], eternally servant of Kṛṣṇa. So as soon as we accept it and engage ourself in the service of the Lord, that is our liberated position. Then we, again, we become nitya-mukta. We revive our original condition of life. Original condition means ever liberated. We can go anywhere. When we are actually liberated, when we are not conditioned by this material body, that spiritual spark, as I explained several times, revives all godly qualities. Sarva-ga, we can go anywhere.

Just like Nārada Muni. Nārada Muni is sarva-ga. He's ideal living entity. He's going everywhere, in the spiritual world, material world. Similarly, every one of us, we can travel. Even within this material world, there are different grades of planets. There is one planet which is called Siddhaloka. There the inhabitants, they can fly in the sky without any instrument. Aṇimā-siddhi, yoga-siddhi. Therefore it is called Siddhaloka. All kinds of yogic, aṣṭa-siddhi, eight kinds of perfection they possess. They haven't got to practice the mystic yoga system. By nature, they are perfect. As the yogis can travel from one place to another without any instrument, they will sit down here and perform the yogic practice. Within a moment or within a minute, wherever he wants to go, he'll be there. This is yogic perfection. This is called aṇimā-siddhi. Laghimā-siddhi, prāpti-siddhi, vaśitā-siddhi, īśitā-siddhi.

So these are simply samples of our perfection. By yogic practice we can regain some of our sample liberty, but actually when we are in our spiritual form, identity, we have got such liberty, we can go anywhere, we can do whatever we like, as Kṛṣṇa can do. Of course, Kṛṣṇa is the supreme person. His power, his liberty is unlimited. Our power and liberty is limited. So when we use our power and liberty within that limit, we are called nitya-mukta, ever liberated. If we want, artificially, more power to imitate Kṛṣṇa, then we are gone. Then (indistinct) kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. Then you are conditioned in this material world. Because in the spiritual world the enjoyer is only Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can be enjoyer; everyone is servitor. Jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. Still, although we are put into this prison house, all these rebelled souls, this prison house, this material world, is only one fourth of Kṛṣṇa's creation. Ekāṁśena sthito jagat [Bg. 10.42]. Ekāṁśena. The three-fourths part of His creation is the spiritual world. Just imagine, this ekāṁśa. Ekāṁśa means not only this one universe. There are many hundreds and thousands of universes like this. This is one of them. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that this universe is just like a mustard seed in the bag of mustard seeds. You just imagine in a bag how many mustard seeds you can pack. Unlimited. You cannot count. Mustard seed within a bag, two and a half mounds weight. Can you count? No, it is not possible. Similarly all these universes, material universes, each of them is compared with a mustard seed, and this universe which we experience is one of the mustard seeds within the bag of mustard seeds. And all these material universes combined together, aggregate, is one fourth creation of Kṛṣṇa. And the three-fourths part is the spiritual world. So just imagine how many liberated living entities are there. They are also living entities. They are ever liberated. Just like in the jail, the population in the jail is very small in comparison to the population of the city.

Similarly, within this material world, all the living entities, they are all conditioned, very limited number. The unlimited number are there in the spiritual world. But still Kṛṣṇa has made arrangement. Kṛṣṇa is giving us chance, this human form of life, that "I give you all facilities, all the supplies, necessities of your life. The river will serve you, the hills will serve, the mountains will serve you, the ocean will serve you, the forest will serve you, the vegetables will serve, the animals will serve you, everyone will serve you. Now you have got human form of life. You take service from them, live peacefully, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." This is the arrangement. But these rascals, they'll not chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. They want to predominate over these hills, mountains, rivers, animals. In the Bible, it is said the animals are given under the control of human beings, man. Is it not? They have taken it. And because the animals are given under the control of man, therefore man should open slaughterhouse and eat them? Suppose if somebody gives his son, "Sir, will you take my son? Keep him under your control." Does it mean I shall eat him? These rascals interpret in that way. Because the animals are given under the control of man, therefore there should be slaughterhouse, the animals will be killed, and they will eat. This is their interpretation of the Bible, is it not? Who knows Bible? Anyone? Nobody knows Bible? Have you forgotten? Anyway...

Devotee: In the Koran it is also said.



Prabhupāda: Huh? In the Koran also it is said, yes, that animals are under the control of man. That is naturally. Just like...



Devotee: They say it is for the purpose of eating, fish(?) are created for the purpose of eating.



Prabhupāda: That is also in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also, that jīvo jīvasya jīvanam. That we also accept. But just like jīvo jīvasya jīvanam, then why don't you eat your own son? He is also jīva. Why do you discriminate? Therefore discrimination is the better part valor. We should know, we are also eating the vegetables. What kind of jīva, living entity we shall eat, that is to be discriminated. Not that because one living entity is food for another living entity, it does not mean I shall eat my own son. I am father. We do not do that. Because we use our discrimination.



Similarly, in the human form of life there should be discrimination. We have to eat. We have to eat. Discrimination means (indistinct), that what kind of food I shall eat. Suppose the hogs, they eat stool. Does it mean because the stool is also food, I shall eat that? That is discrimination. If you say that everything is food, then why don't you eat stool? One man's food, another man's poison. That is... What is to be eaten, what is not to be eaten, that is discrimination. Now our discrimination is, because human life is meant for becoming God conscious, Kṛṣṇa conscious, we have to act in God consciousness. We have taken vow that we shall eat the remnants of foodstuff, prasāda, from Kṛṣṇa. Now, what Kṛṣṇa wants? Kṛṣṇa says patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Kṛṣṇa says "Give Me vegetable, water." "Anyone who offers Me in devotion." So we have to eat Kṛṣṇa prasādam. Although animals are meant for eating by the man. That is stated in the (indistinct). Ahastāni sahastānām apadāni catuṣ-padām. Ahastāni, they haven't got hands(?). Ahastāni. (indistinct) sahastānām, they are food of the human being. So ahastāni sahastānām apadāni catuṣ-padām. Just like the creepers, grass, and vegetables. Catuṣ-padām. They're food for the four-legged. Phalgūni jīvo jīvasya jīvanam.

So, in this way, there is order that one life is meant eaten by another. That is nature's law. But we should use discrimination what kind of foodstuff, what kind of living entities we shall eat. That Kṛṣṇa... (?). We have taken vow to eat only Kṛṣṇa's prasādam. There is something. Whatever Kṛṣṇa orders. So that is a fact that each and every living entity is meant for another living entity for eating. When we get human form of life, the animals, they, just like, another eat vegetables. Similarly, the cows. Nature's law is there. Although one animal is meant for by another these animals, they use their discrimination by nature's law. Tigers will never come to your garden to eat fruits and vegetables. No. By nature, they have got teeth and jaws to kill another animal. They want to eat, drink blood, fresh blood. Nature has given them all the provisions for that. Similarly, we human beings, this is scientific. Our teeth are meant for eating fruits. That is one Dr. Cooney, in your Germany. He said that... And actually, if you eat fruits and milk, you will have never any kind of sickness. That's a fact. So they're also life.

So we should use our discrimination. We... We, our only business is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. So under Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we cannot eat anything which is not offered to Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa says: patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. Kṛṣṇa does not say that "You give me meat, eggs and fish." Kṛṣṇa does not say. When you have got Kṛṣṇa as your guest... Kṛṣṇa has come very kindly to be handled by you. He's unlimited. But He has agreed to become limited by your limited hands. This is Kṛṣṇa, this arcā-vigraha. Arcā-vigraha. If Kṛṣṇa, if you want to handle Kṛṣṇa is His gigantic universal form, you have no capacity. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa has become very small, and He's giving you chance to serve Him, to dress Him, to wash Him, to offer Him foodstuff, to offer ārātrika. Kṛṣṇa is giving these chances. So whatever Kṛṣṇa says. He's your guest. He has come very kindly. He says, "Give Me such kind of food." It is your duty to give such food. Patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalam... You cannot say, "Kṛṣṇa, this is also nice food, eggs and fish." No. That you cannot do.

Indian: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Indian: Tri-vidhā āhāra tri dvitiya...(?)



Prabhupāda: So sāttvika-āhāra... Because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is on the, above sāttvika platform, above goodness... Śuddha-sattva. Here in the material platform, sattva-guṇa is sometimes contaminated by rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. But in the spiritual world there is simply pure sattva-guṇa. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam. So vasudeva platform. There Kṛṣṇa takes birth; there Kṛṣṇa is seen. When you come to the śuddha-sattva... Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]. At that platform, you can deal with Kṛṣṇa.



So this devotional service is śuddha-sattva platform. There, you cannot bring in something contaminated which is material. Here, everything should a be spiritual. Therefore, because we have taken the vow of accepting Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we cannot eat anything, although they are meant for eating. But we cannot eat anything. That is discrimination.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730828SB.LON

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.5

-

London, August 28, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads synonyms, etc.) Translation: "The rivers, oceans, hills, mountains, forest, creepers and active drugs in every season paid their tax quota to the king in profusion." [SB 1.10.5]



Prabhupāda: Yesterday we discussed, sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. Sarva-dughā mahī. Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. This land, mahī, can give you everything. Actually it is giving. We cannot manufacture anything. The land is there. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4]. These are the gifts of Kṛṣṇa. These are the ingredients. In this material world, whatever you see, they are preparation of these five gross ingredients. Nothing more. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ kham. Land, water, bhūmir āpaḥ anala, fire, vāyuḥ, air, and kham means the sky, ether. This is the ingredients of all material civilization, grossly. And subtle: mano buddhir ahaṅkāra, mind, intelligence, and egotism. These are the eight gross and subtle elements. Now, by the mixture of these things, we find so many things.



Now, how the bhūmi or the land, gives us sufficient supply? Therefore there is arrangement of the river, nadī, nadyaḥ. And the stock of water is there in the ocean. It is practical. Just like you keep some stock of water according to your measurement. The stock of water is the ocean, because we require so much water. In India it is said that "You are spending like water." India is tropical country. They use profusely water. There are many rivers also. They take bath in the river, especially Ganges River. There are five very sacred rivers: the Ganges, Yamunā, Narmadā, Godāvarī, Kṛṣṇā. Big, big rivers there are. So tropical country there is sufficient supply of water, and you use it for cleanliness. Natural antiseptic water. Any septic, you simply wash with water, it will be antiseptic, natural. In India even the poorest man who has no sufficient cloth, but he will daily wash the cloth twice. And it is tropical country, there is no difficulty. You wash and within five minutes it is dry. So antiseptic. So arrangement is so nicely made. Pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idam [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation]. Kṛṣṇa's arrangement is very nice.

So yesterday we discussed about the profuse supply of milk. That is required. Luxury... Actually, luxury means nature's supply. You can have profuse supply of milk, grains. For dressing you can have profuse supply of silk, cotton. And for eating, profuse supply of grains, fruits, flowers. And for this profuse supply these are the means. The first thing is nadyaḥ, rivers. The stock of water is the ocean, and by evaporation, cloud is formed. Just like you pump water to the topmost floor. So Kṛṣṇa's pumping process is this cloud. Pumping process. He is, I mean to say, evaporating water throughout the whole summer season. And they are on the head, on the sky, and then the water is distributed all over the land. Parjanyaḥ. Kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]. Because water is required. Just see how nice arrangement. And the water, whatever for the time being in the rainy season, is distributed. And for future supply it is stocked on the head of the hills and mountains. And from that hills and mountains the rivers-they are supposed to be water supply source-throughout the year will supply water. It is stocked on the head. The same principle. We simply imitate. We also keep a very big tank on the head of the house, and through pipe we get water supply. So here nature's pipe water supply is the big, big rivers, and the water is being supplied from the stock on the head. There are big, big lakes and it is supplied. The same process.

So nadyaḥ, samudrāḥ, and girayaḥ. Full cooperation. The stock is the samudrāḥ and the... Just see that such huge stock of water is salty. Why it is salty? It will never decompose. It will never decompose. But you cannot take the salty water. Therefore it is distilled by the sunshine, distilled. You take the distilled clear water. If you directly collect water from the rain, it is distilled water, without any contamination, without any dirty things, clear, very nice. Those who have, I mean to say, traveled by ship, you'll see the ocean and sea is so clear water that up to twenty feet you can see clear water. Clear water. The stock, the ocean water, it is very clear. So everything is nicely arranged. Simply they'll work nicely when you are obedient to God. Just like if you are a good citizen the government cooperation is full with you. But if you are outlaw, if you are rascal, if you are criminal, no supply, you go to jail. That's all. Try to understand. This is the arrangement.

So whose properties are this, the rivers, mountains, oceans, and the forest? Whose property it is? It is Kṛṣṇa's property. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the proprietor." Sarva-loka-maheśvaram. Not only this planet, but sarva-loka, all the planets, all the universes, He is the proprietor. And we are maybe that... Maintained. Actually, we are maintained. And the supply method is there. Nadī, the river is there, the mountain is there. Mountain, it does not stock water only, but from mountain you get so many minerals, huge quantity of minerals, jewels, gems. And from the samudra, or the ocean, and the seas you get large quantity of pearls and... What is called? Muktā. Pearls is muktā. Yes. And corals. Huge quantity. Simply because this material world, the supply is immediate. Just like in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness you can get one example. Just like in 7 Bury Place we were congested. So we were feeling. Kṛṣṇa immediately supplied you this, Bhaktivedanta Manor, "Take it." Huh? You cannot construct this house even in your own life. That is not possible. So we have to depend fully on Kṛṣṇa. That is called full surrender. Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66]. And serve him. All supplies are there. There is no botheration. It will come automatically. It will come automatically. Because after all, the supplier is Kṛṣṇa. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān.

What is the difference between us and God, or Kṛṣṇa? He is also living entity. Just like we see Kṛṣṇa is playing on flute and He is enjoying the company of Rādhārāṇī. So you can do also. You can also create one Rādhārāṇī and get a flute and imitate Kṛṣṇa. But that does not mean you are Kṛṣṇa. If you play rascaldom, simply if you imitate Kṛṣṇa, and you think that you have become Kṛṣṇa, that is rascaldom. Because there is another business of Kṛṣṇa. What is that? Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. Kṛṣṇa can supply the necessities of life to every one of you. You cannot. You cannot provide even your wife. That is the difference. Those who are less intelligent, they cannot understand what is the difference. Kṛṣṇa can lift the Govardhana mountain on His finger. So you cannot do it. So how you can imitate Kṛṣṇa? The rascals, they say that "Kṛṣṇa enjoyed the company of the gopīs; so let us create some gopīs and enjoy. Then we become Kṛṣṇa." There are many rascals, do that. They imitate rāsa-līlā. In Karachi, there was a rascal. He declared himself that "I am Viṣṇu. I am Lord Viṣṇu. So I'll play rāsa-līlā. Send your wives and daughters." So rascals, they sent their wives and daughters to dance with him. You see? And there was another rascal during Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's time. Perhaps you know the story. So he was also imitating this rāsa-līlā. Māyāvādī rascals, they do that, imitate Kṛṣṇa. How you can imitate Kṛṣṇa? You are not Kṛṣṇa. But by imitating His rāsa-līlā they become Kṛṣṇa. No. If you imitate Kṛṣṇa of His rāsa-līlā, then you have to imitate to lifting the mountain. You have to kill demons like Kaṁsa. But you'll find the so-called artists, they will paint pictures of Kṛṣṇa only with gopīs dancing and the... Not other things, how He's killing Kaṁsa, how He's killing Aghāsura, Bakāsura. That they'll not paint. That side is completely blind. But in our Kṛṣṇa book you'll find both the pictures.

So here you have to understand that the rivers, the ocean, the mountains, and the trees, and the creepers, they will all serve you very, I mean to say, regularly, provided you are obedient to Kṛṣṇa. This is the process. Phalanty oṣadhayaḥ. Nowadays we do not know. As soon as we become sick we go to the doctor or to the drug shop. But in the forest all the medicines are there. All the medicines are there. Simply you have to know which plant is the medicine for what kind of disease. Phalanty oṣadhayaḥ sarvāḥ, and kāmam anvṛtu tasya vai. And according to seasonal changes you'll get fruits, flowers and drugs and everything. During Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time all these things were being supplied by nature because Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was Kṛṣṇa conscious, and he maintained his kingdom, all the citizens, Kṛṣṇa conscious. Even at the time of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, grandson of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, so he condemned Kali. He was going to kill Kali because he was trying to kill a cow in the kingdom of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So he surrendered, "Sir, I am also your subject. This is my business, to act sinfully. So you give me protection. Because you are king, you have to give protection to everyone." So, of course king has to give. So King Parīkṣit Mahārāja said that "You have to go out." But he said that "Where is your kingdom? Where is that place where there is no kingdom, where is no supremacy of your majesty? Where shall I go?" So he gave him these four places: illicit sex and intoxication and meat-eating and gambling. "Where these four things are going on, you go there." That is the place of Kali.

So the Kali had to face so many difficulties to find out such place, because there was no place where illicit sex was going on, there was no place where unnecessarily animals are killed, there was no place where wines and intoxication used. So Kali found it difficult where to go. At the present moment we say the Kali-yuga is strong because everywhere you'll find these four sinful activities. Everywhere. That has become part and parcel of modern civilization. But up to the time of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, these sinful activities, nobody could trace out where it is. Therefore every nature's resources were supplied. Because after all, supply is being made by Kṛṣṇa through the agency of material nature. Material nature is not independent. Independent. Therefore we find... In your country there is no mango. Mango is supposed to be the king of all fruits. So in India there is sufficient supply. But in some year there is so much supply, enormous, and some year there is no supply. Similarly, grains also; in some year there is sufficient supply, and some year there is no... There is scarcity, famine. Then after all, you will have to depend on nature. You cannot produce in your factory these things which are received through these phalanty oṣadhayaḥ sarvāḥ. That depends on nature's gift. And the nature is working not independently. Nature is working by the order of Kṛṣṇa.

That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. The rascals, fools, they think that nature is working automatically. If nature is working automatically, why sometimes there is profuse supply and sometimes no supply. Why? What is the reason? Nature would work automatically in the same way. But why, in some year, in some season, the supply is profuse, and in some year there is no supply? There must be some control. And the controller is Kṛṣṇa. That is stated in the Bhagavad... Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. "The prakṛti, material nature, is working under My direction." So nature is working... (aside:) Again the (coughing) same trouble. So do not think that nature is working, producing things, blindly. No. There is no such thing as blind. There is, arrangement. Just like we see the aeroplane is flying in the sky. It is not that the aeroplane is automatically flying. No. There is a pilot. This is intelligence. Similarly, the whole material nature is working, and these are the venues of nature's work, rivers, ocean, and the mountains, and the vegetables or the plants and creepers, and trees, drugs. Everything will give you sufficient supply if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, if you act according to Kṛṣṇa's direction.

Where you get the direction? Sādhu-śāstra-guru-vākya. You get Kṛṣṇa's direction from saintly persons, from authorized scriptures, Vedic literature... Sādhu, śāstra, and guru. Guru means who knows how to follow previous saintly persons, who knows what is written there in the book of knowledge, he is guru. Sādhu-śāstra-guru. And śāstra means that the direction of Kṛṣṇa; that is called śāstra. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said, yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ, na sa siddhim avāpnoti [Bg. 16.23]. Therefore you cannot manufacture scripture. That is not possible. Therefore it is said, dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Śāstra, scripture, means the words and the laws given by God. So what is the law? How can I know? Bhagavad-gītā is there. Why don't you take it? Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is the law. "You simply think of Me," man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, "become My devotee," mad-yājī, "worship Me." Just like you are doing in the temple. We are worshiping Kṛṣṇa, we are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, simply remembering Kṛṣṇa, man-manāḥ. And this Deity worship, temple worship, is done by the bhaktas. So one who is engaged in this service, he's a devotee. Man-manā bhava mad..., mad-yājī, worship. What is the business of the temple? Simply to worship. Bring flowers for Kṛṣṇa, bring nice foodstuff for Kṛṣṇa, cook for Kṛṣṇa, offer it to Kṛṣṇa. Then whatever remnants is there you eat, take kṛṣṇa-prasādam, glorify Kṛṣṇa. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. This devotional service only for Kṛṣṇa. Not that you bring some rascal and make your Kṛṣṇa. No. Real Kṛṣṇa, not imitation Kṛṣṇa. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam arcanam. This temple worship is called arcanam.

So if you take to these principles of devotional service you gradually understand what is Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa will provide everything. Yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham [Bg. 9.22], Kṛṣṇa says. Teṣāṁ satataṁ yuktānām. If you are actually engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, all your necessities will be supplied by Kṛṣṇa. How it will be supplied? Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ vahāmi. "I personally carry all the necessities to the house of the devotee. I personally carry." There is a big history how He personally carries. But He hasn't got to do personally. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. His energy is so, I mean to say, acute, that Kṛṣṇa, if He wants to supply you... It does not appear that Kṛṣṇa has personally come, but you will understand that supply is so, I mean to say, surprisingly supplied that you will understand how Kṛṣṇa supplied. You'll be surprised. When you are in need of something... In London it was so happened. When we established the Bury Place Deity, on the three days before, the Deity which I ordered from India, it did not arrive. Three days before. And I was so much full of anxiety, that "Where to get...? We are arranging, we are issuing invitation card, and there is no Deity. Where is the installation?" But you'll be surprised to know that some Indian gentleman came just on the three days before: "Sir, we have got a Deity. You can take." So Mukunda and myself went, immediately brought the Deity. And nobody knew this afterwards, but we got surprisingly.

So Kṛṣṇa is so kind. If you are actually sincere to the service of Kṛṣṇa, then He has got agents everywhere. Sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat. He has got hands and legs everywhere. Wherever He will order, the things will come. Simply we have to become sincere; then everything is there. Read the purport.

Pradyumna: "Since Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was under the protection of the ajita, the infallible Lord, as above mentioned, the property of the Lord, namely the rivers, oceans, hills, forests, etc., were all pleased, and they used to supply their respective quota of taxation to the king."



Prabhupāda: Yes. So Kṛṣṇa's another name is Ajita. Ajita means "one who cannot be conquered." His name is Ajita. Everyone can be conquered, everyone can be vanquished, but not Kṛṣṇa. Therefore His another name is Ajita. This Ajita, who is never conquered, He can be conquered by the devotee. That is Kṛṣṇa's name. Another name of Kṛṣṇa is Ajita. Ajita means nobody can conquer.



That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. This is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva

jīvanti san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām

sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām



This was quoted from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by Rāmānanda Rāya about the process of approaching Kṛṣṇa. So he suggested so many things. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "Yes, but better process is there. If you know, just describe." So he described, varṇāśrama-dharma, sannyāsa, jñāna-miśra-bhakti, karma-miśra-bhakti, in this way, everything Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu rejected. Eho bāhya āge kaha āra. "This is external. This is not very good. If you know something more better, you speak." So when at last he said this verse, jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva... If one becomes submissive and does not endeavor to understand Kṛṣṇa by his so-called limited knowledge, jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta, one has to become sub... The whole devotional department is submissiveness. Because under the influence of māyā, everyone is falsely proud. "Oḥ, I am so intelligent. I can do everything." This is the disease, material. Everyone is falsely proud.



So if you want to enter into the spiritual kingdom, as Lord Jesus Christ also said, "The kingdom of God is for the meek and the..." Huh? Meek and mild, yes. So that is the qualification. You have to become humble. Therefore the Bhāgavata also says the same thing. Jñāne prayāsam. Don't be very much proud of your so-called knowledge, that "I can understand everything." You should become namra, meek and mild. And then how to be...? Jñāne prayāsam udapāsya namanta eva san-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām. You should engage yourself to receive spiritual knowledge from the authority, reliable source. Spiritual knowledge is understood through the ear. Therefore the Vedas are called śruti. San-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām. This is recommended, that Kṛṣṇa's kathā should be heard from the realized source. San-mukharitām. Sat means devotee. Sat. Oṁ tat sat. San-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtām. Then sthāne sthitāḥ, you can remain in your place. It doesn't matter whether you are a brāhmaṇa or a śūdra or American or Indian or... It doesn't matter. You keep yourself in your position. Simply go there. Where these things are discussed authoritatively, you hear. Śruti-gatām. Śruti-gatām. Śruti means the ear. You just give the aural reception of the words of realized soul. San-mukharitāṁ bhavadīya-vārtāṁ sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatām. You can keep yourself... It doesn't require that you have to change your position. Simply you have to hear from the right source.

Then what will be the result? The result is by hearing, hearing, hearing, one day you'll be able to conquer over the unconquerable, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is unconquerable. Nobody can conquer Him. But you hear, you'll be able to conquer Him, simply by hearing about Him. Therefore this hearing process is so important from the right source. Read.

Pradyumna: "The secret of success is to take refuge under the protection of the Supreme Lord. Without His sanction nothing can be possible. To make economic development by our own endeavors on the strength of tools and machinery is not all."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Tools and machinery are already there. But why there is scarcity? Now there is no petrol, whole world. You have got the drilling machine, tools and machinery, everything. Then why you are in scarcity? Because now Kṛṣṇa is against you. Therefore in spite of the oil underground, in spite of tools and machine, you'll starve. This is nature's process. You have created such a situation. Now, in spite of having everything... Just like it is said by Vaiṣṇava kavi, nire kari vas namre kila peyas (?) Just like you are on the ocean and you are thirsty. You are in the ocean, profuse water, but you cannot touch a drop. Nire kari vas namre kila peyas. Thirsty, you want water, but you are in the water, in the ocean. Now drink it. Similarly, if Kṛṣṇa does not desire, you may have ample things, everything there, but still the key is in the hand of Kṛṣṇa. Unless He opens it, you cannot get. Go on.



Pradyumna: "The sanction of the Supreme Lord must be there, otherwise..."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Now the sanction is not there; therefore there is scarcity. Nature can supply you anything, as we have already described. But if Kṛṣṇa says, "Don't supply," bas, finished. Then?



Pradyumna: "Otherwise, despite all instrumental arrangements, everything will be unsuccessful. The ultimate cause of success is the daiva, or the Supreme. Kings like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira..."



Prabhupāda: Daiva, daiva means godly. So you may have everything complete, but if the daiva sanction is not there... Just like one may have father and mother. Generally, it is supposed that a child under the protection of father and mother will be happy. But that is not the case. If Kṛṣṇa does not sanction, in spite of very rich parents, the child is suffering. Why? Because there is no sanction. Similarly, if one is diseased, you can engage first-class physician and you can use first-class medicine; still he dies. Why he dies? You have got so advanced medicine, advanced physician. Why the man dies? Because Kṛṣṇa wanted. That's it. Similarly, we have created so many countereffects for all our miserable condition. That is called struggle for existence. But if there is no sanction from Kṛṣṇa, these counteractions will not be useful. You'll have to starve. You'll have to die. All these methods cannot help you. Mayādhyakṣeṇa [Bg. 9.10]. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram. So everything, without Kṛṣṇa's sanction... They say, "Not a blade of grass moves without the sanction of God." This is the position. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Kings like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira knew perfectly well that the king is the agent of the Supreme Lord to look after the welfare of the mass of people."



Prabhupāda: Yes. That is king. King means he is representative of God. Therefore king is addressed as nara-devatā, the god amongst the human beings. Because as agent of God, Kṛṣṇa, his business is to see that all the citizens, they are happy in their daily necessities of life and they are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the duty of the government. Not that "You go to hell; give me tax." This is not government. Therefore, the king being pious, how nature was supplying everything, and the citizens were very happy, there was no scarcity. And how they were executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It is true, as people say, that if one is hungry, needy, how he can execute? Therefore it is the duty of the government to see that everyone is happy for the material necessities of life and is engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So that is not being done. Everyone is trying to become happy without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like in your country I heard in a... The Archbishop of Canterbury... There was some meeting. So he said that "You want kingdom of God without God. That is your philosophy." The modern, so-called politicians, they want to make everything very nicely going on. They have discovered this United Nations so that there may not be any war or any strife or any scarcity. They have medical department, W.H.O. Do you know the W.H.O.? W.H.O. department. W.H.O. means World Health Organization. W means World and H means Health and O means Organization, of the United Nations. So there is a W.H.O. organization but there is no health. (laughter) The W.H.O. organization is there, worldwide, but there is no health. This is their business. Because there is no Kṛṣṇa.

So this Archbishop of Canterbury said rightly that "You want kingdom of God without God." That is the disease. Everything we want. Therefore our propaganda is just the opposite. We want everything with center Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we will have never scarcity. Others will suffer. Go on.

Pradyumna: "Actually, the state belongs to the Supreme Lord. The rivers, the oceans, the forests, the hills, drugs, etc., are not creations of man. They are all creations of the Supreme Lord, and a living being is allowed to make use of the property of the Lord for the service of the Lord."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Yes. You must use... Just like we are using this hall, this hall, very nice hall. What purpose? For satisfying Kṛṣṇa. We are dancing, we are chanting, we are eating nicely, you are understanding philosophy. What is the purpose? To satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Then you can use. The whole world you can use very nicely, provided you know how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. But if you do not know, then this thing will be fire. In spite of having nice house, nice arrangement, you'll think that you are in the fire. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Today's slogan is that 'Everything is for the people,' and therefore the government is for the people and by the people. But to produce a new species of humanity at the present moment on the basis of philosophy and religion on the basis of justice and peace, on the basis of God consciousness and perfection of human life, the ideology of godly communism, the world has again to follow in the footsteps of kings like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira or Parīkṣit. There is enough of everything by the will of the Lord, and we can make proper use of things to live comfortably without any enmity between men or animal and man and nature. Everywhere, the control of the Lord is there, and if the Lord is pleased, every part of nature will be pleased. The river will flow profusely to fertilize the land, the oceans will supply sufficient quantity of minerals, pearls and jewels, the forest will supply sufficient wood, drugs and vegetables, and the seasonal changes will effectively help produce fruits and flowers in profuse quantity. The artificial way of living depending on factories and tools can render so-called happiness only to a limited number at the cost of millions. Since the energy of the mass of people is engaged in factory production, the natural products are being hampered, and for this the mass is unhappy. Without being educated properly, the mass of people are following in the footsteps of the vested interest by exploiting natural reserve, and therefore there is acute competition between individual and individual, and nation and nation. There is no control by the trained agent of the Lord. We must look into the defects of modern civilization by comparison here and should follow in the footsteps of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira to cleanse men and wipe out anachronisms."



Prabhupāda: That's all. Thank you. (end)





730621SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.6

-

Māyāpura, June 21, 1973





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



nādhayo vyādhayaḥ kleśā

daiva-bhūtātma-hetavaḥ

ajāta-śatrāv abhavan

jantūnāṁ rājñi karhicit

[SB 1.10.6]



Translation: "Due to the King's having no enemy, the living beings were not at any time disturbed by mental agonies, diseases, or excessive heat or cold."



Prabhupāda: So in the previous verse it has been described that nature was favorable. The river, the hills, the mountains, forests, vegetables, creepers, these are our natural surroundings. Animals... Everyone was complete. It is a cooperation. So many living entities, according to karma, we have got different bodies. Some has got the human form of body, some has got the body of an animal, some has got the body of a tree, creeper. Sometimes hills, mountains, also. Everyone. Their business is cooperation. We can study from our own body. There are different parts of the body, but it is a business of cooperation. Hand, legs, eyes, ears, nose, they are all cooperating for the upkeep of the body. Similarly, all living entities-may be in different types of bodies-they are meant for cooperating in the matter of serving the Supreme Lord, central point. (aside:) Just see the...



So if the government or the chief of the executive power, the king, is just to the point, dharmeṇa, as it was said, "Abiding by the religious principles, ruling over the country," then everything, even natural elements, they become cooperative. They must become cooperative. What is nature? Nature is also another energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So the nature is also working under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate

[Bg. 9.10]



So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time, the cooperation was so complete that everyone was free from anxiety, disease, calamities, natural disturbance.



In this material nature, or material world, we have got three kinds of sufferings, tri-tāpa-yantana. Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī inquired, "Why these three kinds of miseries inflict pains upon me?" Ke āmi kene āmāya jāre tāpa-traya. Tāpa-traya. Tāpa means painful condition, tāpa. Just like if you touch fire, it creates a painful condition by burning the part, similarly, this world is also a blazing fire, saṁsāra-dāvānala. The rascals, they do not know. They are always out of the three kinds of miserable condition. Everyone is in some way or other under these conditions. These conditions means it is... These kleśāḥ, painful conditions, they are created by three causes. What are those causes? Daiva-bhūtātma-hetavaḥ. Daiva means created by the demigods. Daiva. Devatā. Just like this rain department, water department, is under the control of Indra. So Indra can supply water just to your requirement, or sometimes he does not supply, or sometimes he supplies over, over requirement. Ativṛṣṭi, anāvṛṣṭi. Anāvṛṣṭi means no rain, and ativṛṣṭi means excessive. So we don't want excessive or less. We want just proper. So this is under the control of the devatā. You cannot say... You may be very great scientist. You cannot say that "It is under my control." When there is no rainfall, you cannot say, "All right, we are scientists. We are creating rain." You can theoretically say, "Now we are making progress. In future."

All these rascals say, "In future." And we also believe, that "In future these rascals will give us all happiness." Not now. Now you die. Just like a clever lawyer, his client was condemned to death, to be hanged. I have seen it in Allahabad high-court. And still, he is patting him, "Don't worry. I shall get you released by appeal. Now you can go to be hanged, and I shall get you released." Like that. I have seen it. One big European barrister... In those days European barristers were very valuable. Mr. Armstrong. I had also one case in high-court. So one man, one medical practitioner, he killed his servant in the operation room very mercilessly. The servant was implicated with his wife. To revenge, he called the servant in the operation room. The servant did not know that he was to be killed. And immediately he was captured, chloroform, and mercilessly killed with knife and then packed up in a box. He was taking the corpse in a different place to throw away. In the meantime a police officer was passing. He saw that drops of blood is coming out of the box. He immediately arrested. So this case was. Then the doctor was condemned to death. So Mr. Armstrong was appointed his lawyer. So he was solacing, "Don't worry, I shall get you released by appeal." So our so-called scientists, they also say like that: "In future we shall do this. In future. Now you go to hell. That's all." But in future they cannot do anything. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Nature's law is so strong. The so-called childish scientists, they cannot give any relief. That is not possible. That is not possible. It is simply false promise. And those who are fools and rascals, they believe that in future... Future, but what they have done in the past? They cannot do anything.

Therefore it is said, there are three kinds of miserable conditions: daiva, bhūta, ātmā. Daiva means adhidaivika, and bhūta means adhibhautika, and ātmā means adhyātmika. Three kinds of miseries. Adhyātmika, pertaining to your body and mind. Body, we have got, we have got experience, so many bodily troubles, anxieties. If not body, mental. These are called adhyātmika. Then adhibhautika. I am peaceful, but another neighbor, or another animal, will give me some trouble. I am peacefully sitting here, but these flies are giving me trouble unnecessarily. I have to take precaution. So there are flies, mosquitoes, at night so many other animals, they come. Besides that, my brother, my friend, they are also prepared to give me trouble. Some way or other, other living entities causing some painful condition. This is called adhibhautika. And adhidaivika. Daivika, painful condition created by the demigods. Just like there is hurricane all of a sudden. So many trees falls down, sometimes cottages devastated, overflood, excessive rain, overflood, famine, pestilence. You have no control. You cannot control. You can simply say, "In future." That's all. But there is no control.

So we are always in this painful condition. That is material life. But those who have got eyes, sense, they can see. Just like Sanātana Gosvāmī, he could see. He was prime minister, well situated materially. Learned scholar, very intelligent. Otherwise how they could become Caitanya Mahāprabhu's personal associates? Very qualified. Caitanya Mahāprabhu... When Sanātana Gosvāmī consulted Jagadānanda, that "I want to do this. What is your advice?"... Sanātana Gosvāmī became infected with itches all over the body. And it was, what is called, bleeding itches. Itches are two kinds: dry and sometimes oozing water. What is called?

Devotee: Pus. Pus.



Prabhupāda: Not pus. Weeping.



Devotee: Weeping.



Prabhupāda: Yes. The technical name is weeping. Dry and weeping. So it was weeping itches. And whenever he would go to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, immediately Caitanya Mahāprabhu embrace him, and the weeping secretion will touch the body of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So he thought that "I am suffering from this disease. Caitanya Mahāprabhu (is) embracing me. I shall kill myself. I shall commit suicide." So he consulted, not for suicide, but leaving the place. So when he was advised, "Yes, you can leave the place," so Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He heard this news that Jagadānanda has advised Sanātana Gosvāmī to leave the place, He became very angry, that "You have the audacity to advise Sanātana Gosvāmī? Nonsense." He was so respectful to Sanātana Gosvāmī. The same Sanātana Gosvāmī approached Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, asking Him the question: "What I am? Why I am put into these threefold miserable condition of life?"



So this is our position. We may be very great man in the estimation of our friends and countrymen, but everyone is subjected to the miserable condition of life. They cannot make any solution. That is not possible. They have made a solution, big, big learned scholars, just that Mr. Kotovsky said, "Swamiji, after death, there is no life. Everything is finished." Unless they think like that, then life becomes more horrible, full of anxieties. If they think of that there is another life and there is punishment and reward, according to our karma, then their life is very horrible. So just like the animals, poor animal, sometimes facing enemy, close the eyes, as if there is no enemy, so they do like that, close the eyes. Children, when there is danger, they close the eyes. They have no other means to escape. So these people, they close the eyes. "There is no life after death." Otherwise they cannot accommodate.

But there is life after death. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ. There is life after death, simply change of body. Now, there are so many bodies, 8,400,000's of bodies. I can become next life a fly, according to my karma. Or I can become next life Brahmā. That is also according to karma. But there are varieties of life. So the so-called scientists, they do not know what is life after death, how it happens, how it is going on. This is a great science. That you can understand from the Vedic literature, not from your so-called scientific research. That is not possible.

So how these people, during the time of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, were free from all kinds of anxieties and diseases? Nādhayo vyādhayaḥ kleśāḥ. If you are in anxiety, then that will create a disease. Our this psychological condition, physiological condition, is working in so subtle way-little shocking, little disturbance will create another disturbance. The Ayurvedic medicine, they treat patients on this principle, how things are disturbed. They have got their calculation: kapha, pitta, vāyu. Tri-dhātu. This body is a composition of these three dhātus. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Kuṇape. This is a bag created by the interaction of the three elements, namely, kapha, pitta, vāyu, bile, mucus and air. This is kavirāja treatment. They can understand the position of these three elements by feeling the pulse. This is Ayurvedic science. If one kavirāja can learn to feel the pulse, he can say everything. He can say when this man will die, today or tomorrow or... Accurately he will say. The pulse beating is so scientifically described in Ayurvedic science. As soon as he fixes up the pulse beating, immediately the formulas are there: "Such kind of pulse beating will create such and such symptoms." So you feel the pulse and inquire the patient, "Are you feeling like this?" If he says, "Yes," then it is confirmed. The disease is confirmed. Then the medicine is there. Very simple thing. Now in allopathic treatment, first of all you have to sacrifice one chaṭāka of blood, immediately. As soon as you go to the medical man, in your country, he will take so much blood. First of all you have to give your blood. Then fees. Then you have to purchase nonsense medicine. So here also there are nonsense kavirājas also. So unless one is expert in feeling the pulse, he is not kavirāja. That is the criterion.

Indian: It will take two years.



Prabhupāda: Just see.



Indian: To pass education, takes two years' time.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Two years' time. So this is the... This body is made of three dhātu, and misadjustment of these three things... If the mucus is increased, the other two decrease. In this way disturbance is created, and that is the cause of disease. Ādhayo vyādhayaḥ. So if people remain completely in hygienic principle, as they are prescribed in the śāstras, just like rise early in the morning, take bath, evacuate and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra... If you follow the rules and regulation, then there will be no anxiety, no disease. People become crazy when he is full of anxieties or disease. If he is happy in every respect, then he does not become crazy, he does not become enemy. If everyone is satisfied, then where is the chance of becoming your enemy or my enemy? Everyone is satisfied.



So in Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time, the government, the government was responsible also to keep people peaceful, without any anxiety. That is government. Without any anxiety. And now the government means full of anxieties. You do not know how to sleep peacefully at night. You have to keep watchmen, just see, enemies are coming or not, with torchlight. You see. This is our position, full of anxieties. Even we cannot sleep at night peacefully. This is government. And here you see, compare the government-no anxiety, no anxiety. Just compare. So what is the use of this rascal government? The rascal government must be there because we are rascals. You cannot complain against the government. Because we select. It is the days of democracy. We elect our representative. So why you should, I mean to say, blame the government? You have created the government. You have sent your representative, a rascal, another big rascal. You are rascal, and another big rascal, you have voted; so how you can expect good government? You send only big rascals. That's all.

So there cannot be. That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that in the Kali-yuga, all the people will be rascals, śūdras. Simply by manipulation, if one gets vote, he captures the governmental power. Śūdra. He's a śūdra. He is not a kṣatriya like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, trained up kṣatriya. He is a rascal, third-class man, fourth-class man. He gets the vote and we give vote. So how we can be happy? How we can be carefree or anxiety-free or disease-free? It is not possible. Therefore if the people in general, they become Kṛṣṇa conscious, they become trained up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they understand the value of life, how to live, then they can send good representative. Kṛṣṇa conscious man. Then the government will be nice. Without becoming... Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. If people are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, their so-called qualification has no value. Kuto mahad-guṇāḥ. There cannot be value. There cannot be any good qualification of a person who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, who is not a devotee. This is our conclusion. We have got some test tubes. We can study man. He may become a very good scholar, very good politician, very big minister, but we test whether he has got any sense of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If he's not, immediately I understand that "Here is a rascal number one." That's all. We have got test tube, how much he is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If he's not, then he is grouped immediately in four groups: duṣkṛtina, means constantly committing sinful activities; mūḍha, rascal; narādhama, lowest of the mankind; māyayā apahṛta-jñāna, although educated with high degrees, his knowledge has been taken away; āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritaḥ, and demon.

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



Immediately we classify, "Here is a rascal number one, lowest of the mankind," or "always engaged in sinful activities," or "whatever education he has got, that is useless, because his real knowledge..."



Just like Professor Kotovsky, such a big professor, he says, "There is no life after death." He's a rascal number one. What is the meaning of this education? He does not know that the soul is eternal, and therefore Bhagavad-gītā teaches first, dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanam... [Bg. 2.13]. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. "First of all understand this: soul is eternal; you are eternal; you do not die, after the annihilation..." This is the first education. And these rascals, they say there is no life after death. So how much educated they are you can understand. They are all rascals. And you may open big, big colleges, institution, providing some rascal professor, rascal student, and beg the whole life, and sacrifice everything. It is useless. Śrama eva hi kevalam, simply wasting time.

dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam

[SB 1.2.8]



Śrama eva hi kevalam. You can do your duties very nicely, very good, dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ, but if you do not develop your, I mean to say, attachment for Kṛṣṇa... Vāsudeva-kathā ruciḥ [SB 1.2.16]. "Oh, here kṛṣṇa-kathā is going on. Topics on Kṛṣṇa is going on. Let me hear it." Just like here. We are talking of Kṛṣṇa; nobody is coming. Nobody is coming. Only few selected. Vāsudeva-kathā ruciḥ. There is no taste for hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā. So such kind of education, advancement of civilization, is śrama eva hi kevalam, simply wasting time. And if you waste your time in such foolish activity, then there will be anxiety, there will be disease, there will be enemies, there will be disturbance-everything, one after another, one after another. Natural disturbance, disturbance by other living creatures, disturbance by your body. So this world will become hell. This is the position.



So just compare the present governmental situation and the time... A king is supposed to be responsible for the citizen's peaceful life, no anxiety, no disease. Ādhayo vyādhayaḥ. That is king. Just like one brāhmaṇa approached Lord Rāmacandra that "In the presence of father the son has died. You are responsible. There must be something wrong in Your kingdom." His son died. That is natural, that son lives, father dies. This is natural death. "And what is this? The father is living and son is dying?" So king was so much responsible, even the death must be systematic. There should be no anxiety. There should be no disease. There should be no scarcity, no famine, no natural disturbance. This is government. This is government. Just try to understand the ideal government during Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time. Not only Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, all the kings. Rājarṣayaḥ. Imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ. They were all great ṛṣis, although they were kṣatriyas. Brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya, they used to guide the general people. The high caste means who would guide the people nicely. The brāhmaṇa by their Vedic knowledge, perfect knowledge, paṭhana-pāṭhana yajana-yājana dāna-pratigraha. By high learning, they would... They were not interested for capturing the government. No. They had no time. But there was consulting body. Even Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja's time, there was consulting body, all the kings. The brāhmaṇas and the ṛṣis, they would form a consulting body and give advice to the king: "My dear king, do like this.' And they will abide. Just like head. Head. Head gives the instruction to the arms. Not the arm gives instruction to the head. Head. Brain. Mukha-bāhūru-pādebhyaḥ.

So brāhmaṇa means this portion, head, brain. And kṣatriya means this portion, arm. And vaiśya means this portion, belly. And śūdra means this, leg. So no part is unimportant. Every part is important for upkeep of the body. But comparative study, this part is more important. If my head is cut off, then all other parts may remain. It will not act. Similarly, at the present moment there is no brāhmaṇa. All śūdras, simply legs. If you keep the legs of the body, what is the value of this body? There must be head. Everything must be there. Everything must be there. The head must be there, arms must be there, the abdomen must be there, the legs must be there. Then it is complete body. Similarly, this scientific division, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13], the division of the human society according to quality, the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Kṛṣṇa says, mayā sṛṣṭam: "This is My creation for upkeep of the social system."

So there is necessity of the śūdras and there is necessity of the brāhmaṇa. There is necessity of the kṣatriya. Everyone is required to do, to function, in his particular position. Then the society will be nādhayo vyādhayaḥ kleśāḥ. No more anxiety and no more disease. Everyone is peaceful, cool-minded, cool-brained. Then chant Hare Kṛṣṇa without any disturbance and go back to home back, to Godhead.

Thank you very much. (end)



730622SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.7

-

Māyāpura, June 22, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.):



uṣitvā hāstinapure

māsān katipayān hariḥ

suhṛdāṁ ca viśokāya

svasuś ca priya-kāmyayā

[SB 1.10.7]



Translation: "Śrī Hari, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, resided at Hastināpura for a few months to pacify His relatives and please His own sister, Subhadrā"



Prabhupāda: So read the purport also.



Pradyumna: Purport: "Kṛṣṇa was to start for Dvārakā, His own kingdom, after the Battle of Kurukṣetra and Yudhiṣṭhira's being enthroned, but to oblige the request of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and to show special mercy to Bhīṣmadeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa stopped at Hastināpura, the capital of the Pāṇḍavas. The Lord decided to stay especially to pacify the aggrieved King as well as to please Subhadrā, sister of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Subhadrā was especially pacified because she lost her only son, Abhimanyu, who was just married. The boy left his wife, Uttarā, mother of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. The Lord is always pleased to satisfy His devotees in any capacity. Only His devotees can play the part of His relatives. The Lord is absolute."



Prabhupāda: So we are personalists. We believe... Not believe, not the question of believe, but actually the ultimate truth of Absolute is a person. That is the statement of Vyāsadeva.



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate

[SB 1.2.11]



Tattva-vit, those who are in knowledge of the tattva or the Absolute Truth, they know that ultimately the Absolute Truth is manifested as a person like you, like me. Not exactly like you, like me, but so far personality is concerned, individuality is concerned, He is like us. In the Bible it is said, "Man is made after God." Because God is person, therefore we are person. Otherwise, where from our personality comes? God is the origin of everything. Therefore He is the origin of personality, individuality, otherwise how we are persons? How we are individuals? Wherefrom we get this personality, individuality?



So the foremost feature of the Absolute Truth is a person. And as a person, He has got the same feelings as we have got. As we have got feelings for our relatives, for our brothers, for our sisters, for our friends, for our enemies, the same thing there is also. If you study your personality or your friend's personality, you can get a rough idea of the Supreme Personality because our personality is dependent on the Supreme Personality. Mamaivāṁśaḥ. We are simply fragmental personalities just like the sparks and the fire, or the drop of ocean water and the ocean. The difference is in quantity. A drop of ocean water or a fragmental spark of the fire is of the same quality like the fire or the ocean. But in magnitude it is very, very small. God is vibhu, the greatest, and we are the smallest. God is infinite, we are finite, infinitesimal. That is the difference. Otherwise everything is there, as we have got.

Just like the son inherits the quality of the father, similarly... We are supposed to be sons of the Supreme Person. Therefore, in minute quantity we have got all the qualities of God. Not all. Seventy-eight percent. In very minute quantity. That is our perfection. If we revive godly qualities seventy-eight percent, in minute quantity, that is our perfection. That is there, already there. Simply it is covered by this material energy. Otherwise everything is there. So the feelings of affection, there is also in Kṛṣṇa.

So Kṛṣṇa expands. Ekaṁ bahu syām. Expands. Ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Kṛṣṇa expands His energy, ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. Rasa, humor, mellows, to enjoy, He expands Himself. Just like Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī has given us the definition, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

[Cc. Ādi 1.5]



Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, the same Absolute, but Rādhārāṇī is the expansion of the pleasure potency of Kṛṣṇa. We have got potency as Kṛṣṇa has got. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. This is the Vedic injunction. Parā, they say. Absolute Truth has many potencies, innumerable, vividhaiva śrūyate. One of the potencies is the pleasure potency. Just like we want some pleasure. Pleasure is the constitutional position of spirit soul, or the Absolute Truth. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). God and we, being of the same quality, we are by nature always joyful. So our joyfulness is checked when we are in material condition. Therefore there is struggle. We are hankering after, to revive that joyfulness, but this contamination of material energy, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa, they are checking, obstacles.



Therefore we have to get free from obstacles. Sattva-guṇa, we have to go above the sattva-guṇa, śuddha-sattva. Then again we revive our original position of joyfulness. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. This is the joyfulness: no lamentation, no hankering. We hanker after something which we want, and we lament for something which we lose. Here there are two business: something gaining and something losing. Just like businessmen. They have got two businesses: either to make profit or to lose. At the end of the year they calculate, "Whether we are loser or gainer?" But in the spiritual world there is no such thing as to gain or as to lose. There is nothing... Absolute. That is Absolute. That idea we haven't got just now. But that is the nature of the spiritual world. There is no question of loss, nor there is any question of gain. Simply ānanda, ānanda, pleasure. Pleasure means because there is no loss. Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam. There is ānanda, and ānanda ambudhi. Ambudhi means the ocean. Here the ocean does not increase. If the ocean increases, then whatever small land we have got, it would have been finished. No. Ocean does not increase. We have seen that Los Angeles on the beach, the big Pacific Ocean, but just about three yards or four yards off from the ocean we are walking. We are confident that "Although the Pacific Ocean is so big, powerful, it cannot come here." Only a few yards off we are walking, confident.

So everyone is working under the direction of the Supreme Lord. Ocean, although very powerful, very big, still, by the order of Kṛṣṇa, it cannot go beyond the limit. It cannot go. So the... Everything... Yasyājñayā bhramati kāla-cakraḥ. Yac cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ. Now, this sun, the sun, unlimited heat, aśeṣa-tejāḥ, heat. But it is also limited. It cannot expand so much heat so that we may burn into ashes. The sun can do that. As the big ocean can overpower all your cities and towns in a second, similarly, the sun also can burn the whole universe within a second. It has got so much potency, temperature. But yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ. No. The kāla-cakra... I think the scientists also say that the sun from the orbit, if it comes this side one inch or that side one inch, one side coming this side, the whole universe will be frozen, and the other side, whole universe will be burned. I do not know whether there is any scientists who say. But it cannot go this side or that side. Sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ. The orbit which is given by Kṛṣṇa, that "You shall travel within this orbit..." Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **.

So everything... And what to speak of ourselves, we want to become independent. What is the meaning of independence? Even the sun, moon, or the sea, ocean, nobody is independent. And how we can be independent? We are teeny, very small. There is no question of independence. The so-called independence, as we fight for independence, that is māyā. There is no question of independence. When I first met my Guru Mahārāja, on the first meeting, he said that "You go to preach in the Western countries." I was surprised. There was no acquaintance. So "Caitanya Mahāprabhu's message, you are all educated young men, you should go and preach." I replied that "We are dependent nation, Indians. Who will hear us? Nobody will hear." So at that time he explained dependence and independence-temporary, it has no meaning. Actually, at that time I could not realize the independence. We were waiting for independence. What independence we have got? Independence means you go for one kilo of rice and stand there for two hours. (laughter) This is our independence. Everything is controlled. You cannot get. And the price... Before independence the price of rice was two annas or five rupees, six rupees per mound, two annas per kilo. Now it is more than two rupees. Everything. Practically we have increased our dependence. Not independence. In the name of independence, we have increased our dependence. So actually there is no independence. But we manufacture so-called independence. Nobody is independent. I thought, "We are so much dependent on the state rules and regulation. America is independent." When I went to America I saw they are so dependent, that any young man could be called for military service without any objection. So the whole nation is dependent on the whims of the military board. So dependent.

So we are dependent. So long we are under the control of māyā, we are dependent. We are depend... Our constitutional position is dependence, servitude. So by false declaration we think that "We are now going to be independent. We shall not service Kṛṣṇa. We shall become independent. I shall become Kṛṣṇa." As the Māyāvādī thinks that he shall become Kṛṣṇa, "I shall become God," that is another dependence. You cannot be independent. That is not possible. And to remain dependent, that is our happiness. That we do not know. Instead of declaring independence, if we remain dependent, that is our happiness. Just like children, women, śūdras, dogs. Their happiness is when they are dependent. Artificially... Now in India also, the women are imitating independence. But I have seen in the Western countries, in your country, the independence, declaration of independence by the woman class, is not their happiness. They are unhappy. Better to become dependent upon father, upon husband and upon elderly children. That is their happiness.

Just like Kuntī. Kuntī, so much qualified lady, she can call any demigod. She got one benediction from Durvāsā Muni. When she was young girl, she served Durvāsā Muni. Mahārāja Kuntibhoja used to invite so many saintly persons. That is the system in India still. So once Durvāsā Muni became a guest of Mahārāja Kuntibhoja, and Kuntī served the Durvāsā Muni. He was very pleased, and he gave her one benediction, that "You can call any demigod by your sweet will. As soon as you desire, the demigod will..." So Kuntī, she was a girl; she made an experiment, immediately called the Sūrya, the sun-god, and he came. So Sūrya asked him (her) that "You have called me. You take some benediction. Take a son from me." She refused. "No, I am unmarried. I cannot." "No, there is no harm. Your son will be born from the ear." Generally, the son is born from the vagina, but Kuntī's son was born from the ear. Therefore Karṇa. The first son was Karṇa. Unmarried. Therefore Karṇa was, I mean to say, given away, because she could not show, and when Karṇa was floating on the water, that one carpenter picked up and he raised him. So Karṇa was known as the carpenter's son, śūdra's son. Actually, he is Kuntī's son. So when Karṇa was killed, Kuntī began to cry. And Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja inquired, "Mother, why you are crying?" At that time she admitted, "Karṇa was my son." "Oh? Such a secret you did not disclose? We treated Karṇa as our enemy. We could have taken..." There are so many incidences like that.

So there are so many things in the Mahābhārata, in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. You can learn social, political, economical, philosophical, religious, anything. Veda, veda means knowledge. So these are Vedic literatures. Pañcama-veda. Mahābhārata is pañcama-veda. And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the essence of Vedic knowledge. Nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam idam [SB 1.1.3]. Nigama. Nigama means Vedic literature. And it is kalpa-taru. Kalpa-taru means desire tree. Whatever knowledge you want, you will get it. Veda means knowledge. Vetti veda vida jñāna(?). So Veda means jñāna, knowledge. Any type of knowledge you want, there is in the Vedic literature. So it is meant, Veda, jñāne, knowledge is meant for the human society. It is not meant for the animals. Animals cannot study Veda. And what is the purpose of Veda? The purpose of Veda is to understand Kṛṣṇa. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. This is Veda. If you try to understand, or if you understand very little... You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa fully. Kṛṣṇa Himself cannot understand Himself. So it is not possible. But whatever Kṛṣṇa is speaking about Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā, if one hundredth part, one percent you can understand, then your life is successful. Vedic knowledge. That is Vedic knowledge. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15].

So all these relatives of Kṛṣṇa, the Pāṇḍavas, His sister Subhadrā-Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, Subhadrā. Subhadrā was sister of Kṛṣṇa. So Baladeva wanted to hand over the sister to Duryodhana, and Kṛṣṇa wanted to hand over the sister to Arjuna. Two brothers, difference of opinion. But elder brother's order cannot be disregarded. Therefore Kṛṣṇa planned that Arjuna may kidnap His sister. So Subhadrā was kidnapped by Arjuna in the dress of a sannyāsī. Don't learn this business, sannyāsīs. (laughing) But Kṛṣṇa planned it, that "You come..." Because he was known, if he comes as ordinary Arjuna, then he will be recognized because he is the cousin-brother. Therefore he covered himself as a sannyāsī just like Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa also kidnapped Sītādevī as a sannyāsī.

So in former days also, the sannyāsīs were very expert in kidnapping. Yes. Therefore in the Kali-yuga sannyāsa is forbidden, because they'll not be able to follow the rules and regulations. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu inaugurated. He Himself became sannyāsa. Therefore we are trying to follow His footsteps, to accept sannyāsa. But we should not become a sannyāsī like Rāvaṇa. No. We should try to follow the footsteps of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was very strict. No woman could approach Him. They were allowed to offer obeisances from distant place. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very strict about asso... Even in His gṛhastha life He was very strict. He would not play any joke with any woman except His wife. And that also, once He joked with His wife, not with any other woman. So He was so strict. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's opinion is that sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu [Cc. Madhya 11.8]. Viṣayiṇāṁ sandarśanam, to mix very intimately with the viṣayīs. Viṣayī means those who are very much fond of eating, sleeping, mating and defending. They are called viṣayī. They have no other business.

So practically, at the present moment, the whole world is viṣayī. But this line, Kṛṣṇa consciousness line, is so transcendental that one has to give up this viṣayī idea. Viṣaya chāṛiyā se rase majiyā mukhe bolo hari hari. We chant "Hari, Hari," but actually, "Hari, Hari," we can chant "Hari, Hari" only when we give up viṣaya. Viṣaya chāṛiyā se rase majiyā. Otherwise "Hari, Hari" is not purely chanted. Therefore there are ten kinds of offenses we have to give up. Śuddha-nāma. When we chant pure Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, then we are elevated to the platform of transcendental love. Otherwise we can attain up to liberation. Not on the platform of loving. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very strict about viṣayī and strī-saṅgī. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was asked how to, what is the business of a Vaiṣṇava. He summarized in two lines: asat-saṅga tyāga, ei vaiṣṇava ācāra [Cc. Madhya 22.87]. Asat-saṅga tyāga, to give up the association of asat. Asat means materialistic. So who is asat? Now, asat eka strī-saṅgī and kṛṣṇa-abhakta. Those who are too much attached for material enjoyment, they are asat. And one who is not devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he is also asat. So we have to give up the company of these kind of people, who are too much materially attached and is not devotee of Kṛṣṇa. If we can avoid these two persons, then we can be fixed up in devotional service.

So,

uṣitvā hāstinapure

māsān katipayān hariḥ

suhṛdāṁ ca viśokāya

svasuś ca priya-kāmyayā



Svasu means sister, and the relative... So although Kṛṣṇa is unattached, still He observed the social obligation. There was great fight. All of them lost their relatives. Not only the Kauravas lost everything, but the Pāṇḍavas also. Just like Subhadrā's son Abhimanyu. He was only sixteen years old. His wife, Uttarā, she was once taught by Arjuna. She was disciple, student. Arjuna was teaching her dancing. Virāṭarāja, King Virāṭa's daughter, Uttarā. So they were in disguise. Ajñāta-vāsa. So the Virāṭarāja did not know that Arjuna was living in his house. So this daughter of Virāṭa, Uttarā, when Arjuna was known that he is Arjuna, he requested that "You marry my daughter." So Arjuna said, "No, how can I marry? She is my disciple. She is my student. She is just like my daughter. How can I marry?" Then he promised that "I shall get her married with my son, although he is not very grown up."



So Abhimanyu was Kṛṣṇa's (Arjuna's) son from the womb of Subhadrā. So he was married. Only sixteen years. Almost the same age. Fortunately Uttarā became pregnant. So Abhimanyu went to fight in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra and never returned. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was posthumous child. He took his birth after the death of his father. He did not see. Not only father, many. Because it was after the battle. He was the only survivor of the whole Kuru dynasty. So he was also attempted to be killed by Aśvatthāmā by brahmāstra. Kṛṣṇa saved. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was born after the death of his father. The grandfathers took care of him, and as soon as the child was grown up, all the grandfathers, Pāṇḍavas, entrusted the kingdom to Parīkṣit Mahārāja, and they left home.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730625SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.11-12

-

Māyāpura, June 25, 1973



Devotee: (leads chanting, etc.)



sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgo

hātuṁ notsahate budhaḥ

kīrtyamānaṁ yaśo yasya

sakṛd ākarṇya rocanam



tasmin nyasta-dhiyaḥ pārthāḥ

saheran virahaṁ katham

darśana-sparśa-saṁlāpa-

śayanāsana-bhojanaiḥ

[SB 1.10.11]



"The intelligent, who have understood the Supreme Lord in association with pure devotees and have become freed from bad, materialistic association, can never avoid hearing the glories of the Lord, even though they have heard them only once. How, then, could the Pāṇḍavas tolerate His separation, for they had been intimately associated with His person, seeing Him face to face, touching Him, conversing with Him, and sleeping, sitting and dining with Him?"



Prabhupāda:



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

[SB 3.25.25]



Satāṁ prasaṅgāt. Sat-saṅga. Sat-saṅga. Sat means devotees, and asat means nondevotees. Even in moral instruction of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, he advises: tyaja durjana-saṁsargaṁ bhaja sādhu-samāgamam. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita ad... Although he was a politician, a great politician, still, a learned brāhmaṇa and knowing all moral instruction, he gives this advice: tyaja durjana-saṁsargam.



This is the crucial point of advancement in human life. Tyaja durjana-saṁsargam. Try to avoid. Not try; must. You must avoid the association of the materialistic persons. Materialistic person means those who are after money and woman. That's all. They are materialistic. Those persons, simply hankering after money and woman, they are materialistic. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has advised to associate with this class of men, hankering after money and women, it is better..., death is better, preferred, than to associate. When He was requested to see King Pratāparudra... Because he was king, he's supposed to be always in association with money and women. He refused to see him: "No, I cannot see the King." When He refused to see, He quoted one verse: bhava-sāgarasya, niṣkiñcanasya bhava-sāgarasya. Niṣkiñcanasya jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya.

People do not know what is bhava-sāgara. They do not know even. But in Vedic literature, this is the first instruction, how to get out of this bhava-sindhu, bhava-sāgara, material ocean. The whole universe is also a ocean. And all these planets, they are called dvīpa. Just like this planet is called Jambudvīpa, Bhāratavarṣa. Actually it is like dvīpa. Nowadays, those who are flying in the sky, they're going from one island to another island, one planet to another planet. So when that is called dvīpa, there must be relative term, the ocean, or the sea. So whole, this universe, this planets, they are called dvīpa. Therefore they are floating in the ocean of air. Just like you have got experience. You have got experience of this also, ocean of water. And above water, there is air, ocean of air. Then there is sky. So bhava-sāgarasya. The whole universe is bhava-sāgara. Sāgara means ocean, or sea. And bhava means repetition of birth and death. Bhava. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. In the Bhagavad-gītā, once we take birth, we remain here for some time, then we give up this body; we accept another body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. We have to... So long we are in this material ocean, we have to accept these laws of nature, repetition of birth and death. This is called bhava-sāgara. So we are eternal, nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. It requires little intelligence, that "I am eternal. Why I am in this business, accepting one body, and again giving up, giving it up? And there is no guarantee what kind of body I'm going to accept next." There is no guarantee. It will be according to your work. We can become an insect, or we can become the demigod. We can become tree; we can become animal-anything, according to our karma. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1].

So this rascal civilization, they do not understand what is bhava-sāgara, what is bhava. Nothing. They are so rascal. And they're passing on as civilized men. No knowledge. So when one is intelligent, actually, then he considers that "If I am eternal, why should I accept repetition of birth and death?" That is intelligence. But they have given (in) to birth and death-"Never mind." Even university students, they say, "If next life, if I become animal, what is the wrong?" Just see. How much degraded. In Hawaii University, one student said that "Even if I become an animal, what is the wrong there?" Just see how much degraded the human society has become. They are prepared to become animal, cats and dogs, trees, anything.

So when one comes out of this gross ignorance, how to get out of this bhava-sāgara... Just like if you are thrown into the water of sea, you may be very expert swimmer, but you don't like to remain there. You want to come out. Similarly, although we may be very expert in changing our body, but still, at the time of death, we don't like it. Nobody likes to die. But he... Nobody thinks how to stop this death. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. By the destruction of this body, the soul is not dead. It is living. So this is called self-realization. One must be sober to think over that "If I am eternal, if I do not die after the destruction of this body, and I do not like to die, how to stop it?" This is intelligence, how to stop the repetition of birth and death. But the human civilization, the so-called human being has become so much degraded, they have no brain even to think over these matters, that how to stop this repetition or if there is any means to stop this repetition of birth and death. They do not..., they have no knowledge. Still they are going on as human being. They're like animals. Even big, big professors in Europe, they say, "Swamiji, after death, everything is finished." You see. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Even these plain words, the first instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, they do not understand. Not only they. Here, also. So many politicians, so many rascals, they take Bhagavad-gītā, but they do not understand. They're busy with politics.

But the first instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20],

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir...

[Bg. 2.13]



No. No. Political leaders teach the people that there is birth after death. Have you heard, any politician? But take the Bhagavad-gītā and stands with photograph: "Oh, he's a very great reader of Bhagavad-gītā." But one who understands Bha... "He's a rascal." If he understands Bhagavad-gītā, why he's in politics? And even if he's politics... These, all these kings, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Kṛṣṇa, they were also in politics. But they know things as they are. That is the difference. Who can be greater politician than Kṛṣṇa? He's giving this instruction: dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. So in human life, if they do not know what is the process of living condition, how we are changing, how we are accepting birth and death, how to stop it, then what is the meaning of this human being?



So this knowledge can be attained by sat-saṅga. Sat-saṅga. Sat-saṅga means... This is sat-saṅga, associating with devotees of the Lord. So sat-saṅga. Sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgaḥ. You cannot make association with two parties. If you want to associate with the devotees, then you have to give up the association of the nondevotees. That will be natural. Just like our, these students, although they are very young... They are not only young, but coming of very luxurious families in America, Europe. Here, the boys, they cannot even imagine how much luxury they enjoyed. Here, they have no employment, our young men. Mostly unemployed. And in Europe, America, especially in America, there is no question of unemployment. Anyone can go and earn immediately ten dollars. Ten dollars means hundred rupees. He's prepared. One of my students, Trayādhīśa, he was, morning, he was absent. So I asked him, "Why you are absent?" "Now I required some money, so I went to get some money." "How you got money?" "Now I went to the shoe brushing shop. So I brushed some gentleman's shoes. I got some money, five dollars." So they know how to earn money. There's no scarcity of money. Even in a hotel, one goes, he washes the dishes-immediately gets ten dollars. So money and woman. So there enough they enjoy, but now they have given up everything. Why:. Due to this sat-saṅga. Due to this sat-saṅga. Sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgaḥ. No more. No more association with money and woman. This is so powerful, sat-saṅga. Sat-saṅga is so powerful.

Sat-saṅga means satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvidaḥ. When actually there is sat-saṅga... Not professional Bhāgavata readers or Bhāgavata reader... No. Really realized souls of Bhāgavata, Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, they are called sat. Not for earning livelihood. They are not sat. Those who are, those who are reading Bhagavad-gītā and Bhāgavata for some worldly material gain, they are not sat. They are asat. Those who are actually reading Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for the satisfaction of Bhagavān, bhāgavata, they are sat. So once associating with these sat people, he cannot make anymore association asat. Here is a vivid examples: Hṛṣīkeśa. He left our company. He associated with some asat. Asat means nondevotees. Asat, generally, we understand rogues and thieves. But those who are devotees, they're less than rogues and thieves. Those who are not devotees, they're less than rogues and thieves. So he could not associate. It was struggle. At last, he had to leave.

So sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgaḥ. Once you are associated sincerely with devotees, he cannot mix with nondevotees. This is the test. This is the test. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. If once only... Sakṛt. Here it is said, kīrtyamānaṁ yaśo yasya sakṛd ākarṇya rocanam. If once... Satāṁ prasaṅgāt, sat-saṅga is so powerful. If one submissively hears from sat-saṅga about the name and fame of the Supreme Lord, immediately it becomes palatable. Sakṛd ākarṇya rocanam. The same thing is repeated in another place: satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. If one hears from real devotee, immediately he becomes pregnant. Vīryamāna. Just like if one boy is vīryamāna, as soon as he has sex, the girl must be pregnant. Similarly, those who are vīryamāna, really devotee, by hearing him, one becomes pregnant. Pregnant means he becomes interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is called satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ [SB 3.25.25]. Hṛt. We like from the heart. We like from the ear. Very nice to hear. Hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ. Rasāyana means pleasing. As soon as one will hear from satām, then his ear and heart will be pleased: "Oh, it is very nice." Hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ. Taj-joṣaṇāt. And if he again cultivates, if he thinks over, taj-joṣaṇāt, āśu... Āśu means immediately. Apavarga-vartmani, on the path of liberation. Śraddhā bhaktir ratir anukramiṣyati. This is the process. Therefore, sat-saṅga is required.

Now we have opened such a big hall, inviting people to come to take part in the sat-saṅga, but nobody's interested. So therefore if anyone becomes interested, he's very intelligent. He's intelligent because he wants to stop this repetition of birth and death. This is the problem. This problem, the so-called scientists, philosophers, educationists, politician, they have set aside this question. The real problem is to solve the question of birth and death. They do not touch it. They are making plan for economic development and other things. Economic development... Suppose you become rich man for twenty years or fifty years, utmost, at the present moment. Then you become a cat and dog in next life. Then what is your economic development? But they do not know that there is life after death. We have to prepare for the next life. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. Then according to my karma, by superior inspection, I'll get next birth. And in the Bhagavad-gītā it is plainly spoken: janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Kṛṣṇa says, "Simply try to understand My janma. I take birth." Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā. He's aja. Every one of us aja. Na jāyate na mriyate. We don't take birth, don't die, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa must be aja.

So Kṛṣṇa takes birth. That is Janmāṣṭamī. So if anyone tries to understand why the Aja, the Unborn, takes birth, janma karma... And God, Kṛṣṇa, who has nothing to do... That is the Vedic information. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. Why He has to do? Actually He hasn't got to do anything. He has to enjoy only. Just like we see the Deity Kṛṣṇa is not working in the factory as a factory manager. He's enjoying the company of Rādhārāṇī. We have to work. If we enjoy with our so-called Rādhārāṇī, then we'll starve to death. We have to work. But God is not like that. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate. Na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate. These are the informations from Vedas, Upaniṣads, that He has nothing to do. Yes. That is real God. If God has to work, God has to do something, then what kind of God He is? Here, the so-called imitation Gods, even a rich man, he does not do anything. And why God will work? Therefore God comes... He's aja, unborn. He comes, janma, karma, He works also. Just like Kṛṣṇa. He worked ordinary cowherd's boy. He worked as ordinary politician. He worked as ordinary philosopher, left the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā and so many other instructions, sublime instructions.

So one has to understand that why the unborn takes birth. One who hasn't got to do anything, why He comes as a human being and works? Janma karma me divyam. These are all transcendental subject matter. These are not ordinary things. Kṛṣṇa's coming, Kṛṣṇa's working, Kṛṣṇa's fighting, Kṛṣṇa's loving, they're all transcendental subject matter. Aprākṛta. So janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ. If anyone simply understands this subject matter, why Kṛṣṇa takes birth, why Kṛṣṇa works as ordinary man-these are all transcendental subject matter-then he becomes free. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. Simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa, about His work, about His birth. Simply if we can understand. The Bhagavad-gītā is there. You can read and try to understand Bhagavad-gītā as it is. The result will be, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. Then after giving up this body, he never takes birth in this material world. Punar janma. Punar janma means within this material world. In the spiritual world there is no janma, there is no death. Punar janma naiti. Then where...? He's finished? No. Mām eti: "He comes to Me, back to home, back to Godhead." This is perfection.

So anyone who is interested in this highest perfection of life, punar janma naiti mām eti, not to take birth again in this material world, but to go back home, back to Godhead, such person... Caitanya Mahāprabhu speaks for such person: niṣkiñcanasya jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya, pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya. Pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣoḥ. Just like we are on this side of the sea. We want to go the other side of the sea. Similarly this bhava-samudra, we are on this part of the sea, material world. If we want to go to the other side, spiritual world, so we have to become niṣkiñcana. Niṣkiñcana means no more possessing anything material. That is called niṣkiñcana. If we hanker after possessing material... Therefore sannyāsa. Sannyāsa means simply possess Kṛṣṇa and no other possessions. That is niṣkiñcana. You have to possess something. Suppose you have got something, one copper coin or silver coin. So if you dispossess, if you throw it away, then what is the gain. Whatever you had, gone. But if you throw the copper coin, or the silver coin, and if you accept a gold coin, then you are profited. Then it is profit. So niṣkiñcana, to simply become niṣkiñcana, renounced of everything... Just like Māyāvādī sannyāsīs. They do... Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. Yes. But brahma satyam, they do not understand what is the actual satya-vastu. That satya-vastu is Bhagavān. They do not search after Bhagavān; simply the light, effulgence of Bhagavān, brahmajyoti. They are satisfied. (yelling in background) (aside:) What is that, trouble? Stop them.

So there are so many versions about sat-saṅga and asat-saṅga. Caitanya Mahāprabhu advises niṣkiñcanasya pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya sandarśanam atha yoṣitām. (yelling continues in background, louder) They're fighting? Or what...?

Devotee: Sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca.



Prabhupāda: Ah. Sandarśanam atha yoṣitāṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca [Cc. Madhya 11.8]. So niṣkiñcana means do not hanker after any more money and women. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu refused to see persons who are after money and woman, because by their association we may be infected. We may be again hankering after. Suppose I have taken sannyāsa, and if I see one gṛhastha having a very faithful and beautiful wife, if I think, "Oh, I left my wife. If I would have possessed, I would have been happy," he's immediately fallen. Because within the mind, he's associating with yoṣit. Suppose we go to see some rich man. I see that he has got money, nice motor car, nice building. If I think, "Oh, I have taken sannyāsa. If I would have possessed all these things, I would have been...," then immediately fall down. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu strictly prohibits that if you have become niṣkiñcana, renounced order, with a idea of going forward, bhava-sāgarasya, on the other side of the ocean, then aspiring after money and women is lower than dying, committing suicide. Hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu. If you take poison, that is criminal. Similarly, He says, "A man in renounced order of life, if he's thinking of woman and money, then he's committing suicide more than ordinary suicide." Viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu. Viṣa-bhakṣaṇa. If you drink poison, then you are criminal. If you survive, by law you'll be punished. Perhaps you know it. Anyone attempting to commit suicide, if he survives, by law he'll be punished: "Why you attempted suicide? This is criminal." Similarly, to see, to aspire after women and money, by the renounced order people, is lower than committing suicide. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's version.



So actually who has associated with sādhu, he cannot make any more association with asādhu. Therefore it is said that sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgaḥ. Mukta-duḥsaṅga. Mukta means completely liberated. Such person, hātuṁ notsahate budhaḥ, such person cannot give up the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. Kīrtyamānam. He may try to go away, but he'll not be happy. He'll not be happy. We have seen practically. Some of our boys who have left, they come occasionally. Even he protests externally, internally he understands that he has committed a mistake by associating. Kīrtyamānam. Kīrtyamānaṁ yaśo yasya sakṛd ākarṇya rocanam. The saṅkīrtana, chanting of this holy name, is so pleasing that one cannot avoid it if once he has associated with devotees. This is the position.

Therefore for the Pāṇḍavas... Of course, the holy name of the Lord and the Lord, they're identical. There is no difference. But still we are chanting the holy name of the Lord, and if the Lord comes personally, how much we shall be engladdened. So we are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's name, but the Pāṇḍavas, they were practically associating with Kṛṣṇa. So if a person associating with devotees, becomes interested in chanting the holy name of the Lord, how much it is impossible, how much it is impossible for the Pāṇḍavas to give up His association. Because they are so fortunate that darśana-sparśa-saṁlāpa-śayanāsana-bhojanaiḥ. They're in intimately friendly terms with Kṛṣṇa, that they're lying together, they're sitting together, they're eating together, always seeing Kṛṣṇa. How they can tolerate His separation? It is impossible. If a..., satāṁ prasaṅgāt, if a devotee cannot give up this chanting of His holy name, how the persons who are actually seeing Kṛṣṇa, associating with Kṛṣṇa, can tolerate separation from Him? This is the purport.

Thank you very much. (end)



730626SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.13

-

Māyāpura, June 26, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sarve te 'nimiṣair akṣais

tam anu druta-cetasaḥ

vīkṣantaḥ sneha-sambaddhā

vicelus tatra tatra ha

[SB 1.10.13]



"All their hearts were melting for Him on the pot of attraction. They looked at Him without blinking their eyes, and they moved hither and thither in perplexity."



Prabhupāda: Read the purport also.



Pradyumna: Purport: "Kṛṣṇa is naturally attractive for all living beings because He is the chief eternal amongst all eternals."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Kṛṣṇa, the very name, suggests attractive. Kṛṣṇa means all-attractive. He has got, because He's complete, pūrṇa, so He has got all the attractive features, from material point of view, spiritual point of view. Therefore His name is Kṛṣṇa. And He delivers the fallen souls from the miserable condition. He attracts and He delivers. Kṛṣṇa. Therefore kṛṣṇa means Paraṁ Brahman. Paraṁ brahman iti śabdyate. Rāma also, the same thing, Paraṁ Brahman.



So Kṛṣṇa is all-attractive, by opulence, by His power. Our definition of God is very simple. We do not define God as avyakta. Avyakta means "cannot be explained." If you cannot explain, then what you will understand? The Māyāvādīs, they say that God cannot be explained. In the Vedānta-sūtra there is a sūtra: na śabdyāt. I, I forget the... "God is explainable." Because in the Vedas there are mantras. Sa aikṣata, sa asṛjata. He glanced over the material nature. He created. Sa aikṣata. So these things are explainable. So we don't see that the Absolute Truth is not explicable. It is explicable. We have got our explanation. Pūrṇa. Pūrṇa means complete. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). He's also a living entity like us. (yelling in background) (aside:) Ask the rascals to stop talking. But He's pūrṇa. That is the difference. We are not pūrṇa. We are defective. Especially when we come in the material world, we are defective in so many respects. By nature, we are defective. Or not pūrṇa, incomplete, subordinate. He's therefore called the nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. He's complete, the chief all living entities.

So how do we explain it? It is very simple thing. Suppose I am here, and you are here. So you may be better than me. Nobody is equal. You don't find. We don't find. In every respect, two bodies equal, you won't find. In bodily features, in qualities, in action, in thinking, in feeling. All you'll find varieties. Var... That is... Variety is enjoyment. If I agree with you in every respect, then where is varieties? Just like if you are given a nice dish of foodstuff. Somebody says, "Give me this one." Another says, "Give me this one." So variety of taste. Although all sweetmeats are made of the same ingredients, sugar and yogurt or curd, but somebody says, "Give me this rasagullā," somebody, "The sandeśa..." Somebody says, "Give me panthva(?)." They're made of the same ingredient, but it is different taste.

So you cannot neglect these varieties of taste. That is enjoyment. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). We are all ānandamaya, joyful. Therefore there must be varieties. Without varieties, there is no joy. Simply hackneyed, one thing, "Brahman, Brahman, Brahman," nobody likes it. They keep with "Brahman, Brahman," they fall down or they again come to the explanation of this Bhāgavatam. I have seen so many Māyāvādī sannyāsīs. By "Brahman, Brahman," they could not attract audience. Then come to Bhāgavata reading and explains in nonsense way all the Bhāgavata, Māyāvādī. But they come to... Because Bhāgavata is full of varieties. But they explain in their own way. I have seen one big Māyāvādī sannyāsī, explaining Bhāgavata that "God became pleased..." in some stanza. "So if you become pleased, then God becomes pleased." This was his explanation. If I am pleased by drinking wine, then God is also pleased? This is his explanation. Yes. I'm a grand debauch. By debauchery I am pleased. So God is also pleased by my debauchery. Because God and I, the same. This is their explanation.

So it is very difficult. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given one line of Vaiṣṇava behavior: asat-saṅga tyāga ei vaiṣṇava ācāra [Cc. Madhya 22.87]. Simply to give up these rascals' association. The rascal means the Māyāvādī, karmī, jñānī, yogi, all they are rascals. It is our open declaration. So we have to give up the company of these rascals. If we actually serious about advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we should not mix with them. We should not even invite them. Neither we shall take their foodstuff, accept their foodstuff. Dadāti pratigṛhṇāti bhuṅkte bhojayate ca... Guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati ca. Bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam. Prīti. If you want to make one friends, then these six kinds of dealings must be there. Dadāti. Dadāti means there must be... One must give something to the other, a friend. Just like I am friend. You are friend. I give you something. In return you give me something. Dadāti pratigṛhṇāti. Guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati ca. I open my mind to you, you also inquire confidential things from me. Or I inquire. Guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati ca. And then bhuṅkte bhojayate. Whatever you give me, I eat. And I give you, you eat. By these six kinds of dealing, prīti, love increases.

So in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we practice this. As far as possible, we are giving and taking. We are... We have made this program, life membership. We are giving our books, knowledge. Whatever we have got, little knowledge, we have written in our books, we are giving them: "Take it." And they are also giving: "Take this eleven hundred rupees." So this is dadāti pratigṛhṇāti. And they also come here to inquire: "Swamiji, your movement is very nice. What is the meaning of this? What is the meaning of that?" Guhyam ākhyāti, expresses their mind. Pṛcchati. They explain, "This is my position. I cannot do it. How can I do it?" And the Vaiṣṇavas reply them. Then we invite them in our love feast. In all our centers, we have got this arrangement. We invite everyone: "Come on, take prasādam." And if somebody gives us something to eat, we also eat, provided he's not a Māyāvādī, karmī, jñānī. Otherwise, we should not take. We can..., we cannot accept anything from these classes of men, atheist class. Then we'll be... Saṅgāt. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. If we associate with these Māyāvādī, atheist class, karmī, jñānī, yogi, then we'll infect their quality. So if we infect the Māyāvādī quality, karmī quality, jñānī quality, yogi quality... I see some of the students, still they practice some yoga āsana. That quality is not yet... He's not yet free. But this is nonsense. This is nonsense. We should, by promise, we should not associate with any of their qualities. That is...

asat-saṅga-tyāga-ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra

strī-saṅgī-eka asādhu kṛṣṇābhakta āra

[Cc. Madhya 22.87]



Asat. Asat means bad element, bad association. So asat-saṅga. We have to give up asat.



"So who is asat, Sir?" Caitanya Mahāprabhu's speaking: asat-saṅga-tyāga ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra. Vaiṣṇava's behavior, Vaiṣṇava's character should be simply to give up the company of the asat. Now there are so many nice people, gentlemen. So if we give up, if we say everyone is asat... So we must know. The Caitanya Mahāprabhu next line gives: "Yes, asat eka strī-saṅgī." Eka strī-saṅgī. One asat is strī-saṅgī. Strī-saṅgī means too much attached to women. Or attached to women. Or attached to women. Too much or little-it doesn't matter. Attached to women. He's asat. And kṛṣṇa-abhakta-and who is not a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So these Māyāvādīs, karmī, jñānī, yogi, they are not kṛṣṇa-bhaktas. They'll say, "Kṛṣṇa is not God. I am God. I am also God. Kṛṣṇa is not God. I am God. But Kṛṣṇa is not God." This is their version. Therefore they're rascals. "I am God." They'll declare, "I am God. You are God." But Kṛṣṇa is not God. Except Kṛṣṇa, everyone is God." This is their version.

So how much rascal they are we must know. So therefore we should give up their company. Asat-saṅga-tyāga vaiṣṇava-ācāra. Otherwise, asat... Asat eka strī-saṅgī kṛṣṇa... There are strī-saṅga, vaidha-avaidha. Vaidha means regular, according to śāstra. According to śāstra means restricted. Śāstra restricts. Śāstra means śās-dhātu. Śās-dhātu means śāsana, ruling. From śās-dhātu, śāstra has come, śastra, weapon, has come. And śās-dhātu, from śās-dhātu, śiṣya also comes. These words are derived from śās-dhātu. Śāstra, śastra, śāsana. Śāsana means ruling. Sanskrit is very nice language. From one verbal root, you can manufacture so many words; therefore it is very difficult to make Sanskrit dictionary. It is very difficult. The so-called Sanskrit dictionaries available in the market, you won't find all the words. It is not possible. Because so many words are manufactured by one dhātu. How many they will add? But there is one book, what is the name of that book? Meaning, this word means this, this, this, that...?

Devotee: Thesaurus.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee: Thesaurus.



Devotee: Synonyms and antonyms.



Prabhupāda: What is that? Name?



Devotee: It's a...?



Devotee: Thesaurus.



Devotee: Thesaurus.



Prabhupāda: Disorder?



Bhavānanda: Thesaurus. Thesaurus.



Prabhupāda: Oh. The Sanskrit name or Persian name?



Bhavānanda: No, that is the name for the book. Any book which gives so many different words, word meanings for one word, is called thesaurus.



Prabhupāda: So this śāstra, śāstra-vidhi. Śāstra-vidhi. Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantoḥ. Nityā hi. Na hi tatra codanā. One does not require encouragement. One is not taught in the school how to learn sexual intercourse. No. These things are already there. Nitya, nityā hi jantoḥ. Every living entity has got these propensities: intoxication, sex intercourse. Vyavāya āmiṣa. Āmiṣa: meat-eating, fish eating. They're there already. One does not require to be educated, how to eat meat, how to drink, how to use sexual intercourse. No. It is already there. Nityā hi... Na hi tatra codanā. There is no need of encouragement. Then why the śāstra's ordering that "You eat meat in this way. You drink in this way. You have sexual intercourse in this way"? What is the purpose? The purpose is to restrict him. Because by natural propensity he'll have... Just like in Western countries there is no marriage practically. But they have sexual intercourse. They think, "Sex is there, available. Why we should bound ourselves by marriage tie?" They think like that. So why the marriage is there? Just to restrict. Without marriage, the man and woman will be open to so many other men and women. Therefore it is to restrict. One man, one woman. Otherwise, if you associate with so many men and so many women, this is animalism. So in order to check him from the animal life, sex intercourse, the marriage is there. This is the purpose. Therefore śāstra. Śāstra means simply restrict. One who is accustomed to restriction, he's perfect. Not indulgence. The animals are not restricted. But nowadays, better animal is restricted. They have got a time for sexual intercourse. But these, these animals, the four-, two-legged, two-hands animal, they have no restriction. Any time. Less than animal. Therefore śāstra is there.



So vaidha. Vaidha means what is sanctioned by the śāstra. That is vaidha strī-saṅga. Yes. One may have association with the women... There must be association with women. By God's creation, there is man, woman. They're meant for being united. So therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that dharmāviruddho kāmaḥ aham. "When sex intercourse is there according to the śāstra, that is I am. That is I am." Dharmāviruddhaḥ. So there are rules and regulations, how to have sex life. So... There are two kinds of association with women, vaidha and avaidha. Vaidha means according to śāstra, and avaidha means without any restriction, without any restriction of the śāstra. So asat, eka strī-saṅgī. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said. And the sahajiyās, rascals, they interpret: asat eka strī-saṅgī. One who has got only one wife, he's asat. One must have many wives. The sahajiyās, you know. They keep so many women, like monkeys, in their company. You see, they have interpreted in this way. Asat eka strī-saṅgī.

So we, we, śāstra restricts, but rascals, they interpret in a different way, and they enjoy. The real purpose comes... Just like what is that sannyāsī in Australia who wrote against... What is the name?

Devotee: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Where is Pradyumna? What is the name of that rascal sannyāsī? In Australia?



Devotee: Aghananda. Aghananda.



Prabhupāda: Oh, Austria, Austria.



Devotee: Aghananda. Aghananda.



Devotee (2): No. Aghananda Bharata.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Pradyumna: Aghehananda Bharata.



Prabhupāda: Agyanananda? No?



Pradyumna: Aghehananda



Prabhupāda: Aghehananda. That rascal says that "This, this is our ultimate goal: unrestricted, eating meat and sex." Is it not? Did he not say like that?



Devotee (3): No, I think that's Rajneesh Acarya.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Devotee (3): Rajneesh Acarya says that one should have unrestricted sex life.



Prabhupāda: So there are so many rascals. Therefore...



Indian: Shakespeare writes in his books that marriage is nothing but legal prostitution.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So that is their interpretation. Marriage, Vedic śāstra enjoins marriage, and it is for prostitution. Just see the interpretation. All the great ṛṣis, they recommended: "Yes, you can go on, prostitution, with your prostitution, under the sanction of the śāstra." No, it is not that. The real purpose is to restrict. Just like meat-eating. Meat-eating is recommended in Vedic literature. There is kālī-pūjā. Kālī-pūjā. By sacrificing one goat before Goddess Kālī. Goddess Kālī's worshiped on the amāvasyā. Amāvasyā takes place once in a month. Therefore these rascals who are meat-eaters, they'll be restricted. If they accept the śāstra, "No, no, if we eat meat from the butcher's place, then we shall be sinful. Let us eat meat..." Just like in Calcutta you'll find so many butchers, they have kept one Goddess Kālī deity so that people will think now it is not sinful. Here the māṁsa, the meat is not..., it is sanctified. Hindu-brāhmaṇa-kati(?). So these things are going on. Actually, it is restriction. And even when there is bali, the sacrifice is given, the mantra means, the mantra says that "This man is killing you. You'll get next life a human being. But you have the opportunity, option, to kill him." This is the mantra. Now, if somebody's responsible, he'll certainly think that "I am going to be killed by this goat again?" Māṁsa khadati. Mām: "He will eat me." That is māṁsa. So no responsible man will take that responsibility, that "I will kill this animal. Again he'll become a man and he'll kill me. No, no. Stop this business."



So this is the process of restriction. Similarly those who are drunkards, for them is recommended by offering liquor to Caṇḍī, they can drink. Similarly, marriage is also like that. It is restriction. It is not prostitution. It is restriction. Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā. This is natural tendency. If you want, if one can stop it, that is called tapasya. And human life becomes perfect by tapasya.

tapasā brahmacaryeṇa

śamena ca damena ca

tyāgena satya-śaucābhyāṁ

yamena niyamena vā

[SB 6.1.13]



This is human life. Not like animals, unrestricted. Animals are also restricted. So vaidha-avaidha. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu has strongly restricted that: "Don't associate with these rascals. Asat." Asat means those who are interested in material affairs. Asato mā sad gama. The Vedic injunction. That is Vedic injunction: sad gama. Just try to make progress towards sat. Oṁ tat sat. Don't be interested in asat. Asato mā sad gama. Jyotir gama. So these are the Vedic injunctions.



So because these Pāṇḍavas and their families were all sat by association of Kṛṣṇa, therefore they were all perplexed within their mind, that "Kṛṣṇa is going back to His home. How we shall live? How we can give up Kṛṣṇa?" Those who are actually devotee of Kṛṣṇa, they cannot give up Kṛṣṇa at any risk. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, and the Haridāsa Ṭhākura in this Navadvīpa area. He was a Muhammadan. He took to kṛṣṇa-nāma. The kazi called him, "You are Muhammadan. Why you are taking this kṛṣṇa-nāma?" "What is the fault, sir? There are many Hindus. They also become Muslim. So I like this." So he was punished. But he did not give up. He did not give up. One cannot give up. Prahlāda Mahārāja could not give up.

So that is explained, that sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgaḥ. As soon as one associates with Kṛṣṇa's name, he associates with Kṛṣṇa. Therefore asat, māyā, cannot touch him. If he's purely chanting without any offense, māyā cannot touch him. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nir... [Cc. Antya 20.12]. And as soon as māyā cannot touch him, then bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam. The blazing fire of material existence extinguished immediately. This is the first gain by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra offenselessly, the first gain is mukti. Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam means mukti. By chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, nāmābhāsa, not pure name. As soon as one comes to the platform of chanting pure Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, without any offense, he becomes immediately enhanced in love with Kṛṣṇa, prema, kṛṣṇa-prema. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was chanting as ācārya. He was crying. Tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati. Śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. So what is that verse? Cakṣ..., cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam. Cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam. Tava nāma, kadā tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati. This is the ultimate, ultimate realization of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, that one should cry. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said like that. So Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name, identical.

These Pāṇḍavas were so purified by association of Kṛṣṇa. So they were thinking, "How we shall live? If Kṛṣṇa goes away to Dvārakā, then how we can live?" In this way, they could not make any solution. They were loitering here and there. Just like when you are disturbed in mind, you loiter, "What to do, what to do, what to do?" So they were doing that.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. Now begin. (end)



730627SB.MAY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.14

-

Māyāpura, June 27, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



nyarundhann udgalad bāṣpam

autkaṇṭhyād devakī-sute

5niryāty agārān no 'bhadram

iti syād bāndhava-striyaḥ

[SB 1.10.14]



Translation: "The female relatives, whose eyes were flooded with tears out of anxiety for Kṛṣṇa, came out of the palace. They could only stop their tears with great difficulty. They feared that tears would cause misfortune at the time of departure."



Prabhupāda:



nyarundhann udgalad bāṣpam

autkaṇṭhyād devakī-sute

niryāty agārān no 'bhadram

iti syād bāndhava-striyaḥ

[SB 1.10.14]



You can practice this diacritic mark. English transliteration is there. It is not very difficult. Simply if you practice twice, thrice, four times, it will come exactly, the pronunciation. You have to learn the diacritic marks. Then it will be all right. Word meaning. (Pradyumna leads chanting)



Ladies generally, they are very much apt to shed tears in ecstatic moment. So Kṛṣṇa was going from Hastināpura, and all of them, all the Pāṇḍavas, not only ladies, the men also, they were very, very much affected. We have already discussed in the previous verses. Especially the ladies, they could not check their tears forcibly coming out. But at the same time, they were thinking that "Kṛṣṇa is going. Everything must be auspicious. There may not be something inauspicious." So they were in a very perplexed position. Tears were coming by force, and they wanted to check it so that there may not be any inauspicity in the matter of Kṛṣṇa's departure. This is the picture.

So these are all symptoms of love for Kṛṣṇa. That is the highest perfection of life, to shed tears for Kṛṣṇa. Yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught us this method of worship in separation, vipralambha-sevā. Not that "Oh, I have seen yesterday. Last night, I have seen Kṛṣṇa. He was snatching my cloth." These are sahajiyās. Actually, our worship should be in separation. The Gosvāmīs also taught us like that. He rādhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ. They in the Vṛndāvana remained authorized persons. They were also searching after Kṛṣṇa. They never said that "We have got Kṛṣṇa," never said. He rādhe vraja-devike ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ, ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau. Simply khedair mahā-vihvalau. They were lamenting in separation. Vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau.

So this is the process of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's worship. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was falling down on the water, "Oh, I could not see Kṛṣṇa." When He was gṛhastha, He was simply consulting with mother, "Mother, I could not realize Kṛṣṇa. What shall I do? Where shall I go?" Mother said, "My dear son, why You are impatient? Everything will be all right in due course." Caitanya Mahāprabhu was giving indication that "I must leave home." Mother was also understanding that "This boy wants to leave us." That was another perplexed position. So that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching:

yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



Govinda-viraheṇa: "In separation from Govinda I am thinking one moment as twelve years." Some of you or all of us have got this experience. If we want something very, very eagerly, then every moment becomes a long time. "Oh, it is not yet received. It is not yet received. It is not yet done." Yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa. Nimeṣa, a moment, a twinkling of an eye, that is called nimeṣa. That appears to be twelve years. The gopīs could not tolerate even twinkling of eyes. They were condemning the creator, "The creator does not know the art of creating. Why he has created this twinkling of eyes so that it is disturbing us from seeing Kṛṣṇa." Seeing Kṛṣṇa, and the twinkling of eyes, that is natural. So the gopīs did not like it, that "Why he has created this? He does not know the art of creation." This is love. Yugāyi... Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu tasted the gopīs' feelings. Śrī-caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptam. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktiḥ. Kṛṣṇa, when He wants to enjoy... He is the Absolute Supreme Person, spirit, Absolute, the Supreme Spirit. So for spiritual enjoyment in this material world great saintly persons, sages, they give up all material enjoyment just to taste what is spiritual enjoyment, spiritual life.



Brahmānubhūti. They give up everything. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa [SB 6.1.13]. By austerity, brahmacarya, yamena, niyamena, tyāgena, satya-śaucābhyām-so many processes they adopt for tasting a little brahmānubhūti. Itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena [SB 10.12.11]. So Śukadeva Gosvāmī said that "Here, the Kṛṣṇa, here is, playing with the cowherds boys. Who is He?" Itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-sukhānubhūtyā. "The great sages, saintly persons, who are trying to taste the spiritual realization, that is here. He is playing as cowherd boy." Dāsyaṁ gatānāṁ para-daivatena: "And those who are devotees, for them He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Māyāśritānāṁ nara-dārakeṇa: "And those who are māyāśrita, they are thinking, 'This Kṛṣṇa is ordinary human child.' " Sākaṁ vijahruḥ kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ: [SB 10.12.11] "So with this boy, transcendental Kṛṣṇa, cowherd boy, the other boys who are playing, they are not ordinary men." Kṛta-puṇya-puñjāḥ. "They accumulated pious activities life after life for many, many thousands and millions of lives. Now they have got the opportunity to play with Kṛṣṇa."

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very serious and important. Here are the sign, how they love Kṛṣṇa. One side, they are..., they cannot check the tears coming out, "Kṛṣṇa is going away." Another side, "Oh, if I shed tears, then there may be inauspicity." How much perplexity, this two sides. Dilemma. Between the horns of Scylla and Charybdis. That is the position. The lover, intense love creates such situation, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu exhibited.

yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



"Without seeing Govinda, the whole world is vacant." This is love. "Let me try to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. If it is done, all right. If it is not done, I shall remain in my position. What is the loss?" Not like that. One must be so eager that without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one should become mad. One should become mad. That is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching, separation, not direct contact.



Direct contact is not possible. Neither that is the way of worshiping by the method of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. That is sahajiyā-vāda. "I am talking with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is snatching my cloth." There is a book, one lady has written, his (her) experience, that Kṛṣṇa comes, He talks with her and snatches her cloth. She has written openly. But this is not Caitanya Mahāprabhu's way. There is one gentleman, Mr. Raya, in Poona, and he has got also woman. Everyone must have a woman, parakīyā. This is sahajiyā-vāda. This is sahajiyā-vāda. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu never said, "This is the parakīyā-rasa: one should have one woman." No. He observed complete sannyāsa life. Rather there was very, very severe, rigid restriction about women. But now, these sahajiyās, they are going on in the name of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: āula, bāula, karttā-bhajā, neḍā, daraveśa, sāṅi sahajiyā, sakhībhekī, like that, so many. They are apa-sampradāya. Real Caitanya Mahāprabhu sampradāya is that he should be feeling like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, separation.

Not sambhoga. Vipralambha. Vipralambha-sevā: "Oh, I am so wretched, I could not serve Kṛṣṇa. How I can see Kṛṣṇa? It is not possible." In this way. That is the teaching of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. "But even though I do not see Him, neither it is possible for me to see Him..." Means: "What I am? I am insignificant person. Why Kṛṣṇa come and see me?" This is right. "Why shall I aspire after seeing Kṛṣṇa? What qualification I have got?" This is bhajana. This is bhajana. Why should I be proud that "Now I shall see Kṛṣṇa"? What I am? That is the teaching of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu māṁ marma-hatāṁ karotu vā adarśanāt [Cc. Antya 20.47]. Adarśana. "Without giving me audience, You kill me, You break my heart; still, You are my Lord, You are my worshipable Lord, nobody else." This is love. This is love. (Bengali:) Asan kṛṣṇa galai diba naiva beja tata(?). Not like that. "Kṛṣṇa may not come. I may not see Kṛṣṇa for thousands and thousands of lives. I may rot in the hellish condition of life for many, many births. That doesn't matter. Still, I cannot give up Kṛṣṇa consciousness." This is required. I may be sent to hell, heaven; it doesn't matter. What qualification I have got that I want to see back to home, back to Godhead? It is not so easy thing. So why should I be sorry for that? I should be happy even in the hell simply by thinking of Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. That is wanted. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So here is the example. Tears by force are coming out: "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is going away." At the same time, they want to check: "There may not be any inauspicity for Kṛṣṇa." They're thinking Kṛṣṇa, for Kṛṣṇa, not for personal self. "Oh, I am now crying. I have become very much fortunate. I am crying for Kṛṣṇa." No. "My crying will create inauspicity for Kṛṣṇa, I must check it." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



730524SB.LON

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.20

-

London, May 24, 1973



Devotee:



anyonyam āsīt sañjalpa

uttama-śloka-cetasām

kauravendra-pura-strīṇāṁ

sarva-śruti-mano-haraḥ

[SB 1.10.20]



"Absorbed in the thought of the transcendental qualities of the Lord, who is sung in select poetry, the ladies on the roofs of all the houses of Hastināpura began to talk of Him. This talk was more attractive than the hymns of the Vedas."



Prabhupāda: [break] ...Caitanya Mahāprabhu, while He was chanting and dancing in Benares. So he criticized Him, that "What kind of sannyāsī He is? He does not take to the studies of Vedānta. He simply indulges in chanting and dancing with some sentimental people." He was criticizing. So one devotee of Lord Caitanya informed Him that "You are being criticized, Sir. We cannot tolerate it. Neither we can reply. He's a great Vedantist. So better we shall give up our life." Then the meeting was arranged between the Vedantist...



Actually Vedānta, Veda means the knowledge. Vetti veda-vidaḥ jñānī. The vid-dhātu. Those who know Sanskrit dhātu, verbal form... So, so there are different forms of one root. Just like the real root is vid-dhātu. Now it, it is sometimes spoken as vetti. Sometimes it is called vida. Sometimes it is called vinte(?). Sometimes it is called vindati, vindate. There are different forms of the same root, vid-dhātu. So when which forms should be used, the grammarians, they know it. Sanskrit language is very difficult language. One has to learn the grammar portion of it only for twelve years. Then he becomes expert grammarian. And when one becomes nice grammarian, he can read any literature, different department of knowledge, Āyur Veda, Dhanur Veda, Yajur Veda, Jyotir Veda. So many Vedas. So real Vedas means knowledge. I've already explained when I was in 1968 in London, in the Conway Hall... That is published in Īśopaniṣad. So Veda means knowledge. Vetti veda vidaḥ jñāna(?). Jñāna, jñāna means knowledge. So veda-anta. Anta means end. There is everything of our material life, as for the beginning and at the end.

So here in this material world, every one of us, we come here ignorant, like animals, no knowledge. There are so many varieties of living entities. Gradually, by evolution, we come to the human form of life, when our consciousness is developed. We can understand higher knowledge. And that is called Veda. So Veda does not mean it is meant for the cats and dogs. Vedas means knowledge, this knowledge, is meant for the human beings. Vedic... Therefore Indian civilization, based on Vedic knowledge, is estimated so high, perfect. Perfect scheme system for human society, based on Vedic civilization. Everything is correctly visioned, and the ideas are given by persons who are above material contamination. Mukta-puruṣa. Mukta-puruṣa means one who is not affected by the material incompetency. There are material incompetencies. We commit mistakes. We are illusioned. Our senses are imperfect. And sometimes... Sometimes not. Always. We want to cheat. These are the defects of material knowledge. And one who is above these material incompetencies, he's called mukta-puruṣa. So one has to become mukta-puruṣa. That is called Vedic knowledge. That is called Vedānta. Vedānta-sūtra. Athāto brahma jijñāsā.

So Vedānta means the, the ultimate platform of acquiring knowledge, up to this. So that "up to this" is Kṛṣṇa. That if you talk of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then you talk of all the Vedas. Sarva-śruti-mano-haraḥ. You talk of Vedic knowledge, but if you simply talk of Vedic knowledge, it becomes dry, speculative. But if you talk of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's līlā, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, then it becomes simultaneously discussion of Vedic knowledge, at the same time, very beautiful. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is described here: uttama-śloka. Kṛṣṇa is never described by ordinary verses. Uttama-śloka. Uttama-śloka means... Uttama means also liberated. Ut. Ut means transcendental, one who has crossed, ud gata. Ut. Ut means one who has gone to the other side. Tama. Tama means this darkness. This world, this material world... Just like it is dark now. Therefore the country on the part of the world which is always covered by darkness... Already there is darkness, and if again that country does not get the facility of sunshine, it is considered that that country is condemned. It is shastric injunction. Any country which does not get the full facility of sunshine, it is to be considered condemned. I think I remarked this long ago, when I first came in the television. They asked me in London that "What is your conception of hell?" And "This is hell, London." Not conception. Practically... Always dark, moist, drizzly. No sunshine. Cloudy, misty. Simply big, big buildings. That's all. So there must be clear sunshine.

So why this material world (aside:) (indistinct)

Devotee: (indistinct)



Prabhupāda: Why this material world is called tama? Because everyone is in ignorance. He does not know what is the value of life. Everyone. In other words, all fools and rascals. Just like big, big scientists. They are theorizing that life is made out of matter. How much ignorance it is. All these Darwin's theory, chemical evolution. Simply they are basing that from matter life has come. But where is the... One gentleman in California University, he's Noble Prize holder. He came to lecture. So our disciple, Svarūpa Dāmodara, he's also Doctor of Chemistry. So when the professor explained that from such and such chemicals combination life starts, he said: "If I give you the chemicals, can you make life?" In that big assembly. So he has to reply: "That I cannot say." So what is the use of such knowledge? You are taking Nobel Prize, holding Nobel Prize on the basis of certain theorizing knowledge, and when you are challenged: "Now you produce with these chemicals," you say: "That I cannot say." So this is going on.



Anyway, human life is meant for knowledge. That's a fact. Therefore athāto brahma jijñāsā. And what knowledge? Knowledge does not mean how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex life, and how to defend. That is not knowledge. These things are there in the animals. The animals also know very well how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex life and how to defend. No. That is not... Human life is meant for different business, and that is brahma-jijñāsā. So brahma-jijñāsā, if one begins the life of brahma-jijñāsā, brahma-jñāna, and when it ends in understanding Kṛṣṇa, that is perfection of life. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. The, the one who is actually jñānavān, in knowledge, such person... Not so-called. There are two classes of men. One class of men is called jñānavān, and another class of men is called māyayā apahṛta-jñāna. All these words you'll find in the Bhagavad-gītā. This is not my manufacture. So māyayā apahṛta-jñāna means he's rascal number one, but he's thinking that he's vastly learned. He has advanced his knowledge so much. Simply he is puffed up falsely. That is called māyayā apahṛta-jñāna. Or jñānavān means one who has actually knowledge. So what is the difference between the two, one how has got actually the knowledge, and one who's simply falsely puffed up that he has got knowledge? What is the...? How you'll find difference, that here is a man who has got real knowledge, and here is a man, rascal, but he's very much puffed up?

So it is very easy to find out. At least for us. That is a fact. This is our criterion. Just like you can find out the currency note, which one is genuine and which one is not genuine. There are some signs. This is an example. Similarly our criterion is, from the Bhagavad-gītā, from śāstra, that we find these two verses in the Bhagavad-gītā. What is this? One thing is:

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



The rākṣasa, āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritaḥ... Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritaḥ means one who does not accept the supremacy of God. "What is God? I am God. I am God." Such... These rascals are called māyayā apahṛta-jñānāḥ. Na māṁ prapadyante. They do not surrender to God, or Kṛṣṇa. They pose themselves as God. So as soon as we find anyone does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, does not understand Kṛṣṇa, he is rascal. Anyone. It doesn't matter. That is the first test. Then you come to the details. As soon as you find someone, somebody, that he does not understand what is God, or his relationship with God, or, and what is the ultimate object of life, he's a rascal. And as soon as you find somebody, that he has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa... Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. How he has surrendered? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]. "Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is everything." Actually, He's everything. The whole world is combination of two energies, material energy and spiritual energy. And Kṛṣṇa is the source of two energies. Therefore ultimate Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes. This is the summary study. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1].



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



So if you go... Just like we are presenting so many books about Kṛṣṇa. Simply we have tried to explain Kṛṣṇa with all these translations, nothing but Kṛṣṇa, how to understand Kṛṣṇa. So here it is called: sarva-śruti-mano-haraḥ. Kṛṣṇa is very pleasing to hear. Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all pleasure. When we get our attachment for hearing about Kṛṣṇa, then at least we can consider that we have become free from material contamination. When we get attachment simply for hearing Kṛṣṇa, nothing else, all nonsense, then you should understand that you have become liberated. These are the test. Everyone can get this position. Because there is process. If you follow the process, then you come to the real stage.



So ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. The beginning of this process is śraddhā. Just like you have come here with a conception of faith, that "Here is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Let us hear something about this movement." This is śraddhā. Ādau śraddhā. This is the beginning. Unless one has faith, or attach... Not attachment, faith only. So ādau śraddhā. Then you mix with the devotees. So we are opening so many branches just to give opportunity to the people to mix with us. Come with us. Rādhā-kṛṣṇa bolo saṅge calo ei-mātra bhikhā cāi. We, we don't want anything from anyone. We don't want any political independence, social reformation, or humanitarian benefit. Nothing. We simply request people, "Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and come with us." That's all. We don't expect anything from anybody else. This is our position. Rādhā-kṛṣṇa bolo saṅge calo. You chant... Also we are chanting on the street, Hare Kṛṣṇa. You also join with us. Rādhā-kṛṣṇa bolo. And so long we go, you come with us. Ei mātra bhikhā cāi. We don't want anything more. This is, this is not a business, that you have come on the street to chant and to make some business. No. That is for your benefit.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very important movement at the present moment. Not only at the present moment. For all the time, past, present and future. But at the present moment, the members of the International Society, they have taken it very seriously to propagate this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement all over the world, and we are getting very good result. At least to our labor we are getting good result, all over the world. There is no question of discouragement. So go on. This is our... Yad uttama-śloka-cetasām. The heart must be always filled up with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is called uttama-śloka-cetasām. So in this way, go on with Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Everyone will be happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.13: Lectures





740601SB.GEN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.13.10

-

Geneva, June 1, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.) Translation: "My Lord, devotees like your good self are verily holy places personified. Because you carry the Supreme Personality of Godhead within your heart, you turn all places into places of pilgrimage."



Prabhupāda:



bhavad-vidhā bhāgavatās

tīrtha-bhūtāḥ svayaṁ vibho

tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni

svāntaḥ-sthena gadābhṛtā

[SB 1.13.10]



So tīrthī, tīrtha. Tīrtha means holy place of pilgrimage. In every religion there is the system that the followers, they go to the holy place of pilgrimage. Just like in India, there are many holy places: Gayā, Prayāga, Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, Haridvar, Rāmeśvaram, Jagannātha Purī, Navadvīpa. Many. Some of them are very prominent, and still there are many nonprominent. Similarly, the Muhammadans they go to Mecca, Medina. The Christians they go Jordan. What is that?



Bhagavān: Jerusalem.



Prabhupāda: Jerusalem. So human society, there must be some religious process; otherwise, it is animal society. And in every religion there is recommendation to go to the place, holy places of pilgrimage. This is one set up. Another set up is that bhāgavatās tīrtha-bhūtāḥ. Those who are devotees, they are themselves mahā-bhāgavata. They are first-class devotee. They themselves are the holy place. Not only they are themselves holy place, but wherever they go, they make that place holy place, pilgrimage. This is the idea.



It was spoken by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira when Vidura came back home... Vidura left home. Although he belonged to the royal family, his nephew Duryodhana behaved with him not very nicely, so he left home. Before the beginning of the Battle of Kurukṣetra, he was very fond of his eldest brother Dhṛtarāṣṭra. So he was always giving him good counsel, "My dear elder brother, why you are intriguing against the Pāṇḍavas?" But he would not hear the younger brother's advice. So his son, Dhṛtarāṣṭra's son, Duryodhana, he understood it that "This, my uncle, is always instigating my father not to take part in the matter of the vanquishing of the Pāṇḍavas." So he used very harsh word, because Vidura, although he was the son of king, but he was not born of the queen. He was born of a maidservant. Formerly, the queens had many maidservants, and they also sometimes begot children by the king. So they were called dāsī-putra. By legal significance, they were not inheritor. So Vidura was born like that. He was not born of the queen, but of the maidservant. But his elder brother Dhṛtarāṣṭra liked him very much. He got him raised-he was younger-very nicely. He got him married and gave him sufficient property. He was very kind upon him. And therefore Vidura was also very much obliged to his eldest brother, and he was always giving him good advice, and a great devotee.

So on this account of family dissension, he left home. And after the battle of Kurukṣetra, when everything was finished, so still, he had affection for his eldest brother, "My dear brother, now everything is finished, your all sons, for whom you intrigued so much. And you are still living, I mean, shamelessly. Because you treated Pāṇḍavas, your nephews, very badly-you wanted to kill them in so many ways-you fell. Then there was battle. So your sons and grandsons all finished. And still, you are shamelessly living in the house of your nephew, with whom you treated so badly. You have no shame." So in this way he very strongly criticized his brother, and then he surrendered, "My dear brother, what do you want me to do?" So he said that "You immediately come with me. Don't remain here." So immediately he left home, and then he underwent tapasya, and then he got salvation.

So here when Vidura came, returned back, so Yudhiṣṭhira is receiving the uncle. He was also... He knew that "Our uncle Vidura was always in our side and tried to protect us." So he was very pleased. So Vidura, during the time of war between the two section, he was traveling in the holy places of pilgrimage and talking with his spiritual master, Maitreya. So therefore because he was traveling in holy place, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja wanted to inform him that "My dear uncle, you are so exalted devotee, you do not require even to travel in the holy places of pilgrimage, because wherever you stay, that will turn into pilgrimage." Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says in his song, tīrtha-yātrā pariśrama, kevala manera bhrama. He says, "To go to the holy places of pilgrimage, it is also a mental satisfaction." Actually, if one is fully surrendered to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, he is so exalted that wherever he lives, that is a holy place of pilgrimage. That was Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura's... And actually, that is the fact. The pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. They cannot forget Kṛṣṇa even for a second, carrying Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, because Kṛṣṇa is with the devotee, such devotee, wherever he goes, that becomes a place of pilgrimage.

It is also said that ordinary persons, they go to the holy places of pilgrimage, and they leave their sinful activities there in the holy place. That is the purpose of going to the holy place, that "During the whole life, whatever sinful activities I have done, now I leave it here, and I become purified." That's a fact. One becomes purified. But the ordinary man, he does not know how to keep purified life. Therefore again comes back home and again commits the sinful activities. And sometimes again he may go. Just like in your, the Christian church, they go to the church weekly, and they, what is called, atone, atonement. So this kind of business is not very good. Once purified, you remain purified. So when the holy places of pilgrimage become piled up with all the sinful reaction of common man, a saintly person when he goes there, he makes the holy place clean. The holy place becomes unclean due to the common men's coming there and leaving their sinful reaction. So holy place becomes overburdened with the sinful results of other people. But in that holy place, when a devotee goes, then again the holy place becomes cleansed. This is the idea. Bhavad-vidhā bhāgavatāḥ.

So bhāgavatāḥ. Bhāgavata means one who has his relation with Bhagavān. From Bhagavān... Bhagavān comes from the word bhāgavata, and anything in relationship with Bhagavān, the Personality of Godhead, is called bhāgavata. Just like this book is called bhāgavata because it has nothing to do with any other thing except the activities of the Supreme Personality of... So Bhāgavata. So there are two kinds of bhāgavata: the book Bhāgavata and the person bhāgavata. So both of them are so pure that wherever Bhāgavata reading is going on... And Bhāgavata reading should be performed by the bhāgavata, person bhāgavata. Then it is very nice. Bhāgavatās tīrtha-bhūtaḥ. They are already purified, holy place of pilgrimage. Mahad-vicalanaṁ nṝṇāṁ gṛhiṇāṁ dīna-cetasām. Therefore, the bhāgavatas, they travel all over the world to purify the ordinary human being because they are dīna-cetasa. Dīna-cetasa. Dīna means poor. They are thinking... Materialistic persons, they think, "It is my duty to live comfortably, to give all facilities to the family or to the society or to the nation, earn your livelihood and spend for sense gratification." This is their philosophy. They do not know anything more than that. Especially in the Western countries, they are very expert how to adjust materially for sense gratification. Just like we had been immediately to the park, very nice park. They know how to live comfortably in the material world, but there is no spiritual information. Missing point. That is the defect of the Western civilization. They have got some vague idea of God, practically no idea. But human life is not meant for that purpose, simply living very comfortably in material life. The other necessity is that they should know Bhagavān, become bhāgavata. That is another necessity.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, it is the desire of Kṛṣṇa that these people who have no information practically about Bhagavān, so they should learn something from this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. And therefore we have published so many nice books. It is the desire of Kṛṣṇa they should read these books and try to understand the Kṛṣṇa philosophy, the science of Kṛṣṇa, the science of God. Then their life will be perfect. Otherwise, this one-sided civilization, material comforts, that will not help them. Because however you may create your city, home, very nice, clean, materially comfortable, you will not be allowed to stay. That defect, they do not understand. And after you leave this body, there is no certainty what kind of body you are going to have. There is certainty according to the material laws. There is certainty, but they do not know it. That body will be manufactured according to the association of the material modes of nature.

There are three material modes of nature. If you keep yourself in touch with the material modes of nature of goodness, then you will be promoted to the higher standard of life. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Therefore at least, you may enjoy material life, but you should keep yourself to the standard of brahminical culture. Then there is guarantee that you don't degrade yourself; you get higher status of life in the higher planetary system: Janaloka, Maharloka, Tapoloka, Satyaloka. Then you will get... But if you keep yourself as it is, then you will remain in this planetary system. This is called bhūr-loka. Bhūr-loka. Oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat-savituḥ. You have gāyatrī-mantra. This is called bhū-loka. Bhuvar-loka. Then, above this, there is bhuvar-loka; then, above this, the heavenly planets. There is system. And if you keep yourself in the association of the modes of ignorance, or foolishness, then you go down. Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Jaghanya-guṇa. Tāmasika means abominable character. The abominable character means these four things: illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. This is tamo-guṇa, exhibition of tamo-guṇa. So, if you continue to keep yourself in the association of the modes of ignorance, then you are going to become adhaḥ. Adhaḥ means down. Down means there are many other planetary system. Just like upper there are bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ, Jana, Mahar, like that, and down also: Tala, Atala, Vitala, Talātala, Pātāla, like that. There is system.

So our only request is that... We don't criticize you because you try to live comfortably in the material... Do that. But don't associate with the modes of ignorance. That is very risky. That is very risky. So at least, either you remain in the householder life or brahmacārī life or, I mean to..., sannyāsa life, you keep yourself always in goodness. Then your position is all right. Otherwise, it is very risky. But these people, the Western people, they do not do that. They keep themselves in the modes of ignorance. That is very risky civilization. So at least you Europeans and Americans, you should know it, and you distribute this knowledge. It is your duty to save them. But these... They do not know it. As soon as there is talk of this goodness and sinful activity, immediately they go away. Immediately. Yesterday that gentleman came, and just when I began to talk about pious activities and impious activities, he immediately left, "I have got another meeting."

So this is the position. Upadeśo hi mūrkhāṇāṁ prakopāya na śāntaye. If one is a foolish person, if you give him good instruction, he will be angry. He will not take it. Upadeśo hi mūrkhāṇāṁ prakopāya na śāntaye payaḥ-pānaṁ bhujaṅgānāṁ kevalaṁ viṣa-vardhanam. A snake, if you kindly give him foodstuff, there is no... Snake is very fond of drinking milk. They are very much fond. So sometimes a snake charmer, they mix milk with banana and give them to eat for their satisfaction. But the result? What is the result? Result is as soon as he becomes strong by eating, the poison teeth becomes filled with poison. Just like with our healthy body, our different nerves and parts of the body become healthy, similarly, the snake's most important part of the body... They have got a teeth. They keep... Within the pocket of the teeth there is venomous poison. So when they bite, from the hole of that teeth, the poison is emitted, and the man dies or the animal dies. But this is a fact. If you infect some disease, you will have to suffer from that disease. This is a fact. It is scientific. Similarly, if you are infected with the particular type of the modes of nature, then you will have to suffer like that. If you remain in ignorance, then you will get the body of animal. This is the...

Therefore every one of you should become pure devotee, first-class devotee. First-class devotee is that... In this age it has been made very easy. Simply keep yourself cleansed, not to indulge in the four principles, prohibition, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Then you will be all first-class devotees. And wherever you will go, you will be able to purify there. Wherever you go. Wherever you speak, wherever you'll sit. So keep this spiritual strength intact. Tīrtha-bhūtāḥ. Tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni sva antaḥ-sthena. The Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra chanting means keeping Kṛṣṇa always within your heart. This is not... It is not expensive at all. You haven't got to make a very exalted throne for Kṛṣṇa. You can imagine that "In my heart I have placed now a very diamond throne, and Kṛṣṇa is sitting." That is accepted. It is... Actually it becomes. Even within the mind you think that "I have kept one diamond throne, very costly throne, because Kṛṣṇa is coming. He will sit down here," that is not false. That is a fact. So you create such situation within your heart. "Now Kṛṣṇa has seated. Let me wash His feet with the Ganges water, Yamunā water. Now I change His dress to a first-class costly garments. Then I decorate with ornaments. Then I give Him for eating." You can simply think of this. This is meditation. Svāntaḥ-sthena gadābhṛtā. It is so nice thing. Anywhere you can sit down and think that Kṛṣṇa is sitting in your heart and you are receiving in so nice way. They are not false. They are also fact. It is so easy.

So here is the... If you simply carry Kṛṣṇa within your heart always in a very devotional service, exalted devotional service, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and think of Kṛṣṇa, wherever you will go, you will purify the whole place. Svāntaḥ-sthena gadābhṛtā. It is fact. It is confirmed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Try to remain in your position as devotee, and as far as possible teach these rascals who are simply attracted by the glaring material stones and woods, and let them have some knowledge and do benefit to your countrymen, to your society, to your family.

Thank you very much. (end)



740602SB.GEN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.13.11

-

Geneva, June 2, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "My uncle, you must have visited Dvārakā. In that holy place are our friends and well-wishers, the descendants of Yadu, who are always rapt in the service of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. You might have seen them or heard about them. Are they all living happily in their abodes?"



Prabhupāda:



api naḥ suhṛdas tāta

bāndhavāḥ kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ

dṛṣṭāḥ śrutā vā yadavaḥ

sva-puryāṁ sukham āsate

[SB 1.13.11]



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, after meeting Vidura, the first inquiry was about the family of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He was always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Now, because he has come back home by touring different places of pilgrimage... Dvārakā is also one of the celebrated place of pilgrimage. So he expected that "Vidura must have gone to Dvārakā. And when he had gone to Dvārakā, he must have some news from Kṛṣṇa's place."



So Kṛṣṇa is the friend, most intimate friend of the Pāṇḍavas. Therefore he says, naḥ. Naḥ means "our." Suhṛdaḥ. Suhṛdaḥ, this word, "always thinking of others' good." That is called suhṛdaḥ. The heart is not contaminated. Hṛdaḥ means "heart," and su means "very good." So Kṛṣṇa says also that suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. And here Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja confirms, naḥ suhṛdaḥ. Actually, Kṛṣṇa is suhṛt. Suhṛt means well-wisher. As the father is the well-wisher of the sons or intimate friend, well-wisher... Here in the material world, although I may be your well-wisher, you may be well-wisher, but there is some interest. Unless there is some interest for my personal benefit, I cannot become your suhṛt. This is material suhṛt. But spiritual suhṛt is different. Spiritual suhṛt means everyone is suffering for want of spiritual consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore attempt should be made so that everyone becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is spiritual suhṛt.

We are now entangled. Actually, our position in this material existence is not very good. Everyone sees it practically. Still, they want to adjust, "Let us make it good. Let us make it good." That is called punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30], again and again chewing the chewed. Just like generally a father, especially here in India, he wants that his son may be well-situated. Therefore we don't get Indian youth very much, because the father and mother settles them. What is that? Get them married and give them some earning capacity, either by service or business. So he becomes satisfied, "This is the end of life." Gṛhamedhi. Just "Now I am married. It is my duty to stick to the gṛha and enjoy senses, that's all." Gṛhamedhi. Sacrifice for Kṛṣṇa, brahmacārī, sannyāsī... Sannyāsīs have become rogues. And there is no brahmacārī nor vānaprastha. Therefore it is very difficult to get Indian workers. They have no... Your qualification is-I told in the beginning-that you have got a renouncing spirit. That is a great qualification. Tyāga. Renunciation is opulence also. Kṛṣṇa, six opulences. One of the opulence is renunciation. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.47), jñāna-vairāgya. Vairāgya means renunciation. You have enough of this material enjoyment. You have enjoyed. Or you have seen that there is no actually profit. Therefore you are in a spirit... That is natural. That is natural. If one has enjoyed very much, the next stage will be renunciation. This is natural. So because you have got a renouncing spirit, you are understanding or taking Kṛṣṇa consciousness very nicely, at least, very eagerly. Jñāna-vairāgya. That is required. This vairāgya then... I therefore sometimes like these hippies because they have a spirit of renunciation. That is very good position. Simply they require jñāna, or knowledge. Then their life will be successful. To bring one to the platform of renunciation, that is a very difficult job. Especially when one has got nice wife, nice home, nice bank balance, it is very, very difficult.

So there is a version by Kṛṣṇa that one who is anxious to take Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but he is entrapped by this binding-nice wife, nice children, nice home, nice bank balance-so Kṛṣṇa, in order to give them, give such devotee, facility, He takes away. Hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ. Yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ [SB 10.88.8]. Just like he did with the Pāṇḍavas. The Pāṇḍavas were devotees, but at the same time, they were king. There was attachment. So therefore Kṛṣṇa took away their everything-their kingdom, their wife, their position, their honor-test him, and still, they did not give up Kṛṣṇa. Therefore they came out victorious. So Kṛṣṇa sometimes tests His..., that how much one devotee is. He forcibly makes him renounced in order. That is Kṛṣṇa's special favor.

So this vairāgya-jñāna, it is required. We were discussing last night also, vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodha [Bg. 4.10], these things are required. Unless one becomes completely, what is called? Averse?

Yogeśvara: Detached.



Prabhupāda: Detached: "So what is this nonsense material life?" That's a very good qualification. If one understands this perfectly-"This is all rubbish, this material enjoyment"-it is a great qualification. Akiñcana. Akiñcana. Akiñcana means do not possess anything material. Akiñcana-gocara. Kuntī, Kuntī, Queen Kuntī, when she was receiving Kṛṣṇa, she said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are akiñcana-gocara. You are realized by a person who has no material possession. And You have given us now so much material possession. How we can understand You?" That was... Kuntī was regretting that "When we are in distress, You are always with us. Now You have given us kingdom and everything. Now You are going away to Dvārakā. What is this, Kṛṣṇa? Better let us go again to that distressed condition so that You remain with us." Akiñcana-gocara. Kṛṣṇa is akiñcana-gocara. Anyone who wants to enjoy material life, it is not possible to become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is very secret.



Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. Bhagavad-bhajana, to become devotee, Kṛṣṇa conscious, is meant for niṣkiñcanasya, one who does not possess anything in the material world. That does not mean he should be poverty-stricken. No. He should know it fully that "Nothing belongs to me; everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. I am simply His servant, that's all." This is called akiñcana. If I think that "Keeping Kṛṣṇa in front, let me possess some material things," that is another cheating. That is not... Akiñcana. You should be fully conscious, that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa and nothing to us." Then Kṛṣṇa becomes your suhṛt. He takes charge, how your benefit will be there, ultimate. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakaṁ dadāmi [Bg. 10.10]. Prīti-pūrvakam. This is very great determination, that "Kṛṣṇa, I simply want You, nothing, anything else. Nothing."

Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa [Cc. Antya 20.29, Śikṣāṣṭaka 4]. This is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's teaching. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught this philosophy repeatedly. Niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajana. Bhagavad-bhajana means He Himself become niṣkiñcana. He was Kṛṣṇa Himself, most opulent. Tyaktvā surepsitaḥ, sudustyaja-surepsita-rājya-lakṣmīm [SB 11.5.34]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu had the most beautiful wife, goddess of fortune, Viṣṇu-priyā, Lakṣmī-priyā. But for the benefit of the whole world, although He is Kṛṣṇa, He showed us the example. At the age of twenty-four years, He took sannyāsa. He was not unhappy in His home. He had His very affectionate mother and... (aside:) Some fly... Affectionate mother and most affectionate wife, beloved wife. But still, it is very difficult to renounce the affection of mother and love of wife. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu did it. (aside:) The fly is still disturbing. So tyaktvā sudustyaja. Therefore in the Bhāgavata it is said, sudustyaja, very difficult to give up. Tyaktvā sudustyaja-surepsita-rājya-lakṣmīm [SB 11.5.34]. And rājya-lakṣmīm, such nice beautiful wife, desired even by the demigods. Such a nice wife, He gave up.

Tyaktvā sudustyaja-surepsita-rājya-lakṣmīṁ dharmiṣṭha ārya-vacasā yad agād araṇyam [SB 11.5.34]. Agād araṇyam. Araṇyam means, going to the forest means, to take sannyāsa. Going to the Himalaya does not mean or going to the forest does not mean that he should actually go there. One should give up this family affection, and dedicate the whole life for Kṛṣṇa's service. That is really going to the forest. Not that unnecessarily. It may be beneficial for person, for his personal self. But real renunciation is to have no more interest in so-called limited jurisdiction of family, social, international, national, but the whole interest is for Kṛṣṇa. That is real renunciation. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Renunciation does not mean give up this world. That I was explaining. Our philosophy is not the jagat is mithyā. Why jagan mithyā? We don't say that. Jagat is fact. It may be temporary, but it is a fact. Now, so long we have got this jagat, let us utilize it for Kṛṣṇa. That is renunciation. We cannot say this microphone is mithyā. So long the microphone is in my possession, let it be used for Kṛṣṇa's service. This is renunciation. Everyone using this microphone, these modern machines, for his personal gain. But we are not using for personal gain. We are traveling all over the world, spending so much money, jet plane, and this plane, just to push Kṛṣṇa consciousness as much as possible. This is renunciation, not that sitting one place doing nothing and become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then there will be fall down. Don't imitate Haridāsa Ṭhākura. That is not possible. You must work.

So to such person, Kṛṣṇa is suhṛt. Suhṛt. Here it is said, api naḥ suhṛdas tāta, uncle, bāndhavāḥ kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ. Kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ means one who has accepted Kṛṣṇa as the worshipable Deity. He is called kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ. There are so many demigods. They have taken to worship. The Roman were worshiping demigods. The India, in India they also worship demigods. That will not make you happy. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām [Bg. 7.23]. To take some benediction from the demigods, although people go there, kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ yajanta iha devatāḥ. People are very much attached to enjoy this material world. So they worship Durgā, Kālī, or Lord Śiva. Kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhim. They get immediately some material benefit. But tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām. What you will do with some temporary material benefit? That is the instruction of Kṛṣṇa. Don't be attracted by the temporary material benefits. Just try for permanent eternal benefit. Go back to home, back to Godhead. That is the... That is the... What you will do? Suppose you become king. How long you will remain king? Or there are so many dangers. Sometimes the kings are beheaded. King Johann(?) was beheaded. So material position is always tiltering, tilting. Yes. There is no fixed position. It will end. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, antavat tu phalaṁ teṣām [Bg. 7.23]. Antavat means it will end, today or tomorrow or hundred years after. It will end. So why should you... You are eternal. Why should you hanker after these things which will exist for some few years? You are eternal. Accept the eternal position. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Eternal position.

So for that eternal position, you have to make kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ, Kṛṣṇa as the worshipable Deity. Kṛṣṇa is eternal, and if you fix up your service to Kṛṣṇa, then Kṛṣṇa will accept you as servant. Naturally, you become eternal. There is a very nice story. Nice story not, a fact. Sāvitrī-Satyavān. Sāvitrī-Satyavān. This, I mean to say, incidences are mentioned in the śāstras to give us lesson. Sāvitrī was a very chaste devoted woman. Sāvitrī. In India, to the woman, in order to become very chaste and devoted to husband, they observe the ritualistic ceremony to worship Sāvitrī Satyavān. So Sāvitrī was in love with a boy who was destined to die on the marriage date, but still, she married. She knew that "As soon as I will be married, on the same day, my husband will die." So she pleased the Yamarāja. After the death... The husband died, but she pleased the Yamarāja so much so that Yamarāja was ready to give her some benediction. So Yamarāja said, "What benediction you want?" "Now, as woman, I wish that may be a son of mine, from me." "All right, you will get a son." Then again she said that "If you are taking away my husband, how I will get my son?" So her husband was made alive. So indirectly... So kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ. If you actually want to be eternally blissful, take to kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ. Or there is no need of praying for "Make me immortal." No. If you accept kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ, then automatically... Just like the benediction was that "You... Yes, you will get a son." Automatically her husband was made alive. So kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja asking that "Did you see them, the Yadu families, who have Kṛṣṇa as their worshipable Deity?" Dṛṣṭāḥ śrutā vā yadavaḥ. Yadu. Yadavaḥ is plural number. Sva-puryāṁ sukham āsate: "Whether they are happy in their home,"sva-puryām, sva-purī, "Dvārakā?" So in this way Kṛṣṇa consciousness means always thinking of Kṛṣṇa. And make Kṛṣṇa the friend. Kṛṣṇa says that suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. Actually, Kṛṣṇa is the only friend, and He is sitting in everyone's heart. He is so nice friend that He is simply trying to induce us to turn our faith towards Kṛṣṇa. He is coming as avatāra, incarnation. He is giving us advice from within. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. He's such a nice friend. Although we have left Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa has not left us. Here He is living with Me within my heart to give me advice, "Please come back." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66].

So Kṛṣṇa is so nice friend. He is such a nice friend that even to the enemy He gives the greatest benediction. Just like Pūtanā. Pūtanā came to kill Kṛṣṇa, smearing poison on her breast. But Kṛṣṇa gave her promotion on the motherly platform. Kṛṣṇa is so grateful that "This demon might have come to Me to poison Me, but I have sucked her breast. She has become My mother. Therefore she must get the position of My mother." Kṛṣṇa is so grateful. If you give little service to Kṛṣṇa sincerely, Kṛṣṇa will never forget you. And He's so powerful. If Kṛṣṇa becomes your friend and Kṛṣṇa remembers you, then what you want more? Just imagine. So Kṛṣṇa... Here it is said, kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ. fix up your mind in Kṛṣṇa and be happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



740603SB.GEN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.13.12

-

Geneva, June 3, 1974



Nitāi: Translation: "Thus being questioned by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahātmā Vidura gradually described everything he had personally experienced, except the news of the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty."



Prabhupāda:



ity ukto dharma-rājena

sarvaṁ tat samavarṇayat

yathānubhūtaṁ kramaśo

vinā yadu-kula-kṣayam

[SB 1.13.12]



Yadu-kula-kṣayam. The Yadu dynasty... When Kṛṣṇa was present, the family members were about ten millions. This is Kṛṣṇa. Everything is wonderful. He married 16,108 wives, and each wife had ten children, and each child begot another ten children. In this way, the Yadu-kula was a very big family. So they were destroyed.



There are two comments on this point, why Yadu-kula was destroyed by Kṛṣṇa's plan. One comment is that if they would continue to live, then the same misconception, that a brāhmaṇa is born in the brāhmaṇa family-they would continue to speak that "We are also gods, because we are born of God's family, Kṛṣṇa's family." Just like in India there is a class, they call themselves Nityānanda-vaṁśa, descendants of Lord Nityānanda. But that does not actually happen. And another comment is that all these members of Yadu-kula, they appeared in the Yadu-kula just to enhance the opulence of Kṛṣṇa. But they came from different heavenly planets to help Kṛṣṇa in His incarnation. Just like a big man, wherever he goes there are many others also go there to help him. When a king goes somewhere, the king does not go alone. He goes with his secretaries, his military commanders, and so many other companions. So these Yadu-kulas were like that. They came to help Kṛṣṇa's līlā, pastimes, within this material world. So some of them were born as sons of Kṛṣṇa, some of them as grandson, as great-grandson, and Kṛṣṇa did not want to leave them behind. Kṛṣṇa was planning to go back to His Vaikuṇṭha, Vṛndāvana planet. So He did not like that they should remain. They should also go back. Now, to go back means they must meet death after..., because otherwise it is unnatural. So... And who can kill them? Nobody can kill them. That is also another point. The family of Kṛṣṇa, there is no power in the whole world that anybody could kill them. So Kṛṣṇa planned that they should be killed amongst themselves by fighting. So another lesson is that if we fight amongst ourselves, even we belong to the family of Kṛṣṇa, we are ruined. This is the instance of Yadu-kula. Although they belonged to Kṛṣṇa's family directly, still, because they fought amongst themselves, they were all banished, vanquished.

So this was not a very palatable incident. So Vidura, when he was asked by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira about the family members of Yadu-kula, he did not describe it, because they were very thickly related as family members, so it would be a great shock to the Pāṇḍavas that Yadu-kula, descendants of the Yadu-kula, had been annihilated in such an unpalatable way. So he did not describe. Yathānubhūtaṁ kramaśaḥ. Ity ukto dharma-rājena sarvaṁ tat samavarṇayat. He described everything. Vinā yadu-kula-kṣayam. Vinā. Vinā means "without." Without the incidence, how the Yadu-kula was destroyed by fighting amongst themselves.

nanv apriyaṁ durviṣahaṁ

nṛṇāṁ svayam upasthitam

nāvedayat sakaruṇo

duḥkhitān draṣṭum akṣamaḥ



He did not describe because he did not like also to see that Pāṇḍavas would be sorry. He went back to his home after so many years, and they were receiving them, and at that time Vidura did not like to see them aggrieved on account of this incidence.



kañcit kālam athāvātsīt

sat-kṛto devavat sukham

bhrātur jyeṣṭhasya śreyas-kṛt

sarveṣāṁ sukham āvahan



Vidura left his home for good. It is not that he has again come back to live with his family members. No. His only purpose was that his elder brother Dhṛtarāṣṭra was rotting there. He lost everything. He lost his kingdom, lost his sons, grandsons and everything. Still, he could not give up the so-called material happiness. He was... Of course, these Pāṇḍavas, they were treating Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra and his wife Gāndhārī very gorgeously as head of the family, but he was not ashamed that he intrigued so much difficulties and plot against the Pāṇḍavas. There was big fight, Kurukṣetra, in which he lost everything. Still, he was living under their care for some material comforts. So this was very shameful affair. So Vidura was very much attracted, attached to Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Therefore, bhrātur jyeṣṭhasya śreyas-kṛt. Bhrātuḥ means brother, and jyeṣṭha means elder. So actually, Vidura went there for the benefit of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Therefore, kañcit kālam atha avātsīt. He decided to live at home along with the family members for some time.



Avātsīt. Sat-kṛto devavat sukham. He was living just like in the opulence of demigods. Because they were all nephews. Pāṇḍavas were so well-behaved, cultured devotees, and Vidura was devotee. So he was treated just like devavat, godly. That is required. Just like whenever I go anywhere, they treat me very nicely, I live very comfortably, similarly, Vidura was treated by the Pāṇḍavas to live very comfortably, devavat, just like godly standard. But he did not live there for getting some material comforts. His aim was that "This poor man, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, my elder brother, he has not yet been lessoned, that what is the value of these material comforts." He was living shamelessly. So he wanted to instruct him, and thus he lived there for some time.

kañcit kālam athāvātsīt

sat-kṛto devavat sukham

bhrātur jyeṣṭhasya śreyas-kṛt

sarveṣāṁ sukham āvahan



So although he especially lived in the palace for the benefit of his elder brother, still, so long he lived, it was a very pleasing time for all of them. Because he was living not as a dull or dumb man. He was speaking about Kṛṣṇa. Therefore everyone was feeling very happy. (reads purport:) "Saintly persons like Vidura must be treated as well as a denizen from heaven." "As well as a denizen from heaven." Yes. If any saintly person comes at home, formerly this was the system. In our childhood we have seen. Many saintly persons used to come, and my father used to receive them very nicely, some of them. Still, the system is if you go to any Indian village and... I mean to say, those who are sannyāsīs, saintly person, they are received very well. Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was touring in South India, so many brāhmaṇas were coming to invite him. That is the system. He hasn't got to bother for his food or shelter any place. That is the system.



So Vidura, he was a saintly person. He was received by the Pāṇḍavas and treated just like denizens. (reads:) "In those days denizens of heavenly planets used to visit homes like that of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, and sometimes persons like Arjuna and others used to visit higher planets." We get information. Arjuna also went to the heavenly planets, and persons from heaven, when there was big yajñas, sacrifice, they used to come and visit Indra, Candra. And sometimes person like... (reads:) "Nārada is a spaceman who can travel unrestrictedly not only within the material universes but also in the spiritual universes." Wherever he wanted, he could go. He can go. He's still living. Not that... (reads:) "Even Nārada used to visit the palace of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, and what to speak of other celestial demigods." It is only the spiritual culture of the people concerned that makes interplanetary travel possible, even in the present body. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira therefore received Vidura in the manner of reception offered to the demigods. This example means demigods were visiting.

(reads:) "Mahātmā Vidura had already adopted the renounced order of life, and therefore he did not return to his paternal palace to enjoy some material comforts. He accepted out of his own mercy what was offered to him by the Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, but the purpose of living in the palace was to deliver his too much materially attached elder brother, Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Dhṛtarāṣṭra lost all his state and descendants in the fight with Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, and still, due to his sense of helplessness, he did not feel ashamed to accept the charity and hospitality of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira." Suppose you create some enemy, always fought with your enemy. So if you accept his hospitality and live there, thinking that "I am living very comfortably," it is not very good sense.

(reads:) "On the part of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, it was quite in order to maintain his uncle in a befitting manner, but acceptance of such magnanimous hospitality by Dhṛtarāṣṭra was not at all desirable. He accepted it because he thought that there was no other alternative. Vidura particularly came to enlighten Dhṛtarāṣṭra and to give him a lift to the higher status of spiritual cognition. It is the duty of the enlightened souls to deliver the fallen ones, and Vidura came to that reason. But talks of spiritual enlightenment are so refreshing that while instructing Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Vidura attracted the attention of all the members of the family, and all of them took pleasure in hearing him patiently. This is the way of spiritual realization. The message should be heard attentively, and if spoken by realized soul, it will act on the dormant heart of the conditioned soul. And by continuously hearing, one can attain the perfect stage of self-realization."

Therefore śravaṇam is very essential. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]. So in all our centers, this process should be followed. We have got now so many books. Simply if we read books... Our Yogeśvara Prabhu is very enthusiastic to read books. So everyone should read books and others should hear. That is very essential, śravaṇam. The more you hear... We have got so many books. Whatever is already published... Just like we are describing one verse daily. So at least... There are so many verses already in stock, you can go on speaking for fifty years. These books already published, you can go on. There will be no want of stock.

So this practice should be adopted. Don't waste time. As much as possible, try to hear about this transcendental subject matter, Bhāgavatam. Yad vaiṣṇavānāṁ priyam. It is stated that "The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is very, very dear to the Vaiṣṇavas, to the devotees." In Vṛndāvana, you will find, they are always reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That is their life and soul. So now we have got already six volumes, and further... How many? Eight volumes are coming? So you will have enough stock. So you should read. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ. That is the main business. That is pure devotional service. Because we cannot devote twenty-four hours in hearing and chanting; therefore we have extended our activities, program activities, in so many ways. Otherwise, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is so nice, if you practice anywhere, any condition, simply by reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you will be happy. So adopt this practice and make your spiritual life perfect more and more.

Thank you very much. (end)



740604SB.GEN

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.13.15

-

Geneva, June 4, 1974



Nitāi: "As long as Vidura played the part of a śūdra, being cursed by Maṇḍūka Muni, Aryamā officiated at the post of Yamarāja to punish those who committed sinful acts."



Prabhupāda:



abibhrad aryamā daṇḍaṁ

yathāvad agha-kāriṣu

yāvad dadhāra śūdratvaṁ

śāpād varṣa-śataṁ yamaḥ

[SB 1.13.15]



So Vidura is Yamarāja, the superintendent of death. After our death, we are brought before the justice Yamarāja, what kind of next birth I may have. So Yamarāja is not śūdra. He is devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, although he has the duty to punish the criminals. Just like a magistrate is always punishing the criminals. That is his business, but he is not criminal. He is giving judgment to the criminals. Similarly, Yamarāja is the appointed magistrate, superintendent. After death, one has to go before him and take the judgment of his next life. This is the process.



So Vidura was cursed by Maṇḍūka Muni, Maṇḍūka Muni. He was a great sage, but sometimes in his āśrama, some thieves were caught, so police arrested both the Maṇḍūka Muni and the thieves, and later on Maṇḍūka Muni was chastised to be punished by śūla. There was a system of punishment. I do not whether (it is) still existing. The śūla means one lance, lancer. Lancer, it is called?

Devotee: Yes.



Prabhupāda: It was to be pierced through the rectum and it will go through the head and the man will die. The pierce was standing, and he was to sit down. What is this punishment? Is there any mention?



Puṣṭa-kṛṣṇa: I never heard of anything.



Guru-gaurāṅga: Arabians have this. It is called pala(?).



Prabhupāda: Śūla punishment. So when he was condemned to the śūla punishment, then the king heard that "Maṇḍūka Muni, the great sage, he is punished like that?" Immediately he stopped. "What is this nonsense that Maṇḍūka Muni has been punished? He is a great sage." So the king stopped the punishment and immediately came to see what has happened. Then he was immediately released. But he was very sorry, that "Why the judge Yamarāja punished him like that?" So he asked Yamarāja, "Why you have punished me like this?" "Now, in your childhood you pierced the rectum of an ant with a...," what is called?



Devotees: Pin, straw.



Prabhupāda: No, not straw. Prick, pricking?



Devotee: Pin.



Prabhupāda: Kāṇṭā, kāṇṭā. We say kāṇṭā, that pricks. What is called?



Devotees: Thorn.



Prabhupāda: Ah, thorn, yes. So therefore he was punished. Now just see. In his childhood he was playing with an ant, piercing the rectum with a thorn. That is also taken account, "All right. You will be punished." Just see how finer laws are there in nature. So the Maṇḍūka Muni did that. Therefore it was recorded he should be punished like that.



This is our position. Anything... If you are walking on the street, if you kill an ant by walking, you will be punished. This is nature's law. We are in such a dangerous position. In every movement there is punishment. Now, if you believe the śāstras, that is different thing. If you don't believe, then do anything you like. But from śāstra we can understand the laws of nature, or God, is very, very strict, very, very strict. So Maṇḍūka Muni also chastised Yamarāja, that "In my childhood, without any knowledge I did something and for which you have given me so great punishment. So you are not fit for becoming a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya. You become śūdra." So he was cursed to become śūdra. Therefore Yamarāja took his birth as Vidura and was born in the womb of a śūdra mother. This is the history of Vidura's birth.

So in his absence, Aryamā, one of the demigods, he officiated Yamarāja. Therefore it is said, abibhrad aryamā daṇḍam. The office must go on, the magistrate post cannot be vacant. Somebody must come and act. So Aryamā was acting. Yathāvad agha-kāriṣu. Agha-kāriṣu. Agha-kāri means... Agha means sinful activities, and kāriṣu. Kāriṣu means those who commit sinful acts. And yathāvat. Yathāvat means exactly to the point, how he should be punished. Yathāvad agha-kāriṣu. Yāvad dadhāra śūdratvam. So long Yamarāja continued as a śūdra, Aryamā was officiating in his place as Yamarāja. This is the purport. (reads purport:) "Vidura, born in the womb of a śūdra mother, was forbidden even to be a party of royal heritage along with his brothers Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu. Then how could he occupy the post of a preacher to instruct such learned...? Answer is that even though it is accepted that he was a śūdra by birth, because he renounced the world for spiritual enlightenment by the authority of Ṛṣi Maitreya and was thoroughly educated by him in transcendental knowledge, he was quite competent to occupy the post of an ācārya or spiritual preceptor." Vidura was a śūdra, born śūdra. Then how he became a preacher?

So the reason is... "According to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, anyone who is conversant in the transcendental knowledge or the science of Godhead, be he a brāhmaṇa or śūdra, a householder or a sannyāsī, is eligible to become a spiritual master." Not that because he was born a śūdra, he cannot preach, he cannot take the post of ācārya or spiritual master. That is not Caitanya philosophy. Caitanya philosophy has nothing to do with this body, external body. Caitanya philosophy is concerned with the soul. This movement is the movement of elevating the soul, saving the soul from degradation. Therefore people sometimes are surprised. The bodily concept of life, the same activities will be karma. And on the platform of spiritual life, the same karma will be bhakti. Same karma will be bhakti. So bhakti is not inactivity. Bhakti is all active. Yat karoṣi yaj juhoṣi yad aśnāsi yat tapasyasi kuruṣva tad mad-arpaṇam [Bg. 9.27]. This is bhakti, bhakti-yoga. Kṛṣṇa says to everyone, "If you cannot give up your karma, then that's all right. But the result of your karma, give to Me. Then it will be bhakti."

So Vidura was Yamarāja. Not only he was Yamarāja, ordinary, but he is one of the great authorities. There are twelve authorities mentioned in the śāstra. One of them is Yamarāja. Balir vaiyāsakir vayam. This is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Yamarāja is one of the GBC of Kṛṣṇa. Yes. As we have got twelve GBC's, similarly Kṛṣṇa has got GBC's. Now,

svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

[SB 6.3.20]



That twelve men are authorized to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we have to follow. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. Therefore we have created these GBC. So they should be very responsible men. Otherwise, they will be punished. They will be punished to become a śūdra. Although Yamarāja is a GBC, but he made a little mistake. He was punished to become a śūdra. So those who are GBC's, they should be very, very careful to administer the business of ISKCON. Otherwise they will be punished. As the post is very great, similarly, the punishment is also very great. That is the difficulty. You can see from this example, Vidura. He was immediately punished. He did little mistake at Maṇḍūka... Because the ṛṣis, the munis, they will curse. Dealing is very... Even Yamarāja is not taking.



(reads:) "He was to play the part of so-called śūdra for years, being cursed by Maṇḍūka Muni. He was the incarnation of Yamarāja, one of the twelve mahājanas, on the level with such exalted personalities as Bhīṣma, Nārada, Brahmā, Nārada, Śiva, Kapila, Bhīṣma, Prahlāda, etc. Being a mahājana, it is the duty of Yamarāja to preach the cult of devotion to the people of the world as Nārada, Brahmā and other mahājanas do. But Yamarāja is always busy in his plutonic kingdom, punishing the doers of sinful acts. Yamarāja is deputed by the Lord to a particular planet some hundreds of thousands of miles away from this planet." That is mentioned. He has got a different planet, where the criminals are taken away after death, and he gives the judgment, what kind of body he will have. And not like the theosophists' thinking, "Now I have got human body. It is permanent settlement." No, that is not permanent settlement. According to one's work... Work means all sinful acts. Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, anyone who acts, he acts sinfully. There is no doubt of it. Because he is acting for sense gratification, and sense gratification means almost 99.9% all sinful activities. Duṣkṛtinaḥ. It is very risky job. Unless you act in Kṛṣṇa consciousness... Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. This is the stringent law of the nature, that you have to act only for Yajña, for satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. Otherwise, you will be entangled. And who is serving Kṛṣṇa? Nobody is serving Kṛṣṇa. So everyone is being entangled. This is the material world.

(reads:) "Yamarāja is deputed by the Lord to a particular planet, some hundreds of thousands of miles away from the planet of earth, to take away the corrupt souls after death and convict them in accordance with their respective sinful activities. Thus, Yamarāja has very little time to take leave from his responsible office of punishing the wrongdoers. There are more wrongdoers than righteous men. Therefore Yamarāja has to do (more) work than other demigods who are also authorized agents of the Supreme Lord. But he wanted to preach the glories of the Lord, and therefore, by the will of the Lord, he was cursed by Maṇḍūka Muni to come into the world in the incarnation of Vidura and work very hard as a great devotee."

The punishment was also reward. Those who are servants of Kṛṣṇa, even they are so-called punished, there is some motive behind this. Just like Jaya and Vijaya. They were also punished to come down and..., just to become enemy of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, when they were very much perturbed that "We are going to the material world from Vaikuṇṭha. So what will be our fate, Sir? There is some little mistake on our part. What we shall do?" So Kṛṣṇa gave him that "If you become My enemy, then you will be relieved in three births, and if you become My friend, then seven births." So the Jaya and Vijaya agreed, "Sir, we shall become Your enemy." So what is the purport? Kṛṣṇa wanted some enemy to fight. Just like we sometimes want to fight. So this desire is there, Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, where we get this desire? So actually, it was Kṛṣṇa's service, this Jaya and Vijaya. Kṛṣṇa wanted to have some fight. In the spiritual world there cannot be fight. There is no fight. There is only service. Therefore some of His devotees, this Jaya and Vijaya, agreed to become His enemy, come to this material world and to..., Kṛṣṇa fought with the Jaya and Vijaya. As Rāmacandra, He fought with Rāvaṇa, and as Nṛsiṁhadeva, He fought with Hiraṇyakaśipu, and as Kṛṣṇa, He fought with Yamarā..., er, Kaṁsa.

So similarly, Vidura also, he thought that "I am always busy in this magisterial work, simply to punish. I have no chance to preach." So Kṛṣṇa is very kind to His devotee. So He gave the chance to preach. So this was the arrangement, that he was cursed by Maṇḍūka Muni, came down to this material world. That is also material. Yamarāja's planet is also in the material world. Therefore he was given the chance of preaching. (reads:) "He is transcendental to such divisions of mundane society, just as the Personality of Godhead assumes His incarnation as a hog, but He is not hog." If somebody thinks that He has come as a hog, playing the part of a hog, that is not the fact. Even though assumes the... (reads:) "The Lord and His different authorized devotees sometimes have to play the role of many lower creatures to claim the conditioned souls, but both the Lord and His pure devotees are always in the transcendental position." Etad īśanam īśasya. That is the authority of God, that even though He accepts some lower position, He is never in the lower position. He is always in the transcendental position. I have given the example yesterday. Just like the sun is sometimes evaporating the urine. This is not very good business. But still, sun is sun. He is never polluted. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa or His devotee, if sometimes apparently does something which is not befitting their position, still, they are in their position. This is the conclusion. Kṛṣṇa has given this concession to His devotee.

It is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

[Bg. 9.30]



Even sometimes, not by willing, sometimes accidentally, a devotee... Just like the other day in the meeting, somebody was giving the example, "Lord Christ, he ate fish." So he can do that. There was some necessity. But you cannot do that. So even though it is sometimes done, abominable, but still they are in exalted position. This is to be understood. Tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya [SB 10.33.29]. Tejīyasām, those who are very, very powerful, anything abominable done by them, it does not contaminate. This is to be understood. But you cannot do that. You cannot imitate.



(reads:) "When Yamarāja thus incarnated himself as Vidura, his post was officiated by Aryamā, one of the many sons of Kaśyapa and Aditi, the Ādityas, or sons of Aditi, and there are twelve Ādityas. Aryamā is one of the twelve Ādityas, and therefore it was quite possible for him to take charge of the office of Yamarāja during his one hundred years' absence in the form of Vidura. The conclusion is that Vidura was never a śūdra, but was greater than the purest type of brāhmaṇa."

Now, have kīrtana. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.14: Lectures



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.14.43

-

New York, April 7, 1973



730407SB.NY



Prabhupāda:



api svit parya-bhuṅkthās tvaṁ

sambhojyān vṛddha-bālakān

jugupsitaṁ karma kiñcit

kṛtavān na yad akṣamam

[SB. 1.14.43]



Translation: "Have you not taken care of old men and boys who deserve to dine with you? Have you left them and taken your meals alone? Have you committed some unpardonable mistake which is considered to be abominable?"

So, "Have you not taken care of old men and boys who deserve to dine with you?" So, this is Vedic culture. When there is foodstuff to be distributed, the first preference is given to the children. We remember, even now we are seventy-eight, when we were children, we were four, five years old, we remember. Some of you have seen that (indistinct), and if you, anyone here? You have seen. So, the first feasting is for children. So sometimes I was little obstinate, I'll not, sit down, "No, I'll take with you, (indistinct)." But that was system. First of all children should be sumptuously fed, then the brāhmaṇas, and children and old men. In the family, children and old men... Just see Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, how much he was anxious to take care of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Although he played, played the part of an enemy throughout, still it is the duty of the family member to take care of the old men. When Dhṛtarāṣṭra left home after being accused by his younger brother Vidura, so, "My dear brother, you are still attached to family life, you have no shame. You are taking food whom you..., from whom you considered your enemies. You wanted to kill them from the very beginning. You set fire to their home. You banished them in the forest. You intrigued against their lives, and now everything is finished, all your sons, grandsons and son-in-laws and brothers, fathers, uncles...," I mean to say Bhīṣma was his uncle. So all the family. In the battlefield of Kurukṣetra everyone was killed except these five brothers: Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva. All male members were killed. So, only the remaining descendant was Mahārāja Parīkṣit. He was within the womb of his mother. And his father died, Arjuna's son, Abhimanyu. He was sixteen years old. Fortunately his wife was pregnant. Otherwise the Kuru dynasty was finished. So, he rebuked ,that "Still you are sitting here just for a morsel of food like dog. You have no shame, my dear brother."

So he took it very seriously, "Yes, yes my dear brother, you are saying all right. So what, what do you want me to do?"

"Be..., immediately come out. Immediately come out. And go to the forest." So he agreed, he went there.

So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira used to come first of all in the morning, after taking bath, after worshiping, because first duty was to go and see the old men: "My dear uncle, you are all comfortable? Everything is all right?" And talk for some time just to please him. This is the duty for family member-take care of the children, take care of old men, take care of even a lizard in the house, a serpent in the house. This is the injunction we find in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, gṛhasta, how much responsible he is. There it is said, even there is a serpent... Nobody wants to take care of serpent. Everyone wants to kill, and nobody is sorry to kill a serpent. Prahlāda Mahārāja said that, modeta sādhur api vṛścika-sarpa-hatyā [SB 7.9.14]. He said that "My father was just like a serpent, vṛścika, scorpion. So killing of a serpent or scorpion nobody is unhappy. So my Lord, You don't be angry. Now everything is finished, my father is finished." So, that was. But still the śāstra says that even in your house there is a serpent, see that he is not fasting without food. This is the spiritual communism. They are now after communism, but they do not know what is communism. Everyone will be taken care of. That is communism, real communism. Nobody should starve. Nobody should have any want in the state. That is communism. So when we went to communist country, Moscow, I think everyone was in want, and they could not get even foodstuff to their own choice. Whatever government rules and all these thing will supply, they will have to accept. And actually there was no good foodstuff, for us. We were staying in that National Hotel, and Śyāmasundara had to spend at least two hours for getting things. That also not very nice thing. Rice could not be obtained. One Madrasi gentleman, he supplied us some rice, nice; otherwise only milk and butter is available, and meat, that's all. No fruit, no vegetables, no nice rice, and these things are not available. This is Kali-yuga. Things will be..., supply will be reduced. Actually the supply is made by Kṛṣṇa.

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān



That is the difference between God and ourself. We are also person, God is also person. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. He is also living entity, we are also living entity. So what is the difference between God and ourself? That ekaḥ, that one living entity, nityaḥ, singular number. So, bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. He supplies the necessities of life to all these plural number, bahūnām. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. Those who know Sanskrit, this nityaḥ means singular number person, and the nityānām, that is plural number. Both of them are persons, both of them are living entities, but why that singular number is considered to the supreme? Because He supplies foodstuff to all the plural. So actually Kṛṣṇa has everything ready for supplying to all the living entities. Nobody is meant for starving. No. That is not. Just like in the prison house, although the prisoners they are condemned, still government takes care of their food, of their hospitalization, not that they should starve. No. Similarly, although in this material world we are all condemned, we are prisoners, prisoners. We cannot move, we cannot go from one planet to another. They are trying so much. Now they have failed. They do not talk now. (laughter) It is not possible, because we are prisoners. Conditioned. You will have to remain in this planet. One has to remain in their planet. There is no question that out of your own will and freedom, because you have no freedom.

But Nārada Muni has freedom. Nārada Muni is going from one planet to another. He is coming from the spiritual sky through the material sky, because he is perfect bhakta. So that is the ideal living entity. As Kṛṣṇa has got full freedom, similarly when we become perfect, Kṛṣṇa conscious, we also become free. This is our position. But not in the conditioned state that we can move. Cannot. Baddha. Brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān, we are conditioned. But in the conditioned state also, if we follow the Vedic principles we can be happy. Happy, and this human form of life especially, it is meant for that purpose, that you live happily, save time for developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that next life you are no more in this material world. You are transferred to the spiritual world. This is the purpose of human life. But these rascals they do not know. They think that we are advancing civilization , because the cats and dogs they are lying on..., on the floor and sleep, we have got 104-stories building and we lie dow there. This is their advancement. But they do not understand that the sleeping, the enjoyment by sleeping, it is the same to the dog and to the man who is lying on the 104th planet, story. Similarly, sex life to the dog and to the man or to the demigod, the pleasure is the same. There is no difference. If you drink milk on a golden pot or an iron pot, the taste is the same. You cannot change the taste of the milk, or anything, putting into the golden pot.

But these foolish persons they are thinking that, that "Our material pleasure will be very much enjoyable when it is put into the golden pot instead of iron pot." Mūḍhāḥ. They are called mūḍhāḥ. (laughter) They do not know the..., our real business is how to get out of this material body. That is, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. This is real knowledge. One should keep in his thought that "My real distress of life are these four things, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi to take birth, to die, to become old and to become diseased. This is my problem." But they do not know this. They are now busy in the petroleum problem. Yes. Yes. They have created this petroleum problem, this horseless tin carriage. (laughter) Yes. They are thinking, "Better than horse. Now I have got this tin carriage." As soon as it is old it has no value. You throw into the street, especially in your country. Nobody takes care of it. And..., but one must have this carriage. And it must run on petrol, and take labor, so hard labor, goes wihin the desert, drill it, and then take out the oil, then bring it in tanks. And it is called ugra-karma. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, that these rascals, demons, they have created ugra-karma simply for trouble to the whole people. That's all. Kṣayāya jagato 'hitāḥ, and bringing destruction nearer, nearer. Now they are going on, and that may be big work that means destruction and simply for creating a little comfort. Formerly also they were moving. Transport was there. But they do not like to remain in the former ways, because they have no other engagement. Better engagement that they do not know. Here is the better engagement: to come before Rādhā Kṛṣṇa and glorify the Lord. Try to understand our relationship. This is our real, real business, but nobody is interested in the real business. They are interested in superfluous engagement whole day work in the office, then come here, go to the club, go to the football club, tennis club. In this way they have invented simply how to waste valuable life of tis human form. They have invented. They have no sense that how this life should be utilized for stopping this, I mean to say, prime problem, janma-mṛtyu-jarā. They do not know.

So, this Śrīmad Bhāgavatam is giving to the whole world real life, real, what is meant by life. So this..., these are the etiquette. To take care, especially, of brāhmaṇa, old men, children, women and cows. This is civilization. These living entities should be taken care of. Now these rascals they are killing cows and making women prostitutes, and killing the children even in the womb. And there is no question of brāhmaṇa respect, and neither there is the brāhmaṇa culture. Then how you can be happy? Huh? And if there is no brahminical culture in the society, then that society is less than animal society. Therefore we offer our prayers,

namo brahmaṇya-devāya

go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca

jagad-dhitāya kṛṣṇāya

govindāya namo namaḥ



First deference is given, go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca, jagad-dhitāya. If you actually want to do some welfare activity for the benefit of the whole world, then these two things must be taken care of, go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca, cows and brāhmaṇas. They should be given first protection. Then jagad-dhitāya, then there will be actual welfare of the whole world. They do not know. Kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ, go-rakṣya, vāṇijyam, vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam. This is the duty of the mercantile class of men: to improve agriculture, to give protection to the cows, kṛṣi-go-rakṣya. And vāṇijyam. And if you have got excess food, you can trade, vāṇijyam. This is the business. The brāhmaṇa is meant for doing the brain work. He will give advice. Just like we, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we, we are not meant for the ksatriya's business or vaisya's business, the devotees, but if required they can take. Real business is, brāhmaṇa's business is to know the Vedas, the Brahman, the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth. He, he must know, and he must distribute the knowledge. This is brāhmaṇa. Kīrtayanto. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ. This is brāhmaṇa's business.

So, we have taken this business that preach that there is God. We have got an intimate relationship with God. So if you act, act accordingly, then they will be happy. This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. These rascals, they have forgotten, or they do not care to know, God, and that is the cause of their suffering. Yesterday that press reporter asked... What was the question?

Devotee: "Will this help to solve the oil crisis?"



Prabhupāda: Yes. So what I answered?



Devotee: "Yes. Why not?"



Prabhupāda: Huh?



Devotee: "Why not?"



Prabhupāda: You do not remember?



Devotee: Yes. You said the solution is already there, Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Actually! That is the fact! But they will not take to it. They will not take it. Now, what is the problem? It is not at all difficult. There is petrol, and it is used, it is meant for our use, but it is their ignorance they are thinking it is... (end)





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.15: Lectures





731129SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.1

-

New York, November 29, 1973



Pradyumna: "Translation. Sūta Gosvāmī said: Arjuna, the celebrated friend of Lord Kṛṣṇa, was grief stricken because of his strong feeling of separation from Kṛṣṇa, over and above all Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's speculative inquiries." [SB 1.15.1]



Prabhupāda: So evaṁ kṛṣṇa sakhaḥ kṛṣṇo. Arjuna's name is Kṛṣṇa Sakha, and he is also called sometimes Kṛṣṇa, because Arjuna's bodily feature was almost similar to Kṛṣṇa's bodily feature. So, he was morose, being separated from Kṛṣṇa, and his elder brother was suggesting whether he was morose for this reason or that reason or this reason. Actually, he was unhappy on account of being separated from Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, not only Arjuna, all of us, we are also, as Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna, he is also a living entity, we are also living entity. So we are also unhappy, because we are separated from Kṛṣṇa. These modern philosophers or scientists, they may suggest that they may go on thinking otherwise that they can improve the world situation in their own way, but that is not possible. We are unhappy on account of being separated from Kṛṣṇa. They do not know that. Just like a child, a child is crying, nobody can say why he is crying, but actually a child is generally in crying condition being separated from the mother.



So the, not only it is the question of Arjuna or Kṛṣṇa, everyone of us. In the Upaniṣad it is said that Paramātmā, Kṛṣṇa, and the living entity they are sitting on the same tree, samāni vṛkṣe. One living entity is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other living entity is simply witnessing, anumantā. So Kṛṣṇa, He's situated in everyone's heart, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Because without His sanction, the living entity cannot do anything. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo [Bg. 15.15], Kṛṣṇa says that "I am seated in everyone's heart." So, the living entity wants to do something out of his own whims, Kṛṣṇa says, or Kṛṣṇa gives good consultation that "This will not make you happy, don't do this." But he is persistent, he will do it. Then Kṛṣṇa sanctions, Paramātmā, "All right, you do it, at your risk." This is going on. Everyone of us (is) very intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is sitting in everyone's heart. Kṛṣṇa is so kind, that He is simply waiting, "When this rascal will turn his face towards Me." He simply is, he is so kind. But we living entities, we are so rascal, we shall turn our face to everything except Kṛṣṇa. This is our position.

We want to be happy, with so many ideas. Everyone is making his own idea, "Now this is the..." But the rascals, they do not know that, what is the actual process for getting happiness, that is Kṛṣṇa. That they do not know. na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. You, you can see in your country, they are trying so many things, so many skyscraper buildings, so many motor cars, so many big, big cities, but there is no happiness. Because they do not know what is missing. That missing point we are giving. Here is, "You take Kṛṣṇa and you will be happy." This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa and the living entity, they are very intimately connected. Like father and son, or friend and friend, or master and servant, like that. We are very much intimately connected. But because we have forgotten our intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa, and trying to become happy in this material world, therefore we have to undergo so much tribulations. This is the position. Kṛṣṇa bhuliya jīva bhoga vañcha kare.

We living entities, we are trying to become happy within this material world, "Why you are in the material world, why not in the spiritual world?" The spiritual world, nobody can become the enjoyer, bhokta. That is only Supreme, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva... [Bg. 5.29]. There is no mistake. There are also living entities, but they know perfectly well that real enjoyer, proprietor, is Kṛṣṇa. That is spiritual kingdom. Similarly, even in this material world, if we understand perfectly well that we are not enjoyer, Kṛṣṇa is enjoyer, then that is spiritual world. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to convince everyone that we, we are not enjoyer, enjoyer is Kṛṣṇa. Just like, this whole body, the enjoyer is the stomach, and the hands and legs and eyes and ears and brains and everything, these should be engaged to find out the enjoyable things and put it in the stomach. This is natural. Similarly, we are part and parcel of God, or Kṛṣṇa, we are not enjoyer.

In every religion, it is accepted. Just like in Christian religion also it is said: "Oh God, give us our daily bread." Bread, we cannot manufacture. It must come from God. That is Vedic version also nityo nityānāṁ cetanaṣ cetanānām eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). God, or Kṛṣṇa, He gives everything, necessities of life, as you like, but if you accept your enjoyable things as you like, then you'll become entangled. But if you accept things to be enjoyed by you, tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā [Īśo mantra 1], as Kṛṣṇa offers you, then you'll become happy. If you make, just like a diseased patient, if he wants to enjoy life in his own whimsical way, he'll continue his disease. But if he accepts the modes of life according to the directions of the physician, then he becomes free from So there are two methods, pravṛtti and nivṛtti. Pravṛtti means "I have got inclination to eat this or to enjoy this. Why not? I shall do it. I have got my freedom." "But you have no freedom sir, you are simply..." That is māyā. You have no freedom. We get experience, suppose there is very nice palatable food. If I think, let me eat as much as possible, then next day I'll have to starve. Immediately dysentery or indigestion.

So you cannot violate the laws of Kṛṣṇa, or laws of nature, that is not possible. You are not at all independent. Because these rascals, they'll not understand this. They are always thinking, we are independent. That is the cause of all unhappiness. Nobody is independent. How you can be independent? Nobody is independent, neither you can be independent, neither nobody is independent. That factual, who is independent? Here you are sitting, so many boys and girls, who can say "I am independent of everything"? No, nobody can say. So this is our mistake, and by misusing our independence we are suffering in this material world in so many ways. That has to be reformed. That has to be checked. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has preached, jīvera svarūpa haya nitya kṛṣṇa dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. We living entities, we are eternally servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is our position. But if we deny this position, "Now why shall I become servant of Kṛṣṇa? I am independent," then suffering begins, immediate. Kṛṣṇa bhuliya jīva bhoga vañcha kare, as soon as you desire to enjoy independently, immediately-that means immediately he is captured by māyā.

kṛṣṇa bhuliya jīva bhoga vāñchā kare

pāśate māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare



It is very easy to understand. Just like if you don't care for the government laws, if you want to live independently, that means immediately you are in the clutches of the police force. You haven't got to create, it is already there. So our position is always dependent on God. We should understand this. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has a song,



mānaso deho geho, yo kichu mora,

arpilun tuyā pade nanda-kiśora



This mistake is going on, that I am independent, king, and my soldiers or my society, community, family or-so many we have manufactured-but



dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ nidhanaṁ pramattaḥ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



Just like a man fights, just like Hitler declared war, or so many wars are declared. This man is declaring, everyone is thinking, "I am independent." So, and we are thinking that we have got so many soldiers, so many atomic bombs, and so many aeroplanes, we shall come out victorious. Similarly, each and everyone of us, we are thinking, "I am independent, and my wife, my children, my society, they are my soldiers. If I am in danger, they will help me." This is going on. This is called māyā. Pramattaḥ teṣāṁ nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati, because we have become mad after this so-called independence, independence of God, we are thinking these things will help us, will protect us, but that is māyā. Teṣāṁ nidhanam, everyone will be destroyed. Nobody will be able to give us protection. If real protection is wanted, he will have to take protection of Kṛṣṇa. That is the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. You rascal, you are thinking that so many things will give you protection. That will not be possible. You will be finished, and your so-called protector, and friends, and soldiers, they will be finished. You don't depend on them. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam... [Bg. 18.66], you just surrender unto Me, I'll give you protection, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ. This is real protection.



Everyone is falsely thinking independent, but he is dependent. But he is depending on false platform. That is the mistake of this material civilization. They are thinking of protection from a (sic:) tiltering platform, material world. So we have to take shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is very friendly to all of us. Therefore he comes down from Vaikuṇṭha to inform this, that is Bhagavad-gītā. And that is elaborately explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is the only thing. So the crisis, people are faced with so many crises, problems. That I told in the airport. The reporter asked me "What is the solution of this crisis?" The solution is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is already there, but you rascal, you will not take it. Solution is already there. If the Arabians think that this oil is Kṛṣṇa's property and the others, purchasers, they also think, Kṛṣṇa's property, then they must agree also. America also must agree that this land of America is also Kṛṣṇa's property. If you think that the Arabian oil is Kṛṣṇa's property, God's property, we shall take it, by force. Then why the Arabians should not be allowed to come from the desert and live in America? But they (are) foolish, they will not come, they have got United Nations. But United Nations means simply committing mistake, mistake, mistake, mistake. That's all. That is their business. Why don't you united? Yes, this Arabian oil is Kṛṣṇa's property. Similarly the Australian land, or the African land, or this American land, so vast tract of land But "No, you can not come here, yow yow." They say, the immigration department. You see. Yow yow department.

So this nonsense, these rascals, all these politicians, they're spoiling the situation, but they are so big rascal, they'll not accept the solution. Take Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and everything will be solved. That's a fact. Mūḍhā, but they're so rascal, duṣkṛtina, and full of sinful activities, na māṁ duṣkṛtina mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ, and lowest of the mankind. So always remember that our preaching work is dealing with these kind of men. Duṣkṛtina means full of sinful activities. Mūḍhā, rascals, narādhamāḥ, lowest of the mankind and māyayāpahṛta-jñānā, and they're thinking very much advanced in education, but fool number one māyā has taken their away, real knowledge, māyayāpahṛta-jñānā. Āsuri bhāvam āśritāḥ. Why all these things? Because they are Godless, only fault is Godless. Āsuri bhāvam āśritāḥ. Because they have taken the position (that) there is no God. These big, big scientists, they are trying to prove there is no God, "This creation is due from matter from chemical, the water has come from chemical combination, hydrogen, oxygen. These are the..." All foolish theories, and they are getting Nobel prize. They are getting Nobel prize. This is the position.

Therefore, from this verse, you should know evaṁ kṛṣṇa-sakhaḥ kṛṣṇo bhrātrā rājñā vikalpitaḥ, nānā-śaṅkā... These rascals, our Say our elder brother, advance, they're suggesting, "This the cause of," "this is the cause of," "this is the cause of," "this is the cause of." But the only cause is Kṛṣṇa, forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa, that they do not know. The only cause.

kṛṣṇa bhuliya jīva bhoga vāñchā kare,

pāśate māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā (dhare)



This is the cause. So try to preach this cult. But not that everyone will accept, but even a few percent, one percent of the whole population accept. Just like in the sky, there is one moon only and there are millions of stars. They're useless. What is the value of the millions of stars? But one moon, oh, dissipate the whole darkness of night. Similarly, at least those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you become, each of you become a moon and enlighten the world. These so-called glow-worms, they'll not be able to do anything. That's a fact. Don't remain a glow-worm. Just become a sun and moon. Then you will..., people will be happy, you will be happy.



Thank you very much. (end)



731130SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.20

-

Los Angeles, November 30, 1973





Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



so 'haṁ nṛpendra rahitaḥ puruṣottamena

sakhyā priyeṇa suhṛdā hṛdayena śūnyaḥ

adhvany urukrama-parigraham aṅga rakṣan

gopair asadbhir abaleva vinirjito 'smi

[SB 1.15.20]



Translation: "O Emperor, now I am separated from my friend and dearmost well-wisher, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore my heart appears to be void of everything. In His absence I have been defeated by a number of infidel cowherd men while I was guarding the bodies of all the wives of Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: So after departure of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's all the wives, 16,108, they were being taken care of by Arjuna. But some cowherdsmen, they plundered all the queens, and Arjuna could not protect them.



So this is the instance, that we may be very powerful so long Kṛṣṇa keeps us powerful. We are not independently powerful, even in the case of Arjuna. We are very much proud of our janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrīḥ [SB 1.8.26]. The material world, everyone is very much proud of his birth, riches, education and beauty. Beauty. These four things are obtained as result of pious activities. And as a result of impious activities, the opposite number. Not birth in a very nice family or nation, no wealth, poverty, no education and no beauty. But one should know that these assets, material assets... Just like you American people. You have got nice assets. You are born of a very respectful nation-American nations are still honored all over the world. So that's a good opportunity for you, janma. You are born in... Every American is... In comparison to India, every American is rich man, because any ordinary man earns here at least four thousand, five thousand rupees. And in India, even the high-court judge, he cannot earn so. Utmost four thousand. So you should be conscious that by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, you have got all these things. There is no poverty, there is no scarcity, there is good chance of education, and you are wealthy, beautiful, everything. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrīḥ. But if you do not become Kṛṣṇa conscious, if you misuse these assets, then again punar mūṣiko bhava.

You know the story, punar mūṣiko bhava? Anyone knows? Punar mūṣiko bhava means "Again you become a mouse." (laughter) A mouse came to a saintly person: "Sir, I am very much troubled." "What is that?" People generally go to saintly persons for some material profit. That is the nature, animalistic nature. Why you should go to a saintly person for some material benefit? No. You go there to learn what is God. That is real business. Anyway, saintly persons sometimes receive. "So what do you want?" Just like Lord Śiva, his devotees are all like that mouse, want something. "Sir, this cat troubles me very much." "So what you want?" "Let me become a cat." "All right, you become a cat." So he became a cat. Then after few days, he came back. "Sir, still I am in trouble." "What is that?" "The dogs, (laughter) they trouble us very much." "So what you want?" "Now I want to become a dog." "All right, you become." Then after few days... One after..., there is nature's arrangement. One is weak, one is strong. That is nature's arrangement. So after all, he wanted to become a tiger. So by the grace of the saintly person, he became a tiger. And when he became a tiger, he was staring on the saintly person like, oh. (Prabhupāda makes a face-devotees laugh) So the saintly person asked him, "You want to eat me?" "Yes." "Oh, then you may again become a mouse. (laughter) If by my grace, by my favor, you have become tiger, so I will again condemn you to become a mouse."

So you American people, you have become tiger now, Nixon tiger. But if you don't behave obligely, if you don't feel obliged, if the tiger feels obliged that "By the grace of the saintly person, I have come to the stage of becoming a tiger, I must be very much obliged to him..." But instead of becoming obliged, if you want to eat, then again become a mouse. If the saintly person has got the power to make you from mouse to tiger, then he can convert you again from tiger to mouse. You must always remember this. So by the grace of God, Kṛṣṇa, you have become so powerful nation, rich, beautiful, educated. By grace of Kṛṣṇa you have become, but if you forget Kṛṣṇa, then you are again going to be mouse. Remember that. Nobody will care for you. Just like Englishmen. Englishmen, they established the British Empire, great, powerful, most powerful nation in the world. Now they are not so. Because they misused their power. So you get power, opulence, by the grace of Lord, Kṛṣṇa. And if you misuse it, then you become again... That is happening. That is the nature's law. Nature's law.

So here, Arjuna, by his personal behavior, he is showing that "Without Kṛṣṇa... I was so great fighter that I took charge of the sixteen thousand wives of Kṛṣṇa to take them safely. Because Kṛṣṇa passed away, so they must be given protection." He was Kṛṣṇa's friend, but he could not do so. All the queens were plundered by cowherdsmen. Therefore he says that gopair asadbhiḥ. Cowherdsmen, they are not very powerful. They are ordinary men, cowherdsmen. But Arjuna was kṣatriya, so powerful. So he was defeated by them. Therefore he is regretting that asadbhiḥ: "If I would have been defeated by another powerful person, that would have been glory, but I have been defeated by the cowherdsmen." Just see. Asadbhiḥ. They are not counted amongst gentlemen. Asadbhir abaleva.

Abaleva. Abalā, another name of the woman. Just like if somebody attacks woman... Any young man, when he has got sixteen years old, he can attack any woman. But a woman, even though she is sixteen years or eighteen years or twenty years, she becomes immediately victim. So abaleva. Even the woman is higher in age, still, she cannot protect. Therefore woman requires protection. Woman requires protection. According to Vedic culture, woman has no independence, because they cannot keep their independence. It is not possible. A sixteen-year-old boy can go safely all over the world, but a sixteen-year girl cannot. That is not possible. By nature, they are weak. So they require protection. And until she reaches youthhood, she is protected by the father. As soon as she reaches youthhood, she is given to a young man, her husband, to give protection. And in old age, she is protected by the elderly sons. This is the Vedic culture. They have three phases of life: childhood, youthhood, and old age. So... Because they are weak. In the Western countries, the women are given freedom like man, but that is unnatural. Unnatural. Therefore these poor souls are being exploited by the other section. It is a great deficiency of the Western sociology.

But the Vedic culture is different from this. Woman is not given independence. And generally one man marries more than one wife. That is Vedic culture. Just like see Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has 16,108. That is allowed. Kṛṣṇa was Personality of Godhead. He could maintain... Why sixteen? Sixteen millions wife. That is not difficult for Him. But even ordinary man, kṣatriyas especially, they used to marry more than one wife. Still. Not only wife, but one wife, one princess is married, and along with her, hundred, two hundred maidservants, they will go with the king. Just like when Vasudeva was married to Devakī, some hundreds of maidservant was given with. So women... The conclusion is that women are weak. They should be given protection. They should not be ill-treated. Just like a father gives protection to the children. It does not mean it is ill-treatment. There is no question of. But protection. Otherwise, abaleva, they can be victimized by any man, powerful, because man is powerful.

So so 'haṁ nṛpendra rahitaḥ puruṣottamena. We also require. Don't be proud, "Because I am man, I don't require protection." Here it is said, Kṛṣṇa said, er Arjuna said, puruṣottamena so 'haṁ rahitaḥ: "Now I have no protection." Arjuna was so great hero. Still, he required protection. Puruṣottamena. Puruṣa, puruṣa means enjoyer. The supreme enjoyer is Kṛṣṇa. If He does not give protection, you cannot enjoy your life. That is not possible. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says... Kṛṣṇa is giving protection, but not as much as He wants to give you protection, because you deny to accept it. Because you deny to accept His protection, therefore He is giving protection to you as much as you want. And if you want full protection, then the condition is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up your own manufactured, concocted means of protection. You just surrender unto Me, and I will give you protection." Protection for what? "Protection from sinful activities." We are victimized by our sinful activities due to ignorance. We do not know what to do, what not to do. Out of ignorance we do something, and we become victimized by the laws of nature. But if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa, He will give you protection. You will never be victimized. You will never be victimized. Because Kṛṣṇa says,

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



Kṛṣṇa will guide you. Kṛṣṇa is within yourself, and He can speak to you. You can hear Him also, provided you are fully surrendered.



So it does not mean that Arjuna was not fully surrendered. Arjuna was fully surrendered, and Arjuna was fully protected by Kṛṣṇa. Neither these queens, sixteen thousand queens could be plundered away by some cowherdsmen. But the... It is an instance, that even a person like Arjuna, he will be helpless without Kṛṣṇa. He will be helpless, what to speak of ourselves? He will be helpless. That is his... He is showing that example. Kṛṣṇa was... So so 'haṁ nṛpendra rahitaḥ puruṣottamena: "Now I am bereft of the association of my dearest friend, Kṛṣṇa." Sakhyā, sakha means friend. Sakhyā priyeṇa. Not only friend, very dear friend, priyeṇa. Suhṛdā. Suhṛdā means... Suhṛt. There are different kinds of friends. But suhṛt is a friend who always thinks of his friend, how he will be happy. That is called suhṛt. That is... This description is given about the devotees also. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 5.29]. A devotee is always thinking how whole world will be happy. Suhṛdaṁ sarva... Not only human being, but animals, birds, trees, beasts, everyone. A devotee does not like to see even a grass is unreasonably cut. That is devotee vision. That is the...

Therefore Vaiṣṇava... What is that? Vaiṣṇavānām? Vaiṣṇava is happy. Just like, take Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja said... Prahlāda Mahārāja was praying Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to pacify Him. So the commentator says that Prahlāda Mahārāja might have been very much afraid of this ferocious feature of the Lord, Nṛsiṁhadeva. So he assured Nṛsiṁhadeva, "My dear Lord, don't think that I am afraid of Your this feature. No, no." Naivodvije. "Neither I am afraid of this materialistic existence." Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ [SB 7.9.43]. "I am quite confident that I have no fear." And he has practically seen that his father teased him in so many ways, but at last he was protected. So why he should not believe? He knows that "I am (have) dedicated my life to Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is not so ungrateful that He will not give me protection. How it is possible?" But one who does not believe in Kṛṣṇa, he thinks that he will protect himself. Apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām [SB 2.1.2]. Those who are not God-realized, they think that they will be protected by their society, friendship, love, country, nation, like that. But that is not possible. Just like you are flying in the sky, so many aeroplanes at a time. Sometimes in a bunch, a group they fly. But if one of the aeroplane is in danger, no other aeroplane can help him. He'll finish. So similarly, we are also flying as aeroplane in the open sky. The protection... You don't expect protection from your so-called society, friendship and love, materially. When there is question of danger, you have to protect with your own strength.

Therefore if we want actually protection, we should take protection of the Supreme, Kṛṣṇa, or His devotee. Kṛṣṇa is suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram, suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām: [Bg. 5.29] "I am the friend of everyone." He can become friend. He is living within our heart as friend. But we refuse the guidance of such a nice friend. That is our misfortune. Kṛṣṇa is so kind, so friendly, that you are... Just like one bird is flying from one tree to another, and another bird is following him. So similarly we are flying from one body to another. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. But Kṛṣṇa does not leave us. He's also going with you just to give you guidance. But we won't give Him. Just like father... It is very natural. Father naturally wants to guide the son without any motive. That is father's nature. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa, or God, the supreme father, is naturally inclined to give us protection, naturally. Therefore He comes, Kṛṣṇa comes. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. Paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. Kṛṣṇa's two business. First of all, preaching, these rascals who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, that "We are very intimately related. I am the father of all living entities. So you come to Me, come to home. You will be happy. I am not poor. I can provide you with all necessities." Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. That one can provide everyone with necessities of life, actually He is doing. What government is doing for the cats and dogs and the ants and the trees? They are not doing anything. Rather, they are cutting. When there is jungle, for their paper mill, they are cutting all the trees. No protection for the trees. They are all cutting all the throats of the cows and animals for eating. So the government cannot give protection. Nobody can give protection. Only Kṛṣṇa can give you protection. Therefore we should always seek the protection of Kṛṣṇa. That is our security, not any other thing.

So suhṛt means... Kṛṣṇa is suhṛt, suhṛt means who always, I mean to say, trying for our welfare. He comes Himself. And even though we do not accept... Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. He gives plain advice that "You always think of Me, become My devotee, offer your respectful obeisances unto Me. That will make your life perfect." But we shall not do that. We shall not do that. We shall think of so many other things, but we will never accept thinking of Kṛṣṇa. We shall become devotees of so many rascals, even of a dog also, but we shall never become devotee of Kṛṣṇa. This is the position. We are devotee or master to our wife, to our children, to our country, to our society, but as soon as you say that "You become devotee of Kṛṣṇa," oh, he is enraged immediately: "What nonsense you are speaking? I have got so many work to do. Why shall I become devotee of Kṛṣṇa?" This is the disease. This is the disease. Therefore Kṛṣṇa ultimately says that "You give up all this nonsense, and if you surrender unto Me, then I shall give you protection."

Naturally... Just like we are preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We are not devotee to the people in general. Then why we are preaching? We are devotee. We are actually devotee, without any motive. Any so-called political leader, he has got some motive. When he becomes devotee of the nation, he has got some motive. But we have no such motive. We simply say plainly that "You become happy by becoming devotee of Kṛṣṇa. You are now devotee of your lust, anger, and illusion. You have become devotee of so many things, rascaldom. You simply become devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Then your problems will be solved." Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. We are devotee, somebody. But we are not devotee of somebody. We are... We have got some motive. Just like now it is coming to exposure. So many leaders, they got election, pretending themselves devotee of the nation. In everywhere, not only in your country. But actually, they were not devotee of the nation. They were devotee of their own lusty desires. That's all. That "If I occupy this post, then I shall be able to fulfill my lusty desires." Nobody is devotee. Devotion is only applicable to Kṛṣṇa. If somebody is proclaiming himself that "I am devotee, servant of my nation, of my society, of my wife, of my children"-all false. Here nobody is devotee. Everyone has got some motive. Even the intimate relationship between husband and wife, there is some motive. The husband has got some motive and the wife has got... As soon as the motive is not fulfilled, divorce: "Ah, no more now. Take another chapter."

So this is going on. You see? This is going on, and therefore in the name of devotion, in the name of love, in the name of faith, they are trying to satisfy their own senses. This is called illusion. And he will never be happy so long he will try to satisfy his senses. And that is the truth. They will never be happy. Because... I have given this example. The parts and parcel of your body. If separately the part and parcel of the body wants to satisfy itself, it will never be satisfied. The only means of satisfaction is that the part and parcel conjointly work and satisfy the stomach, and then it will be satisfied. Similarly, we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. If we want to satisfy ourself, our senses, independently, we shall never be satisfied. This is the fact. You have to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. Then you will be satisfied. This is the process. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170].

Because actually the owner is Kṛṣṇa. I am claiming, "This is my hand." It is not my hand. It is Kṛṣṇa's hand. He has given us to use it. So if I don't use it for Kṛṣṇa, then it will be criminal. It will be criminal. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. Simply for Kṛṣṇa you have to work. And if you work for your sense gratification, then you will be entangled. This is called karma-bandhana. You will be entangled more and more. Yāvan mano vai karmaṇe saktaṁ tāvat na muñcante deha-bandhāt(?). So long we will be, I mean to say, sense-gratifying minded... Because everyone's mind is absorbed in the thought of gratifying his own senses. So so long we shall be absorbed in this type of thoughts, then we have to accept a body, either human body or other body. There are 8,400,000 different types of forms and body. So we have got different types of desires also, because we are prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. We are under the modes of material nature, and the material nature has got the modes, different modes: goodness, passion and ignorance. You mix up these three; three into three, it becomes nine. Nine into nine, it becomes eighty-one. Eighty-one into eight..., it increases. It increases. Therefore we see so many varieties of life, according to the mentality.

So if we work on our, according to the dictation of the mind, then we become entangled. And if we work under the dictation of Kṛṣṇa, then we become free. This is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



731201SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.21

-

Los Angeles, December 1, 1973





Pradyumna: Translation: "I have the very same Gāṇḍīva bow, the same arrows, the same chariot drawn by the same horses, and I use them as the same Arjuna to whom all the kings offered their due respects. But in the absence of Lord Kṛṣṇa, all of them, at a moment's notice, have become null and void. It is exactly like offering clarified butter on ashes, accumulating money with a magic wand or sowing seeds on barren land." [SB 1.15.21]



Prabhupāda: Very important verse, hm? Tad abhūd asad īśa-riktam. Everything will be null and void when there is no God. That's all. The modern civilization has got everything, but without God consciousness, any moment it will be finished. And there are symptoms... Any moment. At the present moment, this godless civilization, as soon as there is declaration of war, the America is prepared to drop atom bomb, Russia is... The first nation who will drop the atom bomb, he will be victorious. Nobody will be victorious, because both of them are ready to drop. The America will be finished and Russia will be finished. That is the position. So you may make advancement of civilization, scientific improvement, economic development, but if it is godless, at any moment it will be finished. At any moment.



Just like Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa, Hiraṇyakaśipu, they were demons, godless demons. Rāvaṇa was very learned scholar in Vedic knowledge and very powerful materially. He converted his capital with gold, all the buildings and everything. It is supposed that Rāvaṇa's brother was a king of..., on the other side of the globe. So it is my suggestion... I do not say it is very scientific proof. So other side of the globe... Rāvaṇa was in Ceylon, and the other side of the globe, if you go by subway, it comes to Brazil. And Brazil is supposed to have gold mines. And it is said in the Rāmāyaṇa that Rāvaṇa's brother was living on the other side of the globe, and Rāmacandra was taken through the subway. So taking this into consideration, we can suppose that Rāvaṇa imported large quantity of gold from Brazil, and he converted them into big, big houses. So Rāvaṇa was so powerful that he made his capital Svarṇa-laṅkā, "capital made of gold." Just like if a man comes from undeveloped country to your country, New York or any city, when they see the big, big skyscraper, they become astonished. Although skyscraper buildings are everywhere nowadays, formerly it was very wonderful.

So we can create everything very wonderful, but we can take the example of Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa was very advanced materially, and he had Vedic knowledge sufficiently. He was son of a brāhmaṇa. Everything was there. But the only fault was that he did not care for Rāma. That is the only fault. "Oh, what is Rāma? I don't care for Him. There is no need of performing yajñas and ritualistic ceremony to be promoted to the heavenly kingdom." Rāvaṇa said, "I shall construct a staircase to go to the moon planet. Why you are trying in this way or that way? I will do that." Svargesari.(?) So these people are trying like Rāvaṇa, but they should take lesson from Rāvaṇa that his godlessness made him doomed. Everything he lost.

So this instruction by Arjuna... He said that so 'haṁ dhanus ta iṣavaḥ. He was defeated by the cowherdsmen. He could not protect the queens of Kṛṣṇa, and they were taken away by these cowherdsmen. So he is lamenting that "I have got this bow and arrow with which I fought in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, and I became victorious because Kṛṣṇa was sitting on my chariot. That is the only reason. Now I have got these bows and arrows, the same bows and arrows with which I fought in the Battle of Kurukṣetra, but at the present moment there is no Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is useless." Īśa-rikta, asad abhūt. Asat means which does not act; it does not exist. "So my bows and arrows are the same, but it is now useless."

So we should take this lesson that without God, without spirit, this material, I mean to say, gorgeousness has no value. Just like we were talking with the scientist in our walking. I was giving this example. Now, there was big, big scientist, just like Professor Einstein was a well-known scientist, but when that small spark of soul was gone from the body, the scientist was lying down, but useless. Nothing coming. Nothing coming. Now, the scientist himself also could not discover any implement or medicine or something like that and teach his disciples, "My dear disciples, when I will be on the death point, please give, inject this medicine in my body and then again I shall come out a scientist." No. That is not... He could not discover that. At least, as a big scientist, it was expected that "Do something wonderful." They might have discovered so many wonderful. The real problem-birth, death, old age and disease-there is no discovery. That I was talking, that discover something by which there will be no disease. You are discovering very nice medicine. The drug shop is full with various types of up-to-date medicine, but none of the medicine is sufficient to make a man not to die. That is not possible. Or not to become diseased. That is not possible.

So this advancement of civilization, material civilization, without God, is like that. That is stated in the Vedic literature, that,

bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya

jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ

aprāṇasyeva dehasya

maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam



Jāti, big nation, big achievement, japas tapaḥ kriyā, big activities... Just like you American people, you are big nation. Your activities are very big, considered in other parts of the world. And your tapasya is there. You have earned this, you have made this America so nice by tapasya, by austerity. It has not come out automatically. You have labored hard. That is called tapasya. So this big nationality, jāti, japas, tapaḥ, these hard work, scientific discoveries, they are very nice, but what kind of popularity it is? Bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ. All these are simply decoration of the dead body. I do not know whether in your country it is a fashion. In India there is a custom that low-class men... Just like cobbler. Cobbler is taken as the low..., those who prepare, expert in skin. So they are generally very poor man. Now they have advanced, because now the Kali-yuga is the age of the śūdras. So they decorate the dead body. If a cobbler's father dies, he brings, he spends money. He brings nice covering cloth, and with flower and everything... So śāstra says that,



bhagavad-bhakti-hīnasya

jātiḥ śāstraṁ japas tapaḥ

aprāṇasyeva dehasya

maṇḍanaṁ loka-rañjanam



If you decorate a dead body, it may be very fanciful to the people, that "This dead body is decorated with costly garments and flowers and all things." So, but the dead body is dead. It is not enjoying. You can be complacent that "My father, the body of my father or my relative, is decorated so nicely." But factually, if you study scrutinizingly, what is the benefit out of this? What is the benefit? Dead body decoration? But people do that. They are accustomed to do that.



So similarly, this body is dead. That's a fact. It is dead from the very beginning. Because it is matter. Matter is always dead. So this body made of matter, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4]-earth, water, fire, air. This external body is dead, but it is living on account of that small spark of spirit. That is the real meant. That we understand from Bhagavad..., dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Dehinaḥ, the small spark, spiritual spark, he is within this body. This is the first understanding of spiritual knowledge. You must know. This is the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā. When Bhagavad-gītā was taught to Arjuna, Arjuna was lamenting for this body. So Kṛṣṇa, when He was accepted Arjuna's spiritual master, śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7], then He advised him that "You are talking like a very learned scholar." Aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase [Bg. 2.11]. "You are talking just like you know..." Just like our so-called scientists, they speak as if they know everything, but real thing they do not know. That is zero. What is spirit, they do not know. They are thinking this body. And according to Vedic knowledge, if one is misguided on the bodily identification of ourself, he is animal. He is animal. He may be Ph.D., D.H.C. or something, but he is animal. Sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. Because he does not know how the body is moving. And neither they can discover anything. When the body is dead... It is dead from the very beginning, but it was moving. Just like so long petrol is there, the motorcar moves. But as soon as there is... Now there is crisis. So how their motorcars will move? They are concerned. So why their crisis? Because the petrol is the life of the movement of the motorcar. Similarly, that spiritual spark, or spirit soul, is the petrol of this body.

So without knowledge of this, sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13], just like cats and dogs, they cannot understand how he is moving. That he does not know. If a human being also does not understand that how this body is moving, neither they can discover what it is, then what is this? It may be very so-called decoration of the body. A decoration of the dead body, what is the profit thereof? If you do not know what is the real living force within this body, then if you simply decorate the body, dead body, loka-rañjanam, you may get some applause from ordinary men, but it has no value. It has no value.

So you can expand in so many ways. Īśa-rikta. Īśa-rikta means without God, without God, īśa-rikta. So we living entities, we are also part and parcel of God, and because we living entity, part and parcel of God, is within this body, therefore the body is so beautiful, so big scientist, so philosophers or politician and... You can say anything. But without that soul, this body is useless, dead body, and you can give all titles, Ph.D, D.H.C., they are all useless. Suppose a man is dead and from Oxford University somebody comes, "Now I give you Ph.D. title," what is the use? Suppose a beautiful woman attracted so many people. Now, when she is dead, if she is offered, "Now you can take this body. You can use it as you...," nobody will like. Why? The same beautiful lying on the... Why don't you take it now? You were after her so many... "No. It is no, (laughing) no more useful. No more useful." Everyone knows it.

There is a story that one beautiful woman was hunted by another man. So he was wooing, canvassing, but she was chaste lady. But... She did not agree. But that man was after her. So one day she said, "All right, you come to me three days after. I will accept you." So on the third day he (she) took purgative, a very strong purgative, and passed stools whole day and night, and he (she) kept those all those stools, stools and vomit and everything, kept in a very good preserver. Then third day, when the man came, she was sitting, and he was asking, "Where is that woman?" "No, I am the same woman. You don't recognize me?" "No, no, you are... She... She was so beautiful, and you, you are ugly." (laughter) "No, no, I am the same. You do not know." "Then how you look so ugly?" "Because I have separated my beauty." "You have separated your beauty?" "Yes, I will show you. Come here. Come here. The stool and the vomit are all stocked for you to show you." But actually, it is very knowledge, very good knowledge. Śaṅkarācārya says, etāṁ raktaṁ māṁsa-vikāram. (?) He is teaching renouncement, that "Why you are attracted with this beautiful? What is this beauty? It is a combination of stool, urine and flesh and bone. That's all." So he saw, "Here is my beauty. Now you add it with me. Then again I shall be beautiful."

So these are actually knowledge. People are after something false. That is called māyā. Māyā means which is not actually fact, but we are after that. Similarly, this so-called advancement of civilization is māyā. It will be finished at any second, but they do not know. They do not know. It will be finished at any second. Even though we accept it, all right, Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham: [Bg. 10.34] "I am the death, and I take away everything at the time of death." Either you take as a philosopher, scientist or rich man, capitalist, as soon as there is death... Just like you see, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he was very powerful, and as soon as Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared, everything finished. Now he is dying. You see? So people do not understand it, that without Kṛṣṇa, without God, without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, simply we are wasting our time, that's all, after false things. Everything will be useless. Today or tomorrow or day after. It will be useless, all useless. Real spirit soul-na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]-that we do not take care. After finishing this false body, which will exist, the spirit soul, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20], which is never vanquished even after the annihilation of this body, we are not taking care of that, wherefrom it has come. People are ignorant, so foolish. They do not know. This is the ignorant, civilization of ignorance. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They do not know therefore. In ignorance they are committing so many sinful life. For the satisfaction of the tongue, they are killing so many animals. Why? There are so many nice foodstuffs. Why you are committing these sinful activities? They do not know what is sinful activities or pious activities. They do not know.

That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, na vidur āsurā janāḥ, pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca janā na vidur āsurāḥ [Bg. 16.7]. Pravṛtti means we have got some inclination to accept something and we have disinclination to reject something. Everyone knows it. But the asuric jana, those who are asuras, demons, they do not know in which way we shall accept and in which way we shall reject. That they do not know. That is called āsura-jana. Just like we are advising our students, "Reject this: no illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling, no meat-eating. Reject. And accept; chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." The demons, they do not know. They do not know it. They do not know why they are rejecting this and why they are accepting this, janā na vidur āsurāḥ. Because they are asuras. If we accept this path, then we are going to be liberated. What is that liberation? Liberation means to get out of this material bondage of body, dehino 'smin. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. This knowledge is wanting. There are so many universities, educational institution, big, big professors, scientists, all rascals. All rascals, we declare. Let them come and argue with us. All rascals. So therefore it is said, harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ.

Here is practical example, Arjuna is giving, that "I have got the same arrow, I have got the same bow. I have got the same chariot, my same horses, but everything is... I am the same Arjuna who was being honored by so many kings, 'Oh, Arjuna is such a great warrior!' Now nobody cares for me." This is example. Here is said, so 'haṁ rathī nṛpatayo yata ānamanti: "I am the same Arjuna, great fighter. People were offering their obeisances to me, 'O Arjuna, you are great friend of Kṛṣṇa. You are great warrior.' Now nobody cares." How it has vanquished? The example is here, "Just like to pour butter in the ashes." This example is... Because in sacrifice the butter is poured into the fire. If it is poured into the fire, then the butter increases the strength of the fire. But if it is put into the ashes, where there is no fire, it is useless waste. And similarly, if you sow the seed in the Arabian desert to get some nice rose flower... The seed is all right, rose seed, but you have to sow it in the proper place, not in the Arabian desert.

Therefore your knowledge, university advancement of civilization, will be perfect when it is properly carried with God consciousness. Otherwise it is all useless. It is all useless, no use. You try to understand it and spread this knowledge. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Don't be misled by the so-called leaders.

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



The modern civilization, they are so rascals, they are expecting something utopian, that by material advancement of civilization they will be happy. Now, one gentleman, that doctor, what is his name, Ifrenzia,(?) yes, he said that in Sweden they are the richest men, but the largest number of suicide cases are there. So this kind of material richness will not help you. That will not help. Actually, practically, we are experiencing. Why their every nation is dissatisfied? Although they have materially advanced so much, but dissatis... In your country also, why this section of people have become hippies? From university student, they have become hippies. Why? Frustration. They know that "What is this life? If I am become educated, then what is my future?" There is no future. Frustrated.



So this kind of civilization will not help. Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad... So therefore they do not know what is the actual aim of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. These rascals, they do not know what should be the aim of life. The aim of life is God realization, God realization, that "There is God, His name is Kṛṣṇa, His address is Vaikuṇṭha, His number is this, He has got so many friends, He has got so many lovers." Everything we are giving. But still, the rascal will not take. We are giving the name, address, activities, everything. "You come, go there." But no, they will not do that. This is called misfortune. He is coming Himself, canvassing, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām [Bg. 18.66], but still they are researching God. God is canvassing, and they are researching God. Somebody's failure, "There is no God." Somebody says, "God is dead. He is finished. Now we are God." These things are going on.

So why? Because na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā [SB 7.5.31]. Their real fault is that they are trying to become happy in this material existence. That is their fault. In Delhi, when I presented in some library my book Easy Journey to Other Planets, so one gentleman met, "You have got, written some book, Easy Journey to Other Planets?" "Yes." "Then we shall go and come back?" "No, why you shall come back?" "No, no, then I don't want." (laughter) The rascal wants to go to other planet and come back. They are doing actually. They are going to the so-called moon planet and coming back. The first aeronautics from Russia, when he was far, far away, he was just looking after, "Where is my Moscow? Where is my Moscow?" You see. This is our intelligence. You may go far away. There is an example. Just like the vulture, they have got a very good eyesight, very good eyesight. You... Seven miles away from the surface, they can see where there is a dead corpse. So they have got good eyesight, but they are searching after dead corpse only. That is their business. These so-called scientists, philosophers, they are very much advanced, but their only business is how to become happy in this planet. That's all. That is their... Not mahātmā. Durātmā. Their mind is not very broad. What is called? Ah? What is the English word? Crippled. Mind is very crippled. Durāśayā. Therefore they are hoping against hope. They will not live here. Still, they are decorating, decorating the dead body. "This is my apartment, this is my house, this is my country, this is my skyscraper building." Painting. And one day, mṛtyuḥ sarva... Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu. He's challenging, challenging, "Where is your God?" "Ah, here is God! Come on! Finished. Finished. Here is God."

So God will appear. Don't forget that you will be godless. You will see God, and death, at that time, after seeing, you will be finished, no more understanding. That is... Kṛṣṇa says, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraḥ... When you will be taken away, everything, all your possession, all your scientific knowledge, bank balance, skyscraper, everything will be taken away, then you will understand what is God, like Hiraṇyakaśipu. So why don't you try to understand before that moment comes? Live so very nicely, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and see Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deity, and eat nicely, live nicely. "No, that is not possible. We shall see at the time of death when everything will be finished. All intelligence, all good food, everything will be finished." So therefore in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said, kṛṣṇa yei bhaje se baḍa catura. Unless one is first-class intelligent, he cannot take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The last class fools and rogues, they cannot take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, you have first-class intelligence, those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Now try to continue it. Don't give it up. Don't be foolish, mūḍha. Continue. Then you will be happy, and all problems of life will be solved.

Thank you very much. (end)



731202SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.22-23

-

Los Angeles, December 2, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "O King, since you have asked me about our friends and relatives in the city of Dvārakā, I will inform you that all of them were cursed by the brāhmaṇas, and as a result they all became intoxicated with wine made of purified rice and fought among themselves with sticks, not even recognizing one another. Now all but four or five of them are dead and gone." [SB 1.15.22-23]



Prabhupāda: I think this editing was wrong, "purified." What is called, fermented, petrified? Putrefied. So instead of "putrefied," it has been "purified." Editing. Yes, rice... They, in India still... Because in India still, no gentleman, brāhmaṇa, at least brāhmaṇas, those who are strictly following brāhmaṇa principles, they do not drink. Neither the kṣatriyas. Kṣatriyas, they are allowed to drink in some particular function. That is also very rarely. And vaiśyas, they do not drink. Śūdras, some of them. Those who are less than śūdras, they drink, and they make their own liquor at home. They boil the rice, and with water, they keep it for few days, it becomes fermented, putrefied, and it becomes intoxicating, home-made liquor. And if you distill it, then it becomes first-class, brandy. So it is not that liquor drinking was not existing. There was. But who drunk, that is stated here, that vipra-śāpa-vimūḍhānām, those who were cursed, vimūḍhānām. And being cursed, they were bewildered. Vipra-śāpa.



The story is that Yadu-vaṁśa, the dynasty of Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa had 16,108 wives, and each wife had ten sons, and each son had another ten sons. In this way the whole family was composed of hundreds and thousands of men, Yadu dynasty. And when Kṛṣṇa came, so to assist Him, all these demigods, they came to help Him, līlā. Just like if you play something dramatic, you require so many assistants, so when Kṛṣṇa comes, those who are devotees of Kṛṣṇa, they also come to assist Him. Somebody becomes His father, somebody His mother, somebody His friend, somebody His wife, somebody His son, some grandson, like that. So when Kṛṣṇa wanted to depart from this planet, He wanted to take away all others also along with Him. So these are simply material, external causes. Actual fact is Kṛṣṇa, as He went away, He wanted to take all the associates under different pleas.

So it is explained in the Bhāgavatam that queens, the were they not actually... Nobody can touch them. Just like Sītā. Sītā was kidnapped by Rāvaṇa. How it is possible that Sītā can be kidnapped by a demon? No. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, that Lord Caitanya, He was a guest of a brāhmaṇa in South India. So He took His bath and came to the house of that brāhmaṇa, but the brāhmaṇa did not arrange for any cooking even. There was no food. He was very sorry. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu inquired, "Brāhmaṇa, you invited Me, but I don't see even you have cooked. What is the reason?" "Oh, yes, I am going to cook immediately. The thing is, I am very sorry that Rāvaṇa, the demon, has taken away Sītā, and I could not rescue her still. So why shall I eat? I shall die." He was in the ecstasy of Hanumān, a devotee. He was thinking like Hanumān. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu very much liked that he is, in devotion and in ecstasy of Hanumān, he is thinking like that. So at that time Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "So don't be sorry. Sītā, Lakṣmījī, she cannot be touched by Rāvaṇa. It was māyā Sītā, māyā Sītā. I will tell you. I will give you evidence from the śāstra." So brāhmaṇa believed Him because Caitanya... "Oh, she is there? Sītā was not taken? A māyā Sītā was taken?" "Yes." Then he become encouraged. He cooked and sufficiently gave Him food.

So by chance, when Caitanya Mahāprabhu was touring in South India... The Purāṇas, Śiva Purāṇa or something like that, it is stated there. And He brought the evidence again, that "Here you see, in the Purāṇa it is said that when Rāvaṇa came to kidnap Sītā, immediately a false Sītā was given to him, and the real Sītā disappeared. Then again, when Lord Rāmacandra, after killing Rāvaṇa, He was accepting Sītā back to home, He tested with fire, that 'Sītā, you should enter the fire, and if you are not burned, then you are chaste. Otherwise you are not chaste.' Yes. So the false Sītā which was taken by Rāvaṇa, she entered the fire, and the real Sītā came out." This is the statement in the śāstra.

So things take place like that. The queens of Kṛṣṇa, they could not be touched. But it is a play only. Similarly, Yadu dynasty, the descendants of Kṛṣṇa, they also could not be killed. But... Just like Kṛṣṇa was killed by the arrow of a hunter. How Kṛṣṇa can be killed? But it is for the persons, for the demons, to demonstrate like that, who thinks Kṛṣṇa as ordinary human being. So for them it is a jugglery. They will still know that "Here your Kṛṣṇa is killed." Yes. They will say like that. So tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān kṣipāmy ajasram asura-yoniṣu [Bg. 16.19]. The demons, as they want to forget Kṛṣṇa, or they do not like to understand Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa plays something like that so that they will be more convinced that Kṛṣṇa is not God, Kṛṣṇa is ordinary human being. Tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān. They will remain in darkness forever. Kṛṣṇa gives chance to everyone. If you want to forget Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will give you such intelligence, you will talk so intelligently that "Kṛṣṇa is not God." Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. And if you want to know Kṛṣṇa, then He will give you such intelligence, you will know that "Here is Supreme Personality of Godhead." This is Kṛṣṇa's busin... If you want to forget Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will give you chance to forget Him forever. And you suffer. Because forgetting Kṛṣṇa, one is not benefited. By knowing Kṛṣṇa is one benefited. But the demons, rākṣasas, they suffer, and still they want to forget Kṛṣṇa. This is their business.

So now the most important thing is that Kṛṣṇa made this plan to kill His descendants. He did not like that they should, but who will kill them? That is the problem. They are descendants of Kṛṣṇa. Who will kill them? Therefore it was Kṛṣṇa's plan that they will kill themselves. If others come to kill Kṛṣṇa's descendants, then what is the value of Kṛṣṇa's descendants? Nobody could kill, because in Kṛṣṇa's presence, whenever there was fight, all the descendants they came out... And who will conquer them? Nobody. That is not possible. But Kṛṣṇa wanted that before His going away, all these demigods, they must also return. "Return" means this body must be killed. But who will kill them? That was the plan of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is... Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. He is planning. He made this plan.

So what is that? One of them made a false pregnancy with a stone on the belly wrapped with cloth, and another boy or another man, he went to a ṛṣi that "Sir, can you tell what is child in the womb of this woman?" She is not woman, she is man. So the saintly person could understand that "These people have come to joke me." So he immediately cursed-vipra-that "Yes, what is there in the womb, that will be the cause of destroying your whole family." So when they were cursed, the came to their senses: "What you have done?" So actually, it was a stone. So they began to rub the stone so that there will be no existence of the stone. Rubbing, rubbing, rubbing, rubbing-that pulp and water, that was distributed, and all of them became sticks. So then, after that, they became intoxicated, and they could not understand amongst themselves who is friend, who is enemy, and took those sticks and began to beat one another. In this way they died. This is the story. You know It is stated in the Kṛṣṇa book.

So our point is to know this is a play only, background. Actually, Kṛṣṇa wanted to take them away. And nobody could kill them. Therefore He planned a killing plan amongst themselves. This is the fact. But we should know that vipra-śāpa-vimūḍhānām: if any person is cursed by vipra, brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava, then they are finished. Therefore according to the Vedic civilization, brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas are always honored so that they may not be dissatisfied. This is the rule. Brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇava. The devotees and the brāhmaṇas. Veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipro brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. Those who are spiritually advanced, such persons should not be offended. Then you are finished in according to our philosophy, vaiṣṇava-aparādha... Just we were talking in our walking that a great yogi... What is the name?

Devotee: Durvāsā.



Prabhupāda: Durvāsā. Durvāsā Muni offended Vaiṣṇava, and immediately sudarśana-cakra came to kill Durvāsā. Vaiṣṇava-aparādha is never tolerated by Kṛṣṇa. Just like the Pāṇḍavas, they were Vaiṣṇavas, and the Duryodhana and company, they were so-called Vaiṣṇava. Actually they were not Vaiṣṇava. So they insulted. They put to trouble so many ways. They banished them in the jungle. They insulted their wife and so many ways by clique. So Kṛṣṇa could not tolerate that. So therefore the Battle of Kurukṣetra.



So Vaiṣṇava is kind. Arjuna, he said, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, whatever they have done, that doesn't matter. I cannot kill my family men. Please excuse." So just see. Arjuna is kind because he is Vaiṣṇava. But Kṛṣṇa cannot tolerate. Kṛṣṇa said, "You must kill them. That is My order. You must kill them." Then he argued with Kṛṣṇa in so many ways: "There will be so much sin. There will be this, there will be that." Then He preached Bhagavad-gītā, and at last He said that "Arjuna, you are thinking that you shall, by not fighting, you shall be able to save your family men, kinsmen. That is not possible. That is not possible. They are already killed. It is all My plan. They will never return home. If you kill them, then you take the credit. But otherwise, they are already killed. And if you think that you will not kill them, they will be saved, that is not possible. That is not possible." Then Arjuna understood that "It is the determination of Kṛṣṇa that they must be killed. Then why shall I disobey His order? It is my business to serve Him. Yes, then I shall kill, if You have so decided."

So this is the fact, that Kṛṣṇa will never tolerate insult on a devotee. He will never tolerate. The devotee may excuse, tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā. He may suffer. Just like Prahlāda Mahārāja, he was suffering. His father was torturing him. He was suffering, "All right." But Kṛṣṇa never tolerated. "Oh, you have done so much. Now it is the time to kill him." This is the process. Kṛṣṇa will tolerate. Even you insult Kṛṣṇa, He will tolerate. But if you insult His devotee, He will never tolerate. Then you are finished. Then you are finished. Just like a big man. If you insult him, he may think "All right, let him." But if you insult or do something harm to his child, he will never tolerate. He will never tolerate. Similarly, a devotee who is dependent on Kṛṣṇa in everything, and if somebody does harm to him, insults him, Kṛṣṇa will never tolerate. That is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, vaiṣṇava-aparādha. Tāra madhye vaiṣṇava-aparādha hāti matta. So we should be very careful not to offend Vaiṣṇava devotees. Not to offend. This is greatest offense. Therefore it is said vipra-śāpa-vimūḍhānām. Vimūḍhānām. Those who are rascal, fools, they will want to try to insult real brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava. Then they are finished. Of course, a Vaiṣṇava never curses. Tolerates. Tṛṇād api sunīcena taror... Vaiṣṇava tolerates, but Viṣṇu never tolerates.

So vipra-śāpa-vimūḍhānāṁ nighnatāṁ muṣṭibhir mithaḥ. Being intoxicated. Another point is intoxication. We are already intoxicated. Being under the influence of māyā, the material energy, we are already forgotten of ourself. Everybody. Nobody knows that he's not this body. This is another intoxication. He is not this body, this is a fact, but go to the outside of this temple, ask anybody, "What you are?" "Yes, I am this body." They are already intoxicated. So again if you drink, then how much intoxicated you become, just try to understand. Vāruṇīṁ madirāṁ pītvā madonmathita-cetasām. Everyone who is in this material world, forgotten God or Kṛṣṇa, he is already intoxicated. Just like intoxicated man, he cannot recognize even his father, mother, or even his sister or mother. It has been practical. One father intoxicated-there are so many instances-raped the daughter. Daughter is crying, "My dear father, I am, I am..." Who cares for that? Intoxicated. This is going on. So intoxication is so sinful. Intoxication is so sinful that... Just like the hog is intoxicated by this material world, eating stool. Is stool a food? But he is tasting very nice. And he's deriving benefit, sexually very strong, never cares whether mother, sister or daughter. Every example is there in front.

So by intoxication... We are already... We have to get out of this intoxicated condition of life, which is called māyā. Instead of getting out of this intoxicated life, if we more increase our intoxication, big, big signboard, "Beefeaters" and this, "Whiskey," then how much we are degrading the whole population, we have to imagine. You see? People are already in forgetfulness. And the government, the society, they are still giving impetus: "You forget more, you forget more..." And he doesn't know. Viśatāṁ tamisram. Adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisram [SB 7.5.30]. And they do not know that "I will have to take next birth, and according to my mentality, because I am infecting a certain type of material qualities, in that way I am creating my next body." That he does not know. This is due to intoxication. He is thinking that "My enjoyment life, in this way forever..." But he does not know that he is creating the mentality, and according to the mentality, hog's mentality, he will become next life a pig, and he will eat... He has to by force. Not by force; he will relish it. Māyā... This is called āvaraṇātmika-śakti, covering influence. The pig is eating stool, but he is very much satisfied: "Such a nice food." He is having intercourse with his daughter or sister or mother, he is enjoying.

So the hellish condition. So we create our hellish condition. Wherefrom the hog comes? The hog comes also... He is also living entity. By process of transmigration of the soul, one is accepting sometimes as a hog, sometimes a dog, sometimes a demigod, sometimes rich man, sometimes poor man, sometimes tree. That they do not know. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. We are spoiling our time in this way, transmigrating from one type of body to another, and there are 8,400,000 types of body. So in the human form of life, if one is actually fortunate, then guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. By the mercy of guru and by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa one gets the opportunity of understanding Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise they are entrapped by māyā, intoxication, and wandering through out the whole universe in different types of body.

So this is called vāruṇīṁ madirāṁ pītvā madonmathita-cetasām, ajānatām. Ajānatām, without any knowledge. We are fighting one another without any knowledge. Why the Americans were fighting with Arabians and the Arabians are fighting? The fighting is going on. The United Nations means fighting settlement arena. That's all. But the fighting is going on. So unless we are self-realized, unless we know that "We are all sons of God; this outward dress is māyā. I am not American, I am not Indian." Just like Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir na yatir vā. He said like that, that... He is taking the varṇāśrama-dharma: brāhmaṇa kṣatriya vaiśya śūdra brahmacārī gṛhastha vānaprastha... So Caitanya Mahāprabhu denied all these: "No, I am a not brāhmaṇa, nor I am a śūdra, nor am I gṛhastha, nor I am kṣatriya." "Then what You are?" Gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ: [Cc. Madhya 13.80] "I am the servant of the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa, who provides the gopīs." This is our real identities.

So without understanding our real identification, if we remain intoxicated and wander within this wonderful universe... You cannot live. It is not that because you have settled up, "Now I am in America or India. Let me live here comfortably. I have got very good arrangement." But you will not be allowed to live, sir. You must have to change. You may make very good arrangement, but who is allowing to stay here. You will not be allowed to stay here. But they do not know. Intoxicated, because intoxicated. Everyone is thinking that "I shall stay forever. Let there be very big iron skyscraper building. I will be able to stay." But because intoxicated, he cannot understand that he will not be allowed to stay. You may simply spoil your energy. That's all. The energy which was given to you to understand God, you are spoiling that energy in skyscraper building, but you will not be allowed to stay. This is nature's law.

But the rascals, they do not know because they are intoxicated already by the nature's law, māyā, and they are still being intoxicated, more drink liquor, more drink liquor, and go to hell.

Thank you very much. (end)



731203SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.24

-

Los Angeles, December 3, 1973





Pradyumna: Translation: "Factually, this is all due to the supreme will of the Lord, the Personality of Godhead. Sometimes people kill one another, and at other times they protect one another."



Prabhupāda: Now read the purport also. [SB 1.15.24]



Pradyumna: "According to the anthropologists, there is nature's law of struggle for existence and survival of the fittest. But they do not know that behind the law of nature, there is the supreme direction of the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is confirmed that the law of nature is executed under the direction of the Lord. Whenever therefore there is peace in the world, it must be known that it is due to the good will of the Lord, and whenever there is upheaval in the world, it is also due to the supreme will of the Lord. Not a blade of grass moves without the will of the Lord. Whenever, therefore, there is disobedience of the established rules enacted by the Lord, there is war between men and nations. The surest way to the path of peace is, therefore, dovetailing everything to the established rule of the Lord. The established rule is that whatever we do, whatever we eat, whatever we sacrifice, whatever we give in charity, must be done to the full satisfaction of the Lord. No one should do anything, eat anything, sacrifice anything, or give anything in charity against the will of the Lord. Discretion is the better part of valor, and one must learn how to discriminate between actions which may be pleasing to the Lord and those which may not be pleasing to the Lord. An action is thus judged by the Lord's pleasure or displeasure. There is no room for personal whims. We must always be guided by the pleasure of the Lord. Such action is called yoga-karmasu kauśalam, or actions performed which are linked with the Supreme Lord. That is the art of doing a thing perfectly."



Prabhupāda: (aside:) That child... So the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gītā, the statement is there by Kṛṣṇa,



sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham

[Bg. 15.15]



Actually, everyone is suffering or enjoying. There is no enjoyment, only suffering. But the struggle for existence, to counteract the suffering, we take it as enjoying. Actually there is no enjoying.



In the Bhagavad-gītā you know... (aside:) It is disturbing, the child. In the Bhagavad-gītā that... What I was speaking? Enjoying and suffering. Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa says that "This place..." The supreme authority says, "This place, this material world, is duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam: [Bg. 8.15] it is the place for suffering." That is a fact. One person is trying to accept suffering as enjoying, and another person is trying to end actually suffering. This is the difference between sane and insane person. I'll give you a practical example, that in the prison, government prison house, there are some prisoners who are called first-class prisoners. They are given special favor by the government. So... And there are third-class prisoners also. But both of them are prisoners. And prison is not meant for comfortable life. It is meant for suffering. The Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura therefore sings, anādi karama-phale paṛi' bhavārṇava-jale taribāre nā dekhi upāya. One who is sane person, he knows that "I may be first-class prisoner, that does not mean I am not prisoner. I am prisoner." The suffering of the prison house, that I have no independence to do anything, that is prison life.

We are, everyone is thinking that we are independent, but that is not the fact.

prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate

[Bg. 3.27]



Actually, everybody is being carried by the laws of material nature, but a foolish person is thinking that he is doing himself. So here it is said that prāyeṇa etad bhagavata īśvarasya viceṣṭitam. We cannot do anything without the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just like in state you cannot do anything without the sanction of the government, similarly the supreme state, the supreme order-giver, Kṛṣṇa or God, without His sanction we cannot do anything. But here it is said that mitho nighnanti bhūtāni bhāvayanti ca yan mithaḥ. Sometimes by His will we kill one another, and sometimes we give protection one another. So does it mean that in different time Kṛṣṇa is giving different intelligence? No. Kṛṣṇa's action is daiva, superior. Just like the high-court, the judge is... Somebody condemning somebody that "This man should be hanged," and other man, "Yes, he must get the degree. He will get the millions of dollars from that person." Now, is he partial? He is giving somebody millions of dollars and somebody is ordered to be hanged. Is he partial? No. He is not partial. He is simply administering the law. That's all. This man has created such a situation that he should be condemned to death, and this man has created such situation that he will be rewarded by ten thousand and millions of dollars. It is his action.



Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. We are acting, and daiva-netreṇa, by superior administration, daiva-netreṇa, we are getting different types of body, and suffering or enjoying the consequence. This is our position. Kṛṣṇa is... God is... It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu: [Bg. 9.29] "I am equal to everyone." Otherwise how He is God? God is not partial, that somebody should be killed and somebody should be rewarded with ten thousand dollars. No. It is our own work, we create such situation. That you should know. We forget. Now, somebody I kill in my last life. Just like here, if I kill somebody, then I shall be killed also, by the law, nature or law of God. Similarly, I forget that because I kill somebody, now that somebody is killing me. So forget. But Kṛṣṇa reminds, "Now this person killed you," or "This child killed you last life. Now you can kill in the womb. Now you kill." Viceṣṭitam. He reminds. Because Kṛṣṇa is described: anumantā. Anumantā upadraṣṭā. He is witness. Now this man has killed this man. Now he gets the opportunity to kill him again. And Kṛṣṇa reminds you, "Kill him. Here is opportunity." This is the position. Don't think when it is said that īśvarasya viceṣṭitam, it is by the will, that will, because He is equal to everyone, so everyone should get chance to retaliate. That is going on.

So God is not partial, He is impartial. Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29]. Nobody in the material world... Just like jail superintendent or the government. The government is not partial. Government is equal to everyone, but everyone is enjoying or suffering according to his own work. So that is reminded. That is reminded and sanction given that "This body, this being, killed you in your last life. Now I give you sanction, you can kill him." This is called nighnanti. Mitho nighnanti. And "This man gave you protection, so you give him protection." So what is the wrong there? There is nothing wrong. It is equal justice. Because... Don't think that because God or Kṛṣṇa gives sanction, viceṣṭitam, therefore He is partial. No. He is always impartial. We are suffering our own activities. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. We are getting different types of bodies, suffering.

Now... Therefore we should always try to understand the will of God. That is our duty. That will of God we can understand in the human form of life. That is an opportunity. Will of God is expressed very clearly. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is said already. Nobody can say "What is the will of God? I do not know." No, you know. He says, God says, Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. "You give up all other business. You just become surrendered to Me." "And then how shall I pull on? Ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi: "I shall give you protection. I will give you protection and I shall release you from the effects of all sinful activity."

Because we suffer on account of sinful activities. And we enjoy by pious activity. That is the law. If you become nicely educated, cultured, then you get good position in the society. But if you are a rascal, then you suffer. Similarly, we are creating our position. But that... That is called karma-bandhana. Karma-bandhana means so long we do not know what is our duty, we create our position differently and therefore sometimes we suffer, sometimes we enjoy. Therefore we must know what is our duty. That we have forgotten. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. In this material condition of life we have forgotten what is our actually aim of life. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. Our duty, when we forget our dharma, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ. Dharma is not a religious sentiment. Dharma means our occupational duty, real meaning. I think I have given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So when we forget our duty, that is called dharmasya glāniḥ. Glāniḥ means deterioration of our real occupational duty.

So our real occupational duty is to serve the Supreme. That is our real occupational duty. We are meant for serving. But when we forget serving Kṛṣṇa and we try to serve so many other things... That means... "So many other things" means our lust, our greediness, our illusion, our so many problems we serve. We have to serve. That is our position. Nobody can be free from service. That is not possible. But we do not know where to give our service. That is forgetfulness. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā na pālitā durnideśāḥ. Here, the human being in ignorance, they are serving the kāma, lust, greediness, moha, anger-so many things they are serving. They are serving. A man is killing another body by lust, lusty desires. Or by illusion. So many other reasons. So we are serving. There is no doubt about it. We are serving. But we are serving our kāma, krodha, lobha, moha, mātsarya. Lust, desire, avarice, like that.

Now we have to learn that we have been frustrated by serving so many things. Now we have to turn that service attitude to Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa's mission. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "You are serving already. You cannot be free from service. But your service is misplaced. Therefore you just turn your service unto Me. Then you become happy." That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā pālitā durnideśāḥ. Because we are greedy... Just like a greedy man, he is suffering by eating more. There are so many diseases, just like diabetes or dysentery. There are so many things. These are the diseases for eating more. That's all. So we are suffering; at the same time, we are eating more. Because we are greedy, we are lusty. This is the cause. So therefore kāmād... We are serving. We are serving our lust, our greediness, and suffering. This is practical. If you have no hunger, if you eat... If you have no appetite, if you eat, then you suffer. If you infect some disease, you'll suffer. That is practical. So we are associating in, being infected by lust, greediness, illusion, fearfulness, so many things. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyam asad-grahat [SB 7.5.5]. If you steal, then you will be under fearfulness: "Oh, I may not be arrested; I may be arrested." Because you have done that, asad-grahat, you have done something wrong, therefore you are under the influence of fearfulness. It is very easy to understand.

So we are creating our situation and serving a different type of desire. That's all. Kāmādīnāṁ katidhā na... And sometimes we are doing something which we should not do. Still, we are doing. But doing so, teṣāṁ karuṇa jāta. Although we have done so much for to serve the lust, greediness, but they are not merciful. They are still dictating, "Go on doing this, go on doing this, go on doing." He is suffering; still, he is following the dictation of lust and desire. We are creating our own karma. Therefore any sane man will see that "I have served so long, so much, our desires, but I am not happy. I am not happy, neither the desire is happy." The desire is never satiated that "You have killed so many animals. Now you don't..." No, he will go on, go on killing, killing, killing, killing, killing, killing. He is never satisfied, "Now I have killed so many. No more, stop." No, there is no stoppage. That will go on. Kāmādīnāṁ kati na katidhā. The injunction is "Thou shalt not kill," but he will kill and kill and kill and kill, and still, he want to be satisfied. Just see. The Bible says, "Thou shalt not kill," and they are simply engaged in killing business, and still they want to be happy. Just see the fun. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes, you be killed by occasional world war. You must be killed. You have created this situation. You must be killed. You may be American or Englishman or German or this or that. You may be very proud of your nationality. But you must be killed." This is the position. Īśvarasya viceṣṭitam. "You have killed so many animals. Now wholesale killing, one bomb. One atom bomb. Be killed."

So these rascals they do not know how things are going on. Īśvarasya viceṣṭitam. "Tit for tat." There must be. If in ordinary laws, in the state laws, that if you have killed somebody you must be hanged, so do you think you can simply bluff the Supreme Authority, Kṛṣṇa, that you are going, killing, killing, killing, and you will be saved? No. You will be killed in pestilence, in famine. Even within your mother's womb, you will be killed, where it is supposed to be good protection, there also you will be killed. The human nation being degenerated in such a way, the killing business is increasing daily, daily, daily. Īśvarasya viceṣṭitam.

So we therefore must submit to Kṛṣṇa. Sarva-dharmān parityajya... [Bg. 18.66]. Because we cannot become free. We cannot go out of the laws of God. That is not possible. Therefore we must surrender that "Kṛṣṇa, God, I have acted freely so many births. I did not become happy. Neither I am happy at the present moment. So now I surrender unto You. You say that 'I give you protection.' So kindly give me protection." This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)



731204SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.25-26

-

Los Angeles, December 4, 1973



Pradyumna: "Translation: O King, as in the ocean the bigger and stronger aquatics swallow up the smaller and weaker ones, so also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to lighten the burden of the earth, has engaged the stronger Yadu to kill the weaker, and the bigger Yadu to kill the smaller." [SB 1.15.25-26]



Prabhupāda: This is the theory of struggle for existence and survival of the fittest. The law of nature is like that, that the stronger overpowers the weaker. The stronger overpowers the weaker. In another place it is stated,



ahastāni sahastānām

apadāni catuṣ-padām

phalgūni tatra mahatāṁ

jīvo jīvasya jīvanam



A living entity, they live by eating another living entity. What is that? Ahastāni sahastānām. Sahastānām means those who are endowed with hands. That means man, man form, human form, they have got hands. So those who have no hands..., just like the animals, they have got legs, they have no hands. So ahastāni, those who have no hands, they are food for the animal with hands: bite that animal. Those animal with hands... They are animal, those who are eating another animal; they are not human being. Although they have got the form of human being, they are not considered human being. Human being means when he's civilized, cultured, then he's human being. If he's not civilized, if he's not cultured, simply having two hands-he's animal.



So that culture begins, civilized, in the Aryan families. Therefore they are called Aryans, "advanced." Aryan means advanced. People want to group themselves in the Aryan family. Just like Hitler, he declared himself only, "The Germans are only Aryans, and Jews are not Aryans," like that. You can manufacture. But real Aryan means one who is advanced in spiritual consciousness. He is Aryan. Not a class of men. Aryan means he's advanced in spiritual consciousness. The Aryan civilization is so eulogized because they..., in the Aryan civilization there was Vedic culture. That is Aryan. Otherwise ahastāni sahastānām, and that is apadāni catuṣ-padām. This is going on, struggle for existence. In the primitive age that human being, so-called human being, naked, in the jungle, they eating animals. The animals have no leg... The Darwin's theory is that there was no civilized man, but gradually it has developed. It is not very clearly explained; he does not know what is the evolution. Evolution means to become civilized. That is evolution. Or to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is evolution.

So this is the law of nature, that the weaker section is devoured by the stronger section. So here it is said, jalaukasāṁ jale yadvat. In the water, there are so many aquatic animals, the struggle is going on. The stronger fish eating the weaker fish. This is going on. That is the law of nature. Therefore meat-eaters, so long they are like animals, they can go on with this nature's law. You are man, you are stronger; therefore weaker animal-cows and goats-you slaughter them. They are stronger bodily, but they have no intelligence. So man has got intelligence. So if you misuse your intelligence in that way, you can do that. That is nature's law. But human being means culture, advance, in spiritual consciousness. That is human. So this consciousness is developing gradually.

So unless you come to this platform, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13], then you must divide the society. Amongst the animals, there is no division. Everyone is on the same status. No. Because the aim is how to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore there must be some system. So that system, unless one comes to the platform of this varṇāśrama-dharma, four divisions, social divisions, and four spiritual divisions, and those divisions are made by Kṛṣṇa Himself, mayā sṛṣṭam, He says. That is natural. But by such institution we can gradually understand what is the aim of life.

varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

[Cc. Madhya 8.58]



Our... What is the aim of life? The aim of life is that we are now detached from God. This is our position. Material life means detached from God, detached from Kṛṣṇa. So this detachment is the cause of suffering.



mukha-bāhūru-pādebhyaḥ

puruṣasyāśramaiḥ saha

catvāro jajñire varṇā

guṇair viprādayaḥ pṛthak



We are different parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa, God, so we must act accordingly. Just like my hand. Hand is there. If the hand is in proper place, he can act nicely. But if I cut the leg and make hand or hand make the leg, then it is all lost. All lost. One must act according to his qualification. That, according to that qualification, the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, they are described in the Bhagavad-gītā. This brāhmaṇa means, these are the symptoms, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. This is human civilization. We must train people in such a way that we must see there what is his quality. According to quality. Just like a physician gives medicine according to the symptom of the disease, then it is cured. Not that any medicine. In the drug house, there are so many medicines. You cannot say "Any medicine will do." No. It is the physician who will pick up the real medicine and he'll administer to the patient. Then he'll be cured.



So this varṇāśrama-dharma means cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13], from the animal position of the human being, to bring him to the human position. That is varṇāśrama-dharma. Just (as in) school (or) college, to become graduate means to become distinguished from the fools and rascals. Similarly, human being does not mean the struggle for existence as the one big fish is eating another small fish, another is... No, no, that is not human. That is natural, but you have to rectify the natural position for the..., for realization of the utmost aim of life. That is human life. Not to treat like animals. Sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]. So that spiritual consciousness begins when one understands that he is soul; he is not this body, he is spirit soul, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. Brahman means the spirit soul. And there human civilization begins. Otherwise, anārya, anārya-juṣṭam. Kṛṣṇa, when Arjuna was declining to fight, He chastised him that "This denial is anārya-juṣṭam. It is befitting for the anārya, those who are not advanced. One must do his duty. You are a kṣatriya, your duty is to fight to give protection to the citizen, so why you are denying this?"

So here the example is given, jalaukasāṁ jale yadvan mahāntaḥ adanti. Adanti means swallows up. Similarly, when the Yadus became very powerful... Because they are descendants of Kṛṣṇa, who can be...? So they were fighting anywhere, conquering anywhere, and everywhere they were victorious. So that was bhū-bhārān. Bhū-bhārān means burden of the world. When one becomes extravagant and misuses his power, that is burden of the world. You cannot misuse your... You get power by the grace of God, by grace of Kṛṣṇa. If you misuse it, then you become a burden, a burden. As soon as there is burden, then it is dharmasya glāniḥ. Kṛṣṇa says, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. As soon as there is a misuse of power, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham, He comes. So Yadu-vaṁśa, Kṛṣṇa's dynasty, when Kṛṣṇa saw that they are becoming so powerful, that unnecessarily they are fighting, therefore to kill them, that fighting spirit was engaged for fighting amongst themselves, one another. Therefore they were all... Fighting, there is necessity; but if you misuse that fighting spirit...

Just like at the present moment the politicians, as soon as they see that they cannot manage things, in the country there is confusion, they declare some war so that the whole attention may be turned that side, and there will be no agitation of the internal dissatisfaction. This is diplomacy. This is diplomacy. We have seen it in Pakistan. As soon as they cannot rule over, they cannot, but they (indistinct), "Oh, the Hindus are our enemy. Kashmir, he has taken." Attention is diverted and they declare war, and again become defeated. So this kind of war is not required. This kind of war is not required. But war is there already, struggle for existence. Just like here, when Kṛṣṇa saw that the Yadu dynasty is becoming... On the strength of Kṛṣṇa, they have become so powerful that they (are) unnecessarily fighting, so Kṛṣṇa wanted that His family, may be..., it may not be degraded farther, so He wanted to kill them. And who can kill them? No outsider can kill them, they are Kṛṣṇa's descendants, that is not possible. Therefore yadūn yadubhir anyonyaṁ bhū-bhārān sañjahāra ha, they fighting amongst themselves, they reduced the burden of the world.

So it is... Kṛṣṇa is exhibiting how things are going on. As soon as there will be burdensome, there will be some war, pestilence, famine-and finished. And finished. You don't require to reduce population by contraceptive method. By nature's way, the wholesale it will be reduced, bhū-bhārān sañjahāra. By nature's way. Why should you commit sinful activities? You don't beget children unnecessarily and don't kill them. That is religion. That is civilization. Why should you unnecessarily produce children like cats and dog? Their śāstra says that don't become father, don't become mother if you cannot save your sons from death. This is the responsibility. This is father's, mother's, responsibility. Na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum, pitā na sa syāj jananī na sa syāt. One should not become, try to become father, one should not try to become mother if the parents cannot save the child from imminent death. That is the responsibility. And who is that father? Who is that mother? This is Vedic civilization. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that "I am a sannyāsī. I am not married, neither I am meant for marrying. But if I can produce Kṛṣṇa conscious children, I can marry hundred times." That is the responsibility. Don't produce cats and dogs; produce Kṛṣṇa devotees. Then you'll marry. Otherwise don't marry. This is Vedic injunction. Marriage is not meant for sense gratification. Marriage is meant for producing nice children, Kṛṣṇa devotees.

So that is our aim. Our aim is not to produce cats and dogs. There are so many cats and dogs, the world is not happy. Now there is need of producing nice children, sober, gentle, devotee of Kṛṣṇa, good brain, good character. These things are required. So they were not unwanted children, these Yadus. This is a make-show (indistinct) other. They came, they are all demigods, they descended just to fulfill Kṛṣṇa's mission. Kṛṣṇa's mission, Kṛṣṇa came down so all the confidential servants of Kṛṣṇa, they also appeared to help Him in different... So when Kṛṣṇa wanted to go, He wanted to go with the descendants also, who came to help Him. So this is a make-show that the Yadus fought amongst themselves. The real purpose is, Kṛṣṇa wanted to take them away. Otherwise, superficially, when one becomes unnecessarily powerful, disturbs the world situation, he's a burden. He's a burden. That kind of burden is vanquished by Kṛṣṇa's desire, will. There must be some catastrophe like war, pestilence, famine, and everything will be finished.

So our duty is, the human form of life, duty is that we should know that we are eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa and, forgetting our relationship, we have come to this material world, and there is struggle for existence, beginning aquatics, jalajā nava... There are nine hundred thousand species of aquatics. Who is that physiologist who can know nine hundred thousand species of aquatics? But in the śāstra you will find, exactly. It doesn't say nine hundred one, Or eight hundred ninety-nine. No. Nine hundred. Nine hundred thousand species, there are. So because we are in the material contact, and according to our desire, we are having different types of body-aquatics, trees, birds, like that. This is our botheration. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9], in this way you are... This is our problem. Therefore human civilization means when people are interested to solve the problems. That is human civilization. Otherwise animal. Struggle for existence. They... There is no human side, that is on the animal side, struggle for existence. Human life is not for struggle. To become sober, not like animals. The animals are engaged whole day and night for searching out food and sense gratification, sex. That is not human civilization.

Human civilization is meant for tapasya, tapasya. You should know what is my responsibility. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena ca damena ca [SB 6.1.13]. One should learn how to practice tapasya. Tapasya. This is tapasya, little tapasya. No illicit sex, no gambling, no meat-eating, and no intoxication, this is tapasya, little tapasya. Who is dying without meat-eating? We have got so many students. There are so many Vaiṣṇavas, they do not eat meat. Are they dying? This is only bad habit. But if you practice little... In the beginning it may be little troublesome. It is not troublesome. I am thinking... Just like one gentleman came, "We cannot give up meat-eating. I want, but I cannot." Practice. Abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena cetasā [Bg. 8.8]. Anything you practice, habit is the second nature. So in association of the devotee, if you try to practice this tapasya... Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa [SB 6.1.13], not to have sex life without any purpose, that is called brahmacārī. Brahmacārī does not mean celibacy. Brahmacārī means who does not use sex life for any other purpose than begetting nice children. He is brahmacārī.

So this is... Everything should be systematic otherwise there will be chaos. There will be chaos. Nobody will be happy and... That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, naraka eva kalpate: the whole world will be hell. That has become now. The whole world has now become hell. So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very important movement. It is overhauling the whole human, social, political, religious... So those who are engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they should be very, very responsible, sober, try to understand the situation and take the shelter of Kṛṣṇa, and everything will come very successful.

Thank you very much. (end)



731205SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.27

-

Los Angeles, December 5, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Now I am attracted to those instructions imparted to me by the Personality of Godhead [Govinda] because they are impregnated with instructions for relieving the burning heart in all circumstances of time and space." [SB 1.15.27]



Prabhupāda: Go on reading the purport.



Pradyumna: "Herein Arjuna refers to the instruction of the Bhagavad-gītā, which was imparted to him by the Lord in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. The Lord left behind Him the instructions of the Bhagavad-gītā not only for the benefit of Arjuna alone, but also for all times in all lands. The Bhagavad-gītā, being spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the essence of all Vedic wisdom. It is nicely presented by the Lord Himself for all who have very little time to go through the vast Vedic literatures, like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and Vedānta-sūtras. It is put within the study of the great historical epic Mahābhārata, which was especially prepared for the less intelligent class, namely the women, the laborers, and those who are worthless descendants of the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and the higher sections of the vaiśyas. The problem which arose in the heart of Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra was solved by the teachings of the Bhagavad-gītā. Again, after the departure of the Lord from the vision of earthly people, when Arjuna was face-to-face with being vanquished in his great acquired power and prominence, he wanted again to remember the great teachings of the Bhagavad-gītā just to teach all concerned that the Bhagavad-gītā could be consulted in all critical times, not only for solace from all kinds of mental agonies, but also for the way out of the great entanglements which may embarrass one in some critical hour. The merciful Lord left behind Him the great teachings of the Bhagavad-gītā so that one can take the instructions of the Lord even when He is not visible to material eyesight. Material senses cannot have any estimation of the Supreme Lord, but by His inconceivable power, the Lord can incarnate Himself to the sense perception of the conditioned souls in a suitable manner through the agency of matter, which is also another form of the Lord's manifested energy."



Prabhupāda: Just like we have no knowledge of Kṛṣṇa, conditioned soul. Therefore for our understanding, He is so merciful, He descends as arcā-mūrti. This Deity which we are worshiping, that is called arcāvatāra, incarnation of arcā. He's accepting our worship, our prayer, our everything. He has descended just suitable for our handling. That is His mercy. Therefore we should not consider that this arcā Kṛṣṇa is made of stone, as atheists will say, that "These foolish persons are worshiping... Heathens, they are worshiping." No, we are not worshiping stone. We are worshiping Kṛṣṇa. But that they do not know. Kṛṣṇa has appeared before us. Because at the present moment, we cannot see except stone and wood, therefore, suitable for our vision, He has appear in such a way. Otherwise how we can appreciate? Here... They are searching after what is God, but here is God. Here is God. Therefore in the śāstra it is forbidden, arcā, arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matir vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhiḥ. It is forbidden that when you worship Deity, you should not think that it is made of wood or stone or something else material. No. What is this material? Material is... Matter means energy of Kṛṣṇa. Just like the sunshine, or like the illumination of this light. It is the energy of this lamp. So it is not different. Similarly, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4], this earth, water, air, fire, anything material, that is expansion of His energy.



So He can accept your service through His energy. That is His omnipotency. That is called omnipotent. You cannot do anything of your personal affairs with your energy, but... You can sometimes do. Suppose if you have got money. Even being present on the spot, by spending money you can get the things done. The money will act for you. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa being omnipotent, He can take your service through His agency, through His potency. And potency means śakti. Śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ. Kṛṣṇa and His potency is not different. So Kṛṣṇa by His causeless mercy, He has appeared before you in a manner by which you can touch Him, you can handle Him, you can dress Him, you can give Him. This is Kṛṣṇa's mercy. It is not idol worship. Therefore it is forbidden. Don't think it is idol. Go on.

Pradyumna: "Thus the Bhagavad-gītā or any authentic scriptural sound representation of the Lord is also the incarnation of the Lord. There is no difference between the sound representation of the Lord and the Lord Himself. One can derive the same benefit from the Bhagavad-gītā as Arjuna did in the personal presence of the Lord."



Prabhupāda: You can derive the same benefit as Arjuna by reading Bhagavad-gītā. People say that Arjuna was enlightened because Kṛṣṇa was present before Him. But Kṛṣṇa is present before you also, by His words, by His sound representation. Just like Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, Kṛṣṇa's name, it is not different from Kṛṣṇa. Nāma, abhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.133]. Nāmi... Here in the material world the name and the person whose name, that is different because it is material. If you want water, this water substance or water is different from the name water. You cannot quench your thirst simply by chanting "Water, water." That is not possible. Because it is material. But you can realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. That is the significance of spiritual and material. Otherwise, how people are satisfied simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra? Let him chant some other name, material. No. You cannot chant more than three times. Then you will feel tired. But you can go on chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra for hundreds and millions of years. It will, still you will not feel tired. That is the difference. Therefore His name and He is not different. Abhinnatva.



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

[Cc. Madhya 17.133]



This is the shastric injunction, Nāma, the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, is abhinna, nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa. Nāma cintāma... Pūrṇaḥ śuddhaḥ, full, complete. Not that little less, no. Full. Pūrṇaḥ śuddhaḥ. And uncontaminated. Just like Kṛṣṇa is uncontaminated, similarly, His name is also uncontaminated. Pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya. Eternal. As Kṛṣṇa is eternal, name is also eternal. Pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto 'bhinnatvāt. Because they are not different one with another, so the most important word is deśa-kālārtha-yuktāni. Deśa, time and space. Bhagavad-gītā is... Because nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa is everywhere, similarly, Bhagavad-gītā can be appreciated in every country, every season, every circumstances. That is deśa-kālārtha-yuktāni. Then hṛt-tāpa upaśamāni ca. Hṛt-tāpa. There is a hṛt-tāpa. Hṛt means heart, and tāpa means... Real meaning is temperature, or temperature rooted. Just like agni-tāpa. Agni. Agni means fire, and tāpa, it has got temperature. So to a certain degree you can tolerate. But when the degree... Just like in India we have got temperature in summer season 120 degrees. Here, just like in your country, the temperature is less. In other country... The temperature in, I mean, the Middle East, the temperature is 135 degrees, Arabian countries.



So there are three tāpas, three kinds of miserable condition, this material world. That also can be taken, tāpa. Tāpa means suffering, excessive heat and cold. That is called tāpa. So hṛt-tāpopaśamāni ca. The teachings of Bhagavad-gītā... We are suffering always within the heart. As Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, that viṣaya viṣānale, divā-niśi hiyā jvale. Viṣaya. Viṣaya means this material enjoyment. So it is just like poison. The more we are entangled in material enjoyment... There is no enjoyment. It is suffering. But we are taking suffering as enjoyment. Just like in this winter season, we cover ourself very nicely with gloves, with overcoat. It is simply counteracting the suffering. But a man who has got a nice overcoat and gloves, he is thinking he is enjoying. This is māyā. He forgets that he is simply trying to counteract the suffering. Actually, he is suffering. But having a nice coat or nice place, he is thinking that he is enjoying. That is foolishness. That is called māyā. There is no enjoyment in this material world. Simply we are trying to counteract the suffering. This counteraction of suffering, we are accepting as enjoyment. So this material world means you must suffer. That is the position of the material world. Otherwise why you have come to material world? Just like in the prison life, how you can expect enjoyment there? But a man... Suppose a big politician is put into the jail and he is given a very nice, comfortable bungalow and everything, but he is in the jail. But he is thinking that "I am enjoying." He forgets that he is in the jail. He is in the jail. That is called ignorance, māyā. He is suffering and he is accepting. Just like the pig. He is eating stool, but he is thinking he is enjoying. This is going on.

So hṛt-tāpa. In this, I mean to say, ocean of suffering, viṣaya viṣānale, divā-niśi, the more we want to enjoy, the more sufferings enter. More suffering. You can understand. Just now we got this car, horseless car. But now there is a problem. They are thinking, "If there is no petrol available, then what will happen?" So this is material existence. Viṣaya viṣānale, divā-niśi... Anxiety. That anxiety is suffering, "What will happen? What will happen?" That is material existence. Sadā samudvigna-dhiyā. Always full of anxiety. This is material life. So Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says that viṣaya viṣānale, divā-niśi hiyā jvale: "The heart is burning on account of this material existence." Juṛāite nā kainu upāya. "But I did not try to find out the means by which I can get out of this." Golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmila kena tāya. The medicine is this Hari, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's teachings, Kṛṣṇa's name, Kṛṣṇa's glorification. That is the real medicine. But we have no attraction for these things. We are simply trying to counteract the suffering, and we are accepting this counteraction as enjoying. Bhagavad-gītā: haranti smarataś cittam.

So actually, if we want to enjoy life, then we should take the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa. We shall chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. That will give us relief from the blazing fire. Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam **. This is the only way. Otherwise...

So when Arjuna was too much perturbed by absence of Kṛṣṇa, he was simply remembering the instruction of Kṛṣṇa which he received in the Battle of Kurukṣetra.

Thank you very much. (end)



750306SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.27

-

New York, March 6, 1975



Nitāi: "Now I am attracted to those instructions imparted to me by the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, because they are impregnated with instructions for relieving the burning heart in all circumstances of time and space."



Prabhupāda:



deśa-kālārtha-yuktāni

hṛt-tāpopaśamāni ca

haranti smarataś cittaṁ

govindābhihitāni me

[SB 1.15.27]



So this word hṛt-tāpa upaśamāni... Hṛt means heart, and tāpa means miseries or burning, heat. Tāpa means burning heat. If there is fire and there is heat, sometimes it is intolerable. So hṛt-tāpa means the burning fire blazing within the heart. So that is always. Anyone who is in this material world, he has got this disease, burning fire within the heart, anyone. That means severe anxiety, everyone. Even a small bird, he is also full of anxiety. You give him some grains. It will come. It will eat. At the same time, it will look this way, that way, this way, full of anxiety. Although there is food, he is eating, still, there is anxiety, "Somebody may come, kill me." So everyone is full of anxiety. That is the material nature. Nobody can say "I have no anxiety." That is not possible. If he says like that, he is a liar. That is not possible. Is anyone here who can say that he or she has no anxiety? Of course, when you take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no anxiety. That is the distinction. Anxiety there is, but to relieve this anxiety one has to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise not. You cannot get relief. (child says, "Prabhupāda") Yes. (laughter) So you may say that "Sometimes we have got anxiety, and sometimes we are very nice." So even accepting that, Arjuna says, deśa-kāla-artha-yuktāni. Deśa, kāla, the time and space within this material world, and artha means purpose, everything, any time... Arjuna does not say that "sometimes." At any time, if we are materially attached, then this hṛt-tāpa must be. Hṛt-tāpa means burning fire, blazing fire within the heart. It will continue.



Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says that viṣaya-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jwale. This means anyone who is engaged in these material affairs, Viṣaya... Viṣaya means material necessities. Everyone has got material necessities: āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna, how to eat, how to sleep, where to sleep, where to get apartment, where to secure money to get food, and how to secure sex pleasure, where it is available, man or woman, and how to defend. "I have got so much bank balance. It may not be taken away. I have got this property." In this way everyone is suffering. That's a fact. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, viṣaya-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jwale: "The heart is burning." The same word. It is in simple Bengali, and this is in Sanskrit. Viṣaya-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jwale, juṛāite nā koinu upāy. So if a man simply goes on suffering like this, then he is not a human being. Human being means if there is suffering, he must try to alleviate it, to mitigate the suffering. That is human being.

That is... Nature gives us this human form of body, intelligence, that if there is danger, if there is anxiety, he tries to get out of it. The animals also do, but they cannot do very nicely. Just like animals are slaughtered. So they know when they are put into one, what is called, pound and they know that they will be slaughtered, but they have no means to get out of it. So the human being can do that. If I foresee, "There is some danger, I can make some way to get out of it." That is human intelligence. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says that "Although I had the intelligence to get out of these material anxieties, the blazing fire within the heart, but I did not take it." And what is that? Now, hari-nāma prema-dhana...

Devotees: Golokera...



Prabhupāda: Golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, rati nā janmilo kene tāy. This is the remedy. Golokera prema-dhana, this hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, this sound vibration, it is not material. Suppose if I would have advised my disciples that "You chant 'Mr. John, Mr. John, Mr. John,' " this movement would not have spread. (laughter) How long one can chant this "Mr. John, Mr. John"? Therefore it is the proof, that all over the world, we have got about hundred centers. Everywhere, hundred, two hundred, three hundred disciples are there. They're chanting, dancing, with Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Why? Because it is not material sound vibration. This is the proof. Don't think that Hare Kṛṣṇa chanting and chanting the name of Mr. John is the same, no. This is the proof. You can go on chanting twenty-four hours, Still, you will not feel tired. This is the golokera... This is the proof, that this hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, golokera prema-dhana, it is the property for loving. It is the thing which will lead you how to love God, prema-dhana. You will gradually develop your propensity to love Kṛṣṇa. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam: "All glories to the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra." Why? Now, bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam.



In this material life there is a fire always. Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni. Dāvāgni means the forest fire, the fire in the forest. Nobody goes to set fire in the forest, nobody has got any business to do that. But still, there is fire. It takes place. Everyone knows. Automatically, by the collision of dry branches of bamboo and others there is electricity and dry leaves that set fire, in this way, a big fire. So similarly, in this material world nobody wants that there may be fire and we all burn. No, nobody wants. But it happens. There is another Bengali song like that. Sukhera lāgiyā ei ghare bandhinu agune puriya gelun(?): "I constructed this house to live very happily. Unfortunately, there was set fire. Fire was set and everything finished." So this is material world. We should always know.

So Arjuna says that "When I remember the teachings of Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā, then it relieves me. Then it relieves me." Hṛt-tāpa upaśamāni. Hṛt-tāpa, that blazing fire within the heart, immediately becomes relieved. So that is also fact. Bhagavad-gītā... Whenever you are perplexed, you read Bhagavad-gītā you will immediately get relief. That's a fact. Gandhi also said that. Gandhi was a politician. Although he could not understand Bhagavad-gītā neither he could understand Kṛṣṇa, still, he said that "When I read, I get great relief." He was always very busy, so many political problems always coming. So there was no spiritual understanding of these politicians. Sometimes they take the spiritual shelter, so-called, for getting some benefit out of it so that his political movement may be increased or enhanced. So we do not wish to discuss, but Bhagavad-gītā, even if you read without any actual knowledge of the Bhagavad-gītā, still, you will feel relief. Still you will feel relief. Just like if you go to the fire, you will feel some warmth. That's a fact. Even you do not know how to enjoy fire, still, because you are near the fire, you will get some warmth. So Bhagavad-gītā is like that. Even if you do not understand, by simply hearing the words of Kṛṣṇa... Simply we chant this, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65], and gradually you do that...

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

[SB 3.25.25]



If we discuss Bhagavad-gītā amongst the societies of the devotee... That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, mad-bhakteṣu abhidhāsyati. Bhagavad-gītā should be discussed amongst the devotees. Sometimes we discuss Bhagavad-gītā amongst the non-devotees. That is due to higher order, higher order-Guru Mahārāja asked that "You go and speak." So we are doing that. Actually, Bhagavad-gītā is to be discussed amongst the devotees. So our hard task is that first of all we have to make one devotee and then let him understand Bhagavad-gītā, our double task. Because nobody wants to become devotee. So we are canvassing door to door, country to country, village to village, "Sir, please come in our temple. We shall give you nice prasādam. You simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and hear something about Kṛṣṇa." So still, people will not come. Still, they will not come. We have to canvass. We have to do so many things. That is the influence of māyā. Māyā is so strong that unless one is very much determined, māyā will be very strong for him.



So still, if we understand that this life is meant for understanding Kṛṣṇa or to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, if this much we understand, then also, our life is successful. But we do not take it seriously. We do not take it seriously. That is the difficulty. Actually, as Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, that viṣaya-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jwale, juṛāite nā koinu upāy, "My heart is always burning on account of this material condition of life, and I did not make any means to get out of this entanglement"... So everyone should be intelligent. Intelligent person will admit that his heart is always burning. That's a fact. Now, if we want to get out of it, then, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu advises, all the ācāryas advises, and here Arjuna also... Arjuna directly listened to Kṛṣṇa, and he says, "This is my practical experience, that when I..." He was a politician, a fighter. He had so many anxieties. So he used to remember the instruction given by Kṛṣṇa directly to him.

So that instruction and when we read Bhagavad-gītā, that instruction, these two instructions, they are not different. Don't think that "Kṛṣṇa was present before Arjuna, but in my presence there is no Kṛṣṇa. Simply I have got this book." But you should know that the book and the instruction there in the Bhagavad-gītā and Kṛṣṇa, they are absolute, one. There is no difference. We can take advantage of Kṛṣṇa's presence by reading Bhagavad-gītā.

I have narrated several times the story of a brāhmaṇa in South India. He was illiterate, and he was reading Bhagavad-gītā. So his friends, village friends, they knew that "This man is illiterate. How he can read Bhagavad-gītā?" So they were criticizing. "Hello, brāhmaṇa. How you are reading Bhagavad-gītā?" So he did not say anything because he knew that "These friends are criticizing me because I am illiterate. He knows." So when Caitanya Mahāprabhu came there, Caitanya Mahāprabhu was attracted. He was illiterate, and he was reading Bhagavad-gītā, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu was attracted. Just see. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu inquired, "My dear brāhmaṇa, what you are reading?" So he also could understand that "Here is a person who has not come to criticize me. He is serious." "Yes, sir, I am reading Bhagavad-gītā, but I am illiterate. I am illiterate." "Then what you are reading?" "No, I am simply turning the pages. I cannot read anything." "Then why you are reading if you cannot?" "No, my Guru Mahārāja ordered me. My Guru Mahārāja asked me that 'You shall read Bhagavad-gītā daily, eighteen chapters.' " Guru mahārāja knew that he is illiterate, but still ordered. This is called guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete koriyā aikya, ār nā koriho mane āśā **. This is called firm faith in guru. Guru ordered him that "You read." Guru must know him, that he is illiterate. So what he will read? Why guru is ordering him? But because he had firm faith in guru and he was trying to read, Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to see him. Just see. How this line is important: guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete koriyā aikya, ār nā koriho mane āśā **. Ār means anything more, you don't try to understand. Whatever your guru says, you just try to carry it out. So what is the next line? Guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete...

Puṣṭa-kṛṣṇa: Śrī-guru-caraṇe rati...



Prabhupāda: Śrī-guru-caraṇe rati, ei se uttama-gati **. Don't try to make very good advance by manufacturing your own way. Simply, śrī-guru-caraṇe rati, ei se uttama-gati. That is first-class. That is Vedic instruction. Vede gāy jāṅhāra carito. The Vedas says,

yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU 6.23]



To understand Vedic literature means one must have firm faith in Kṛṣṇa and firm faith in guru, not that "My guru is not so learned, so let me capture Kṛṣṇa directly." That is useless. That is useless. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. One can get the seed of the plant or creeper of bhakti, how? Guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpā. By the mercy of guru and by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, not that kṛṣṇa-kṛpā. First guru-kṛpā, then kṛṣṇa-kṛpā. So this brāhmaṇa attracted the attention of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was illiterate, and he could not read even one word. What is the truth in it? The same thing. Guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete koriyā aikya **. He took guru's order very seriously, that "My Guru Mahārāja has ordered me, and I must carry out. Never mind I cannot read. Let me open the pages and see. That's all." So he was doing that. So others criticized him that "This man is illiterate. What he is reading?" But Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not criticize. Caitanya Mahāprabhu inquired, "Oh, what you are reading, My dear brāhmaṇa?" So he explained, that "This gentleman has not come to criticize me." So Caitanya Mahāprabhu knew that "He is a perfect knower of Bhagavad-gītā." Still, He inquired, "Well, if you are not reading, then how you are crying? I see there are tears in your eyes. What is the meaning?" Then he admitted, "Yes, sir. Yes. That is." "Why you are crying?" "No, as soon as I take this Bhagavad-gītā in my hand a picture comes before me that Arjuna is sitting on the chariot ordering Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is carrying out his order and driving the chariot. So that makes me amazed. Therefore I am crying, that 'How Kṛṣṇa is merciful, that He accepted a menial service for His devotee. He is so kind.' " Caitanya Mahāprabhu immediately embraced him: "Yes, brāhmaṇa, your reading of Bhagavad-gītā is perfect." So it doesn't matter whether one is illiterate or literate. Everyone has got these ears. So we should hear from the realized person, guru Vaiṣṇava, not professional, no. That will not help us.



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



Tattva-darśinaḥ. Tattva-darśinaḥ means one has seen the truth, not superficially knowing. One who understood that this is the truth, so go there and submit there. Praṇipātena. Prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa nipātena. Fully surrender there and then question, then try to inquire if you cannot understand. First of all, first business is praṇipāta: "Sir, I surrender unto you." Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. Arjuna also did so. "My dear Kṛṣṇa, we are talking like friends. This will not solve the problem. Therefore I am submitting unto You as Your disciple." Śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam. "I surrender unto You. Now You can teach me." Because as soon as you accept guru, you have to hear him, surrender, full surrender. You cannot unnecessarily argue. Of course, if there is any doubt, you can question submissively. But not that, "I shall test my guru, how he is learned." That will not help. One must surrender. So tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā [Bg. 4.34]. Arjuna did that. Therefore Arjuna learned the Bhagavad-gītā, and it was always relief for him when he was perplexity. Haranti smarataś cittam. Haranti. What is that haranti? Hṛt-tāpa. Hṛt-tāpa, the blazing fire within the heart, within the core of the heart, immediately becomes minimized, haranti. Smarataś cittam. As soon as I remember, my consciousness, my heart, core of heart, becomes immediately relieved. How it is relieved? Why it is relieved? Govinda abhihitāni me: "Govinda instructed." Govinda means Kṛṣṇa. Govinda means Kṛṣṇa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Govinda.



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



Govinda is sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam. So that Govinda is instructing to Arjuna personally. How fortunate is Arjuna. But Kṛṣṇa is so kind that if you actually serious to understand... So just like this brāhmaṇa took instruction from his spiritual master and began to read Bhagavad-gītā, and he realized what is Kṛṣṇa, what is Govinda, similarly, if we take seriously the instruction of our spiritual master and try to read Bhagavad-gītā according to his instruction, then gradually we shall realize Kṛṣṇa. And if you simply realize Kṛṣṇa, what is Kṛṣṇa... That is not difficult. Kṛṣṇa is personally speaking about Himself. You haven't got to speculate like nonsense. Just like Gandhi speculated, "I do not believe that ever any person like Kṛṣṇa lived." Do you know that? This is Gandhi's statement, and he is mahātmā. The mahātmā's definition is there in the Bhagavad-gītā: mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. That is mahātmā, not to take advantage of Bhagavad-gītā. Of course, there are... So we do not want to criticize anyone, but sometimes it so happens. Big, big scholars, big, big politicians, they misguide people. That is the position of India. So many big, big leaders and politician and so-called swamis and yogis, they have exploited people by bluffing, and now India's position is: it is neither spiritual nor material. (laughter) That's all. Dhuno ke pap.(?)



Just like it is, the example is, if there are two boats and if you place your leg this boat and that boat, the position is very precarious. (laughter) Neither in this boat, neither that boat. Fully. So our position is that. We are learning technology, and the western countries, they are advanced in technology always hundred years more. Some years ago there was a big exhibition in Delhi. The show was that India had manufactured cycle and sewing machine. That is their proud. The cycle, I think, two hundred years ago (laughs) was manufactured in the western countries and so also sewing machine. So India was very much proud, that "Now we have got cycle." When they are manufacturing big, big 747 airplane, we are manufacturing cycle. (laughter) Just see. Medicine also. Technology, that is also technology. They are advanced in... They were meant for this... They have got brain. They can advance in material civilization because fully... So we cannot compete. We cannot compete, although it is, this technology is the business of the śūdras. Technology is not the occupation for the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, or vaiśyas, no. In our country still, there are blacksmith, weaver, oil crusher. Still they are in the village. But they are śūdras. So this technology means craftsmanship. That is not knowledge. That is not knowledge. Just like I do not know how this microphone is working. If it is wrong, some man who knows the art, he repairs it immediately. That does not mean he has got knowledge. That particular department, he has got knowledge, that's all. Knowledge means that one who knows God. That is knowledge. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. This is knowledge. So the western countries, they have taken-advancement of knowledge means manufacturing a big motor car. That's all. That is also good. But simply for manufacturing motor car, simply for driving motor car, if we forget our real business, God realization, then it is ruinous. Mūḍha. Mūḍha, then we become mūḍha.

This life, human life, it is not cats' and dogs' life. It is human life. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. One can realize the Absolute Truth if he is inquisitive. Brahma-jijñāsā. Just like you are advancing by inquiring. Jijñāsā. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. Jijñāsuḥ. This is human life. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. Uttama means which is not material, which is beyond material... Ut-tama . Ud-gata-tama yasmāt. Tama means darkness. Here they are so-called scholars, big big professor, scientist, and... but they are in the darkness, tama. Tama means darkness. They do not know what they are. Ask any scientist, any philosopher, "What you are?" He will say, "I am this body. I am Indian. I am American. I am white. I am black. I am this. I am that. I am Christian. I am Hindu." He will say. But all these designation is outward, external. Eho bāhya, āge kaha āra. But everyone is going on, big, big man, identifying himself with this body. So they are all fools, tama, in darkness.

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

[SB 10.84.13]



So according to Vedic civilization, any person, he may be very big man, but if he does not know beyond his body, then he is no better than animal. This is Vedic version. So we should not remain animal, this human life. As Arjuna said... There are so many problems. In the Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna was taught by Kṛṣṇa, yudhyasva: "Fight!" He never said, "Sit down, my dear Arjuna. You are My friend. Please sit down and sleep on this chariot, (laughter) and I will do everything. I am God." This is going on. "God will do everything for me, and I will sleep. That's all." This is going on. "If God does not do anything for me, then I don't want God. He must be my order-supplier." This is going on. This is going on in the name of religion. "God, give us our daily bread. If you don't supply, I don't want You." That's all. Everyone. So something is better than nothing. If one goes to God for asking bread, at least he is better than the rascals who at all do not go to God, atheist class. That is... They are admitted.



catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha

[Bg. 7.16]



So we should take this instruction of Arjuna that govinda abhihitāni me: "Govinda has narrated the mystery of Bhagavad-gītā unto me, and when I remember, not read, the instruction, immediately there is minimizing the..." Smarataś cittam, hṛt-tāpa upaśamāni. Upaśamāni means relief immediately. So read Bhagavad-gītā. Our this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is based on this Bhagavad-gītā. We do not manufacture anything. Yata mata tata patha. This is rascaldom. This is rascaldom, that if you manufacture some way for relief, that is not possible. Because you are imperfect, how you can manufacture? Your senses are imperfect. You cannot manufacture. If you manufacture, then you will simply waste your time. Then real religious life means dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19], to abide by the orders of Bhagavān, the Supreme Person. Śrī Bhagavān says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "You simply always think of Me, man-manāḥ, you become My devotee, worship Me, and offer your obeisances. Then you are sure that you are coming back to Me." Very simple method. If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa... and here is Kṛṣṇa present. Just offer Him obeisances and worship Him, decorate Him, give Him nice food. In this way you become devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Then your life is successful. Where is the difficulty? Anyone... We are opening so many temples. Why? This rascal will come, offer obeisances, hear something about Kṛṣṇa, offer something for worshiping Kṛṣṇa, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, So do that. Your life is successful. Thank you very much.



Devotees: Jaya! Haribol!



750307SB.NY

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Excerpt

-

New York, March 7, 1975



Prabhupāda: ...all these so-called material duties. Nirvṛta. Nirvṛto niyatārthaḥ. Niyata artha means that is your permanent duty. Artha. Artha means the aim of life or the achievement. Niyata. That is your real purpose of life. "Real purpose of" means that you are part and parcel of God, and He is waiting when you give up service, your manufactured service, and come to this service of Kṛṣṇa consciousness devotional service. Then what will be the result? Saṁsāra-hetūparamaś ca. Your this material life begun because you did not like to serve Kṛṣṇa. Saṁsāra. Saṁsāra means this material life. Saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam **. So it is... The spiritual master's duty is, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, that inform this, that "You are suffering in this material world. So because you wanted to be relieved from the suffering, so here is the message. Here is the message." Satataṁ kīrtayanto mām [Bg. 9.14]. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāro lāgi': "This māyā, this illusion, you want to get relief from this illusion. So I have brought medicine for you." Enechi auṣadhi. Auṣadhi means medicine. "Enechi I have brought," Enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāro, "to, just to drive away this māyā." What is that? Hari-nāma mahā-mantra lao tumi māgi'. Māgi': "You voluntarily take it." He doesn't force. That is not good. It is not force. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means on behalf of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we are canvassing from door to door, "My dear sir, you are very intelligent, but you are suffering always. Take this medicine. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Thank you very much.



Devotees: Jaya! Haribol! [break]



Prabhupāda: ...is not so complete, then he is given the chance of being born in a very rich family. Rich family means there is no question of economic problem. He is full, born with silver spoon. So without any worrying for his livelihood-he has already everything-he can simply chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. But there is no guidance. He thinks "I have got this money for nothing. Let me enjoy for sense gratification." That is the difficulty. He is in bad association. Otherwise he has got the best opportunity. Just like you. You are Americans. You have no scarcity. You have got this opportunity. So you chant this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement very seriously, and your life will be successful. Because you have no problem. Naturally you have got everything. So take this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and be happy in this life and next life. Thank you very much.



Indian woman: May I ask one question, please? In the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavata, chapter starting twenty-ninth to thirty-five, there is a beautiful description of this rāsa-līlā, and some scholars think that there is some work(?), imagination, in that. So will you please comment upon this?



Prabhupāda: Because they are rascals. We are not commenting on rascals. (laughter) Why do you jump to rāsa-līlā? That is another rascaldom. Bhāgavata, there is twelve cantos. And this rāsa-līlā is described in the thirty-fifth chapter of Tenth Canto. Why you jump there?



Indian woman: Because I got all the stages of bhakti in Bengal Vaiṣṇavism.



Prabhupāda: No. Bengal Vaiṣṇava is not foolishism. You have... First of all you have to understand Kṛṣṇa. Then go to understand what is Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā. You do not understand Kṛṣṇa. Why you jump over His activities?



Indian woman: Well, I was given that work to do for research.



Prabhupāda: So some foolish man has given you like that. (laughter) Yes. You should ask him that "You, Mr. Rascal, (laughter) why you have given, 'jump over to here?' Why not other?" That Kṛṣṇa, to understand Kṛṣṇa, the Bhāgavata begins, athāto brahma jijñāsā, janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ... [SB 1.1.1]. You know Sanskrit, I think.



Indian woman: Yes, I know.



Prabhupāda: So, do you understand this verse?



Indian woman: But this is from first verse from Brahma-sūtra, right?



Prabhupāda: No, no, Brahma-sūtra and first verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Do you understand this Bhāgavatam, this śloka?



Indian woman: Not actually.



Prabhupāda: Then why do you jump over there? Education means from the beginning. Therefore a small child, he wants to be educated. He immediately goes to the M.A. class? Or he learns ABCD? So therefore those who have given you this task, they are not realized souls. All fools and rascals.



Indian woman: (giggles) Thank you very much.



Prabhupāda: Yes. Yes. First of all you understand two plus two equal to four. Then you go to higher mathematics. And all of a sudden higher mathematics? What is this? Is that very good intelligence? You have questioned already. Any other? What is that?



Devotee (1): In Bhagavad-gītā when it states that "Supersoul," in American terms is this known as your astral body?



Prabhupāda: Astral body means mind, intelligence, ego. This is astral body. And Supersoul is soul, Supreme Soul. Hmm?



Devotee (2): Would you say something about the mercy of Lord Caitanya's saṅkīrtana movement?



Prabhupāda: Yes, He says, paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. So you follow His advice and you will get, become victorious. So I will advise you not to make research in that way. (laughter)



Indian woman: Well, I got my degree doing that research.



Prabhupāda: Yes, that degree is there. (laughter)



Indian woman: Well, but Lord Kṛṣṇa still helped me, you know, whether I was right or wrong.



Prabhupāda: Huh?



Indian woman: I still got His grace and help.



Prabhupāda: Well, when you go to the fire, the heat is there. (laughter) But the temperature may be different. Anyway, some way or other, if you go to the heat, fire, you'll get some heat. But that temperature may be different. Hmm?



Devotee (3): How can one rid oneself of sex desire if one continues to chant, continuously chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and is still being plagued by desire for sex?



Prabhupāda: Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa seriously. The examples are there. Therefore Haridāsa Ṭhākura, he was chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, and some envious person engaged some very beautiful prostitute to drag him. But she failed. Chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa is so strong. At mid of night beautiful prostitute, young, she went to entice him. But Haridāsa Ṭhākura said, "That's all right. Your proposal is very nice. Please sit down. Let me finish my rounds." (laughter) So she sat down, and morning, there was morning. So Haridāsa Ṭhākura said, "My dear girl, I am very sorry. I could not finish. So this night we shall finish." In this way, after three nights, the prostitute fell down on his feets, "Sir, I came with this purpose. I was induced by such and such person. So I am offender. Please excuse me and give me your favor." So Haridāsa said, "Yes, I knew that. But because you came to me, I wanted to do something good for you. And therefore I stayed here for three nights just to convert you. Now you are so lucky. So whatever you have got, you distribute it to the brāhmaṇas, and you take one cloth and sit down here before the Tulasī tree and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Hmm?



Mahāmāyā: Śrīla Prabhupāda, is Kṛṣṇa in our heart, in the heart of the body and in the heart of the spirit soul?



Prabhupāda: Yes.



Mahāmāyā: In His two-handed form and in His four-handed form, is He in our heart?



Prabhupāda: In the heart you are also there. In the medical science the every energy is coming from the heart. Heart fails; then that means the spirit is not there. Heart fails means the spirit soul and the Supersoul goes away. That is heart fail.



Devotee (4): Prabhupāda, what does it mean to chant seriously?



Prabhupāda: Without offense. You know there are ten kinds of offense? That's all right. (end)





731206SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.28

-

Los Angeles, December 6, 1973





Pradyumna: Translation: "Sūta Gosvāmī said, Thus being deeply absorbed in thinking of the instructions of the Lord, which were imparted in the great intimacy of friendship, and in thinking of His lotus feet, Arjuna's mind became pacified and freed from all material contamination."



Prabhupāda:



sūta uvāca

evaṁ cintayato jiṣṇoḥ

kṛṣṇa-pāda-saroruham

sauhārdenātigāḍhena

śāntāsīd vimalā matiḥ

[SB 1.15.28]



This is our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that if constantly our mind is engaged in thinking of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa... Thinking begins from the lotus feet, not all of a sudden... (child makes sounds) (aside:) Stop this child. You cannot think of Kṛṣṇa all of a sudden on the top. This is the process. In the Second Canto you'll find we have to think of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto and Second Canto are the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Then you gradually rise. When you are accustomed to think of Kṛṣṇa, that is called transcendental meditation. At any time, at any moment, if you immediately meditate, you'll see the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. That is transcendental meditation. Then gradually rise to think of this portion, this portion, this portion and, at last, the smiling face. That smiling face is compared with the Tenth Canto, Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is explained.



So Arjuna was disturbed in so many ways, but as soon as he began to think of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, (Sanskrit), immediately everything became pacified. This is the process. This transcendental consciousness or transcendental meditation, immediately, without any delay, for a moment you'll feel completely pacified. Therefore Kṛṣṇa advises (Sanskrit). "Always..." Man-manāḥ, "Always engage your mind upon Me." This Deity worship means to train the neophytes devotees how to concentrate upon the form of Kṛṣṇa, especially His lotus feet. That will make our life pacified always, śānta, śānta, pacified, peaceful. Another point is, sauhārdenātigāḍhena, very deep intimacy. We have got already our relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati [Bg. 5.29]. We are seeking after friends who can give me some benefit, who can give me some peace of mind. You are reading so many books, so many..., consulting so many philosophers, scientists, searching out peace of mind. But we are forgetting that our real suhṛt, friend, is Kṛṣṇa. Suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām.

Actually that is a fact, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. The example I have given many times. Just like this finger is part and parcel of my body. So the finger is always happy when it is attached to this body. It is very practical. Try to understand. If the finger is cut and separated from this body, then it will be called somebody's finger. Everyone will see the finger falling on the ground. Somebody will say, "Yes..." Somebody, if he knows that it is that man's finger. But this finger is useless. It is simply name "finger." That you have to understand. The finger's value is so long it is attached with the body. As soon as it is separated from the body, it is useless. You can call it finger. Similarly, our societies, human society is divided into so many departments. Generally, it is divided into four classes-intelligent class, administrative class, productive class and worker class, the whole human society. There are certain men who are very intelligent. They are scientists, philosopher, writers, thinker. There are so many department. So similarly, there are politicians, diplomats. Similarly, there are industrialists, agriculturalists and general worker. They are neither intelligent nor administrator, nor producer, but simply worker. You give them some money and they are satisfied. So that is natural division of a society. And you call it by different names. But scientifically the division is already there.

So in human society the central point is Kṛṣṇa, central point is Kṛṣṇa. If we forget Kṛṣṇa, this intelligent class of men, this administrative class of men, these productive class of men, the worker class of men, they're all useless. They're all useless. If by your intelligence you cannot find out with whom you are intimately related, then what is the value of your intelligence? That kind of intelligence a dog has also got. "Where is something to eat? Where is something to mate?" The dog has that, eating, sleeping, mating and defending. This intelligence the dog has got. And if you have got the same intelligence without utilizing your intelligence to find out the Supreme, with whom you are so intimately related, then what is the value of your intelligence?

So this is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are trying to utilize intelligence to find out the supreme cause, the Supreme, with whom we are very intimately related. Because we are part and parcel, the same example. Just like this finger is very intimately related with this body. But if it is separated it has no value. But again if there is possibility to join this finger with this body, then again it begins its value. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are now separated from Kṛṣṇa. We have forgotten Kṛṣṇa. This is our position. Although I'm intelligent, very intelligent, so-called intelligent for eating or sleeping or for having sex life intelligence. Just like there the scientists are applying intelligence for abortion. What is this intelligence? To give facility for sex life, that's all. What is this intelligence? Killing the poor child within the womb. Is that very good intelligence? No. But that intelligence is for giving facility to sex life. That's all. They are so-called scientists, intelligence. What is that intelligence? Discover atomic bomb. What is the effect? To kill. But they are dying, what is the credit for you? They're already dying, naturally dying, dying out of want for food, dying in famine, in pestilence. Then what you have discovered? This is called intelligence. This intelligence is described in the Bhagavad-gītā, māyayāpahṛta-jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. They are advertising themselves as intelligent, but real intelligence is taken away. Real intelligence is that we are advancing in science, in education, in motorcars and motorcars everything. But where is our peace? Where is śānti? That is intelligence.

That intelligence must be utilized to find out where is really śānti, peace. That is intelligence. That is described, sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, yayātmā suprasīdati [SB 1.2.6]. If you want actually peace, then your intelligence should be utilized for searching out the Supreme and your relation with Him. As soon as you find out... Just like you have lost your father, if you find out your father, immediately your relationship with father is revived. There is no question. "Here's my father." And father says, "Here is my son." Because the relationship is very intimate. Son may go out for years together, but as soon as he comes back home he sees his father, mother, and that original intimacy immediately revived.

So we have got that intimate relation. So when we come to that position to understand our intimate relationship with God, or Kṛṣṇa, that is called svarūpa-siddhi, svarūpa-siddhi. Svarūpa-siddhi means realization of perfection, svarūpa-siddhi. So here Sūta Gosvāmī says sauhārdena gāḍhena, śānta. If an old friend meets another old friend, they become very much delighted. Similarly, if the father meets the lost child, he becomes very delighted and the child also becomes delighted. The husband, wife separated, again they meet. So they become very delighted. It is quite natural. The master and servant after many, many years, if they again meet, they become very delighted. So we have got our relationship with Kṛṣṇa in so many ways, śānta, dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, mādhurya. Śānta, śānta means neutral, simply to understand the Supreme. Dāsya means a step forward. Just like we say "God is great." That is śānta, to appreciate the greatness of God. But there is no activity. But when you go step forward, that "God is great, so I am serving so many society, friendship, loves, cats, dogs and so many I'm loving. Why not let me love the greatest?" that is called dāsya. Simply to realize God is great that is also very good. But when you voluntarily go forward, "Now why not serve the great?" Just like from ordinary service, those who are engaged in service, they want to try to change from the inferior service to the superior service. Service is there. But superior service is somebody gets government service. He thinks it is very nice. So similarly, as we serve, when we desire to serve the great, that will give us peaceful life. That is śānta, dāsya.

Then service with friendship. Service, master and servant giving service, but when the servant becomes very intimate there is friendship. I've seen it practically in Calcutta. The Dr. Bose, his driver was his best friend. When he would sit on the car, he would talk all his mind with the driver. So this driver, he became his intimate friend. All confidential talks with driver. It happens so. If the servant becomes very confidential, the master discloses his mind. He talks with him what to do. So this is called platform of friendship. And again farther advancement... Just like relationship with father and son, mother and son. This is called vātsalya, and at last conjugal love. So in this way we are related with Kṛṣṇa somehow or other. In veneration, in servitude, as friend, as paternal affection, or as conjugal lover You see. So we have to revive that. And as soon as you revive any one of them, intimacy, then we become happy, because that is eternal. The same example... The finger, so long is separated, it is not happy. As soon as it is joined it is happy. Similarly, we have got our eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Now we are separated, but as soon as we join with him again we become yenātmā suprasīdati.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is beneficial for everyone just to try to revive your original consciousness. That is already there, nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness is eternally a fact. Otherwise you European, American boys and girls, you, three or four years ago, you did not know what is Kṛṣṇa. Why you are so much attached to Kṛṣṇa? Why you are attached? Unless you are attached to Kṛṣṇa, you cannot sacrifice your valuable time in this temple or for preaching Kṛṣṇa's glory. You have developed a love for Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise nobody is so fool that he's wasting time. No. How it is possible? One may say that Kṛṣṇa is Indian, Kṛṣṇa is Hindu. So why the Christians are interested? Are they Hindu? No. Kṛṣṇa is neither Hindu nor Muslim nor Christian. Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa. And you are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. This understanding-"I'm Hindu," "I'm Muslim," "I'm Christian," "I'm American," "I'm Indian"-these are all designations. Actually I am spirit soul, ahaṁ brahmāsmi. And Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Brahman, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12].

So we have got intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa. That is eternally fact. Simply we have to revive. Śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya. We have to create. Just like the young man likes to love a young woman and the young woman likes to love a young man. That is natural. That is natural. But when they meet together, it is revived. It is not that something new imposition. It is there. But by chance or anyway, when they are in contact, the loving propensity increases. The love increases. So our relationship with Kṛṣṇa, that is natural. That is not unnatural. Nitya-siddha. Nitya-siddha means it is eternally fact. Simply it is covered. It is covered. That covering has to be taken away. Then we are immediately in relationship with Kṛṣṇa, in natural way. That is perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So here it is said that sauhārdena ati-gāḍhena. Very deep. There are different types of sauhārga, friendship, but there is very intimate, deep friendship. So as soon we revive our Kṛṣṇa consciousness, our deep relationship with Kṛṣṇa as servant, as friend, as paternal relationship or conjugal love... That is already there. Just like this finger. Finger has got already it's place. It is separated. But if there is any physician or surgeon, he can simply put exactly in the place, then it works, immediately. Immediately work. So similarly, we have to place ourself exactly in the position in which we are related with Kṛṣṇa. Then our life is successful, immediately. Immediately successful. Nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti sādhya kabhu naya, śravaṇādi... And that can be accomplished beginning with hearing, hearing. This is the beginning. We are inviting persons to come to hear about Kṛṣṇa from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from Bhagavad-gītā. These are called kṛṣṇa-kathā, kṛṣṇa-kathā, the message of Kṛṣṇa or the words of Kṛṣṇa. That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu's cult, that...

What is His cult? Cult is, He says

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

[Cc. Madhya 7.128]



Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa. You become a spiritual master under my order, under His order. Don't manufacture yourself. Under the order of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. That is called paramparā system, one who is following in disciplic succession the order of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. And what is the order of Caitanya Mahāprabhu? Yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Don't (be) advising your rascaldom. Kṛṣṇa-upadeśa, what Kṛṣṇa has said, you just tell him. You become spiritual master. That's all. It does not become very difficult to become spiritual master. The rascals, they fail, because they do not say anything which Kṛṣṇa says. He manufactures something. He wants to take the place of Kṛṣṇa. This rascaldom will never make you happy. You have to follow as Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Then you become guru. To become guru is not at all difficult, provided you follow the right instruction of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Then everyone can become, expand, expand. You have learned something about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, now you rightly distribute them, then you will increase your group. But if you want to manufacture something of your own concoction, that will not act. That will not... That will be gramophone. No. [break]



...actually penetrating, āpani ācari prabhu jīvere śikhāya. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that you have to act accordingly as it is instructed, āpani ācari, then you can teach others. If you do not act yourself, your words will have no value. [break] ...cut. Evaṁ paramparā prāptam [Bg. 4.2], if you have got connection with the original powerhouse, then there is electricity. Otherwise it is simply wire. What is the value? Simply wiring will not help you. The connection must be there. And if you lose the connection, then it is of no value. Therefore Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means you have to keep yourself always connected with the original powerhouse. Then wherever you'll go, there will be light. There'll be light. If you're disconnected, there will be no light. The bulb is there; the wiring is there; the switch is there. Everything is there. That's how Arjuna is feeling, that "I am the same Arjuna. I am the same Arjuna who fought in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. I was known as so great a warrior, and my bow is the same bow and my arrow is the same arrow. But now it is useless. I could not defend myself because disconnected with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is no longer." Therefore he began to remember the words of Kṛṣṇa which was taught to him in the Battle of Kurukṣetra.

Kṛṣṇa is not different from His words. That is absolute. What Kṛṣṇa said five thousand years ago, if you catch up those words again you're immediately connected with Kṛṣṇa, immediately. This is the process. Just see Arjuna. He says, evaṁ cintayato jiṣṇoḥ kṛṣṇa-pāda-saroruham. When he began to think of Kṛṣṇa and His instruction as..., in the battlefield, immediately he become śānta, peaceful. Immediately pacified. This is the process. We have got intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa, eternally. It is not artificial. Therefore if you keep ourself always connected with Kṛṣṇa, there will be no more disturbance. Peaceful. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. If you get that position, then that is the highest benefit, highest gain, yaṁ labdhvā ca, then you will not desire for any other gain. You'll perceive that I have got the highest gain. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ, yasmin sthitaḥ... And if you keep yourself fixed up in that position, then guruṇāpi duḥkhena na [Bg. 6.20-23], even the heaviest type of calamities, you'll not be disturbed. That is peace. That is peace. Not that little pinching, you're disturbed. If you're actually fixed up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, you'll not be disturbed in the greatest form of dangerous condition. That is the perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



731207SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.29

-

Los Angeles, December 7, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Arjuna's constant remembrance of the lotus feet of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa rapidly increased his devotion, and as a result all the trash in his thoughts subsided." [SB 1.15.29]



Prabhupāda: So material existence means full of anxieties. This is the sum and substance of material existence. Everyone is full of anxieties. Not only humans. Just like Karandhara was speaking, there are so many bad news. What is that? Where is Karandhara?



Karandhara: Energy crisis, food shortage.



Prabhupāda: Yes, energy crisis, food shortage, and what else?



Karandhara: Economic turmoil.



Prabhupāda: Hm. And even Mr. Nixon is in such exalted post, he's also full of anxiety, when he'll be kicked out. You see. So find out any man who is not in anxiety. Not only human being but also animals, birds, beasts-everyone. That is the symptom of material existence, anxieties.



So spiritual life means anxiety-less. This is the difference between material life and spiritual life. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54], in the Bhagavad-gītā it is described what is spiritual life. As soon as you are identified with the Absolute Truth, Brahman, then symptoms will be prasannātmā, jubilation: "Oh, I do not belong to this material world. I belong to the spiritual world. I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Why should I suffer so many things?" That is jubilation. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. The prasannātmā means na śocati na kāṅkṣati. He has no lamentation, no hankering. Here people are always full of anxieties because they have got hankering, "I want this. I want that." And there is lamentation. What they possess, if it is lost, they cry, "Oh, my things are lost." And what they do not possess, they hanker. So their anxiety is there, either he possesses or not possesses. This is material anxiety. If you have no money, then you will hanker after money, "How to get money, how to get money, how to get money?" And when you get money, then how to utilize it, how to, where to keep it, in the bank, or in the house, or who will take away? Somebody will take away. So where is anxiety-less? You possess or not possess, the real disease is anxiety. So when one becomes brahma-bhūta [SB 4.30.20], self-realized, identified with the Absolute Truth, then he has no more anxiety. This is the best education, when you become anxiety-less. That is perfection of education.

So when Prahlāda Mahārāja was enquired by his father that "What nice thing you have studied, my dear boy, in your school?" so he replied, "My dear father, the best education I have received, how to become anxiety-less." That's all. Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehinām. "Not only for me, but for everyone. But you will not understand, my dear father, because you are demon number one." (laughter) He is addressing his father, asura-varya, asura-varya. Asura means demon, and varya, varya means the first-class. (laughter) He is not addressing his father as "My dear father," "My dear best of the atheists." Therefore his father was very angry, "This child, he talks with me on equal level and does not fear me. Kill him!" Asura. He is prepared to kill his son even, if he does not agree with him. You see. We are also prepared. If one is not devotee, if he is son, we can kill him. The same. But our is for Kṛṣṇa, and the asuras is for himself. That is the difference. He wants to do everything for his personal satisfaction, and we want to do everything for Kṛṣṇa's satisfaction. That is the difference. The same propensities are there, but when it is applied for Kṛṣṇa, then it is purified, and when it is applied for personal self, it is impure. This is the difference.

So Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "The best education is that which makes one anxiety-free." That is best education. Now where is that education? Is there any education throughout the whole world, in so many universities, especially in your country there are nice, very, very... Rather, they have created so much anxieties that the boys, they are frustrated. They are giving up everything, becoming hippies. Where is anxiety-less? They increase anxiety. Increase anxiety. Tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ sadā samudvigna-dhiyām. "My dear father, the best of the asuras, I think that anyone who has accepted this material body is full of anxieties." Asad-grahāt. Asad-grahāt means..., asat means temporary. Because he has accepted a body which is temporary, he is full of anxieties. That is the real problem. We, if we want to be anxiety-less, no anxiety, then we have to refuse to accept this material body. Otherwise there is no possibility. All anxieties are due to this material body. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja said, tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt [SB 7.5.5].

This is the problem. Now somehow or other, we have come in contact with this material body. We, "I am not this material body, you are not this material... We are soul." That realization required, that "I am not this material body. Therefore I am not American, I am not Indian, I am not white, I am not black. I am pure soul." Ahaṁ brahmāsmi. This is the real business of human society. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. The swine is enquiring, "Where is stool? Where is stool? Where is stool?" But a human being is also engaged for that purpose, "Where is stool?" or "Where is food?" Stool is his food, and we are also, whole day and night with motorcar going this or, "Where is food? Where is food?" Divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā [SB 2.1.3]. The whole day is spent, so many motorcars going this way and that way. What is the business? "Where is money? Where is food? Where is shelter?" And as soon as you get shelter, money, and food, kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā. Then "How to feed my children, how to feed my wife, how to feed my country, how to..., society?" That's all. This is anxiety. This is anxiety. They... Nidrayā hriyate naktam. At night they want to become anxiety-less by sleeping or by sex life. They want to forget anxiety. This is their business. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. They think that "If I sleep, then I shall be... Let me drink so at night there will be very deep sleep." That is not possible. You dream very ferocious dream, you are dreaming. So... And sex life, that is also temporary free.

So these are not the methods. Method is, here it is recommended by Arjuna, vāsudeva-anudhyānam. Anudhyānam. Anu means constantly, and dhyānam means meditation. They have manufactured so many meditation-without Vāsudeva. That so-called transcendental meditation club and yogāsana, but go there, what you meditate upon? Zero. That is there. They cannot say, "What is that meditation? And where is that transcendental meditation?" No rascal will be able to explain. But they'll call big, big words, "Transcendental meditation." And what is that transcendental meditation? Please explain. "Oh, that cannot be explained." You see. Is it not? But we have got (indistinct), vāsudeva-anudhyānam. You just say. Vāsudevāṅghry-anudhyāna-paribṛṁhita-raṁhasā. Here is Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. You come here and see, very minutely, how Vāsudeva is dressed nicely, how He is playing on His flute, how He is situated with His eternal consort, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, how He is enjoying her company. So nice thing for meditation. But why you are after zero? (laughter) Just see the rascaldom. Here is such nice object for meditation, and they are trying to meditate upon zero. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā says, kleśaḥ adhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām. Kleśa, that "Trouble is more." We can meditate upon Kṛṣṇa, immediately. We are constantly seeing Kṛṣṇa here. So as soon as I close my eyes, I see Kṛṣṇa. That is not very difficult. Anything you see, you'll be able to immediately have the form within your heart, immediately. So there is no difficulty, but they will create some difficult task. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā (says), kleśaḥ adhikataras teṣām. To fix up the mind on Vāsudeva, or Viṣṇu, that is also difficult. But those who are trying to fix up their mind on zero, their position is more difficult, adhikataram. Adhikataram means more.

So people are voluntarily accepting some nonsense method, and they are not happy. That is their misfortune. Misfortune. Narādhama. The, everything is there, but because they do not know... Duṣkṛtina, narādhama. Duṣkṛtina, duṣkṛtina means misfortunate, or always engaged in sinful activities. They'll not meditate upon Vāsudeva; they'll meditate on something, some color, some zero, or something like that. We do not know what kind of meditation there is. But real meditation, recommended in the Vedas, dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Yogi. Yogis see the Supreme Personality of Godhead by meditation. Meditation, dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā, mind is absorbed in the Supreme Personality. That is the real process of yoga system and meditation-to see the form of Viṣṇu. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā, this is the recommended process, standard recommended process.

So here, if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa-Kṛṣṇa recommends also that, man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is nothing, just to train people how to think of Kṛṣṇa and how to become devotee of Kṛṣṇa. That's all. So you may become devotee... But you will become devotee. If you think of Kṛṣṇa, naturally you will become devotee. So... But think of Kṛṣṇa, is it very difficult task? Very simple, very easy, even a child can do it. Here is Kṛṣṇa. You can think of. So you go on thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, you will be attached. You will be attached. You will be attached. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. And thinking of Kṛṣṇa in association of the devotees. Not alone, then you will go to hell. Alone will not do. Association is so strong that anyone who is coming to our association, we..., not that we are everyone teaching, but by association, he wants to become devotee. By association, automatically. So the association is so powerful. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says,

tāṅdera caraṇa-sevi-bhakta-sane vāsa

janame janame haya ei abhilāṣa



He is praying, "My dear Lord, this is my ambition, birth after birth." What is that? "That to be engaged in the service of the ācārya guru, and in the association of devotees. This is perfection." Janame janame haya ei: "This is my desire. I don't want to stop my birth, but simply I want that I may take birth-it doesn't matter-but bhakta-sane vāsa, let me live with the devotees." That is the...



Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says,

kīṭa-janma hau yathā tuwā dāsa

bahir-mukha brahma-janme nāhi āśa



He says that "If I forget You and take by birth as Lord Brahmā, I don't want it. I don't want it." What is the use of taking a birth like Brahmā? "But I shall like to take my birth as even a small insignificant insect, where a devotee is there." This is the ambition of devotee. "I shall prefer to become an insect." Because there are different varieties of living entities, beginning from Brahmā down to the insect, insignificant. In the middle, there are so many varieties-aquatics, trees, plants, demigods, and men, human being. So many thing. So this is the end and one end to another. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl... Kīṭa-janma, insignificant ant, nobody cares for, and Brahmā is very important, supreme person within the... So Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that "I will not prefer a birth like Brahmā if I forget You. But I will prefer to become an insect if I remain with Your devotee." Because if one remains with a devotee, he will not forget Kṛṣṇa. That is the advantage. Just like when you go, people address you, "Hare Kṛṣṇa." Oh, it is very great benefit. Automatically they chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. We have seen it all over the world. And when I was going from London to Nairobi, we stopped at Athens, the dead of night. We are in the..., what is called? That transit room.



Devotee: Transit lounge.



Prabhupāda: Yes, lounge. So as soon as they saw us, "Hare Kṛṣṇa!" You see. So this is advantage. Aho bata śva-paco 'to garīyān yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam. Even a dog-eater chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, he becomes glorified.



So this chance should be given. Let them chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, either willfully, or jokingly, or any way, let him chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. This is the movement. Let him chant once, let his tongue utter this transcendental vibration, Hare Kṛṣṇa, his life will be successful. It is such nice movement. You haven't got to do anything. Simply you come here and see Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, you will be benefited. It is very easy. Su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam [Bg. 9.2]. And once you get the impression of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for meditation, and if you increase, then life, you are success. Life is successful. Because as soon as you become little inclined to see Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa within your heart, that means you have developed His love. Just like if you love somebody, you want to close your eyes and see his face, his..., your child, or your lover. Similarly, as soon as you practice this, how to see, meditate upon Kṛṣṇa, that means you develop. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. Then gradually it will increase, and you will be perfect. It is very easy. This process, Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so easy, and so pleasant, anyone can take. There is no difficulty. And if you become Kṛṣṇa consciousness, completely, always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, bahu anudhyānam, always, anudhyānam, thinking of Kṛṣṇa, thinking of Kṛṣṇa-anyone can do it-then you become perfect. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. That is the problem. Our, what is that problem? Problem is that we are full of anxiety. Why you are full of anxiety? Because you have accepted this material body. So if you stop accepting material body, there is no anxiety. That can be done by vāsudeva-anudhyānam, constantly thinking of Kṛṣṇa.

So you haven't got to pay any price. You are not losing anything. But you are becoming a great, perfect man. Why do you, don't you accept this process, Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Why you are after something, false thing? Just see how unfortunate people are in this Kali-yuga. They will not accept the real thing without any payment, without any loss. Everything is gain. They will accept something nonsense and go to hell. Just see. This is Kali-yuga. The Kali-yuga is so powerful that it will not allow you to accept the real thing. You will be after non-real thing and waste your time and valuable life. This life is meant for Kṛṣṇa realization. It is not meant for anything, any other business. Therefore Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings, hari hari biphale janama goṅāinu: "My dear Lord, I have simply wasted my time." Why? Manuṣya-janama pāiyā rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā. "I got this valuable human form of life but I did not worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. This is my fault." Jāniyā śuniyā viṣa khāinu, "It is just like knowingly, I have taken poison."

So anyone who is not taking to Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as Kṛṣṇa advised, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66], he is simply drinking poison. Drinking poison. That's all. And what is the effect of poison? You will die. Not only this life, life after life, bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. He will accept this life, again he'll give up, again another body, again another. And that you do not know. There is no guarantee what kind of body you are going to get. But they are so rascals, they do not understand that "I am going to get another body." And there are so many varieties of body. If I get the body of a tree, now standed up for seven thousand years... How much risk we are taking. But all this risk can be avoided in this human form of life simply by thinking of Vāsudeva, simply by thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Why people are reluctant? This is their misfortune. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā says, ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness can be accepted only by the most fortunate person. Not less fortunate, alpa-medhasa. Those who have got little brain, or little fortunate, they cannot. They cannot. Sukṛtina. Sukṛtina. Sukṛtina means very fortunate, very pious. And duṣkṛtina cannot take it. Vāsudeva..., thinking of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is very easy, but those who are sinful, they cannot take to it. That is the difficulty.

Therefore we say, "Stop these four pillars of sinful life: illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling." These are the four pillars of sinful life. If you accept these four pillars, then your route, sinful life is very strong. Break this, from the very beginning. There will be no more sinful life. If you simply stop, where is the difficulty? If you do not smoke or do not drink, will you die? We have got so many devotees, they do not smoke, they do not drink. Are they dying? They do not play any gambling. Are they dying? They do not take meat. Are they dying? They do not illicit sex. Are they dying? It is artificial. Māyā's... Artificial. Just like so many cigarette package are advertised, although there is written on the, what is that? It is dangerous...

Devotee: "Smoking is hazardous to your health."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Still the rascal will take. Still... The things will be advertised. The government is writing on the packet, "It is dangerous," but they are not closing the factory of the cigarette. That will... Because they want income. (laughter) You see. This is going on. Cheating. And if you don't like it, why don't you stop this? But that they will not do. Simply a show-bottle. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that we want to stop this show-bottle business. Everyone must be a real leader, then people will be happy.



Thank you very much. (end)



731208SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.30

-

Los Angeles, December 8, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Because of the Lord's pastimes and activities and because of His absence, it appeared that Arjuna forgot the instructions left by the Personality of Godhead. But factually this was not the case, and again he became lord of his senses." [SB 1.15.30]



Prabhupāda: Hmm. So here it is explained what is Bhagavad-gītā. Gītaṁ bhagavatā. Bhagavatā means "by the Supreme Personality of Godhead," and gīta means "spoken." They say "sung," you can say. But gīta means "spoken by." Therefore it is called Bhagavad-gītā, "the instruction given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead personally." Therefore it is called Bhagavad-gītā.



Now Arjuna said that science was spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we read Bhagavad-gītā, then we must follow the person of Arjuna, because Arjuna directly heard Bhagavad-gītā from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he says that this science, gītaṁ bhagavatā. So why there should be interpretation? Because the person who heard directly from Bhagavān, the Supreme Per..., he said that this is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So one who is hearing directly, he's saying something, but you are saying something. You have no right. This is called paramparā system. The person who heard Bhagavad-gītā directly from Kṛṣṇa, whatever he says, that is to be accepted. You cannot interpret. This is the paramparā system.

So if you want to understand Bhagavad-gītā, then we must understand in the same way as the person who directly heard from. This is called paramparā system. Suppose I have heard something from my spiritual master, so I speak to you the same thing. So this is paramparā system. You cannot imagine what my spiritual master said. Or even if you read some books, you cannot understand unless you understand it from me. This is called paramparā system. You cannot jump over to the superior guru, neglecting the next ācārya, immediate next ācārya. Just like our, this Gau..., Caitanya Mahāprabhu's cult; we cannot understand Caitanya Mahāprabhu directly. It is not possible. We have to understand through the Gosvāmīs. Therefore you'll find in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta and at the end of every chapter, the writer says,

śrī-rūpa-ragunātha-pade yāra āśa

caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇa-dāsa



This is the process. He does not say that "I've understood Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu directly." No. That is not understanding. That is foolishness. You cannot understand what is Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Therefore repeatedly he says, rūpa-ragunātha-pade... "I am that Kṛṣṇa dāsa, Kavirāja, who is always under the subordination of the Gosvāmīs." This is paramparā system. Similarly, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura also says, ei chay gosāi jār mui tār dās, "I am servant of that person who has accepted this six Gosvāmīs as his master. I am not going to be servant of any other person who does not accept the way and means of..." Therefore we say or we offer our prayer to our spiritual master, rūpānuga-varāya te, rūpānuga-varāya te, because he follows Rūpa Gosvāmī, therefore we accept, spiritual master. Not that one has become more than Rūpa Gosvāmī or more than... No. Tāṅdera caraṇa-sebi-bhakta-sane vās. This is the paramparā system.



Now here, the same thing is repeated: Arjuna, who directly heard from Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes some people say that "Arjuna heard directly from Kṛṣṇa, but we don't find Kṛṣṇa in our presence, so how can I accept?" It is not a question of direct presence, because you have no idea of the absolute knowledge. Kṛṣṇa's words, Bhagavad-gītā, is not different from Kṛṣṇa. It's not different from Kṛṣṇa. When you hear Bhagavad-gītā, you are directly hearing from Kṛṣṇa because Kṛṣṇa is not different. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's name, Kṛṣṇa's form, Kṛṣṇa's quality, Kṛṣṇa's instruction, everything Kṛṣṇa's, they're all Kṛṣṇa. They're all Kṛṣṇa. This has to be understood. They're not different from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's form here, He's Kṛṣṇa. He's not a statue. "He's a marble statue." No. He's Kṛṣṇa. He has appeared before you because you cannot see Kṛṣṇa. You can see stone, wood; therefore He has appeared in that form. You think that it is stone and wood, but He's not stone and wood; He's Kṛṣṇa. This is called Absolute Truth. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's words are also not different from Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa's words are there in the Bhagavad-gītā, it's Kṛṣṇa.

Just like the South Indian brāhmaṇa. As soon as he opened his... He was illiterate, he could not read Bhagavad-gītā. But his Guru Mahārāja said that "You shall read every day eighteen chapters of Bhagavad-gītā." So he was puzzled, that "I'm illiterate, I cannot... All right, take me the..., the Bhagavad-gītā." So he was in a Rāmaṇatha temple. He took the Bhagavad-gītā and went like this. He could not read. So his friends who knew him, they were joking, "Well, brāhmaṇa, how you are reading Bhagavad-gītā?" He did not answer because he knew that his friends are "Joking me because I do not know... I'm illiterate." But when Caitanya Mahāprabhu came, he was also puzzled, "Brāhmaṇa, you are reading Bhagavad-gītā?" He said, "Sir, I am illiterate. I cannot read. It is not possible. But my Guru Mahārāja ordered me to read. What can I do? I've taken this book." This is trying follow guru's word. He's illiterate. He cannot read. There is no possibility. But his Guru Mahārāja ordered, "You must read Bhagavad-gītā daily, eighteen chapters." Now what is this? This is called vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ. I may be quite incomplete. It doesn't matter. But if I try to follow the words of my Guru Mahārāja, then I become complete.

This is the secret. Yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau [ŚU 6.23]. If one has strong faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and as much faith in the guru, yathā deve tathā gurau, then the revealed scriptures become manifest. It is not the education. It is not the scholarship. It is faith in Kṛṣṇa and guru. Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta says guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya pāya bhakti-latā-bīja [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. Not by education, not by scholarship, never says. Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, guru-kṛṣṇa-kṛpāya, by the mercy of guru, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. It is a question of mercy. It is not a question of scholarship or opulence or richness. No. The whole bhakti-mārga depends on the mercy of the Lord. So we have to seek the mercy. Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi, jānāti tattvam... [SB 10.14.29]. Prasāda-leśa, leśa means fraction. One who has received a little fraction of mercy of the Supreme, he can understand. Others, na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan. Others, they may go on speculating for millions of years. It is not possible to understand. So Bhagavad-gītā As It Is. Therefore we are presenting because we are presenting Bhagavad-gītā as it was understood by Arjuna. We do not go to Dr. Radhakrishnan, this scholar, that scholar, this rascal, that ra... No. We do not go. That is not our business. That is paramparā.

So Arjuna here says, bhagavatā, "What I heard from that personality, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān." Bhagavān means full of six opulences. I've described it many times. So here is the direct hearer, listener. He says bhagavatā. How you can say that Kṛṣṇa is not Bhagavān-ordinary person? How you can say? One who heard the message, he says directly. This is called paramparā system. This is called paramparā. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. So if we understand Bhagavad-gītā, as Kṛṣṇa..., as Arjuna understood. that is perfect. That is Bhagavad-gītā As It Is. And if you try to understand Bhagavad-gītā as some rascal commentator says, then you are reading somebody else; rubbish. There's no meaning. You're simply wasting your time. He may be such scholar, such big politician, like this. In our country, big politician, they have commented; big, big yogis, they have commented; big, big scholars they have... They're all useless. Take it: useless. If you read such commentary of Bhagavad-gītā, it is simply waste of time. If you actually want to study Bhagavad-gītā, then as Arjuna understands. Arjuna directly listened from Kṛṣṇa.

So in Bhagavad-gītā Arjuna says, after understanding Bhagavad-gītā from Kṛṣṇa, he said, "You are Parabrahma." Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. Bhavān. Bhavān means "Your Lordship." "You are Parabrahma, the Supreme Brahma." He's the Supreme Brahma. Brahma means spirit and brahma means the greatest. So he has explicitly explained that spirit soul, we are all spirit soul, every one of us. But He is the supreme spirit soul, param. Param means the supreme. He's not ordinary. So He comes as ordinary, not ordinary, as human being, but He is the supreme human being. That is the difference. Supreme human being. But one who cannot understand, one who thinks, "Oh, Kṛṣṇa is like us. He has got also two hands, two legs, one head. We have got also. He is like me," he is a mūḍha, rascal. Therefore it is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ: [Bg. 9.11] "These rascal fools, they deride." Mānuṣīṁ tanum āś... Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ, "They have no knowledge of the paraṁ bhāvam." So the paraṁ bhāvam, that is understood by the devotees. That is the difference. Budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ, Kṛṣṇa has said. Budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ [Bg. 10.8]. Paraṁ bhāvam, this bhāva... Bhāva means assimilation-"Oh, Kṛṣṇa is so great." This is called bhāva. That is real understanding, when you understand really this bhāva stage. Bhāva-bhakti. Bhāva-bhakti. Simply engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. Paraṁ bhāvam. Person who has not come to this stage of bhāva, he cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. The bhāva stage comes.

Everyone can attain that bhāva stage. There is process. This process is described by Rūpa Gosvāmī how to come to the bhāva stage. Bhāva stage means just prior to perfection. One must come to the bhāva stage, next stage is perfection. Next stage is full perfection. So how to come to this bhāva stage, that is Rūpa Gosvāmī has described, ādau śraddhā. First of all little faith. Just like many outsider also come here, "What these people are doing, these Kṛṣṇa consciousness men? So let us see." So śraddhā. That is called śraddhā. Śraddhā, real śraddhā means complete faith. That is described by Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya [Cc. Madhya 22.62]. One who has got this much faith, strong faith, that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this faith, not flickering, firm faith, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality..." That is called śraddhā. That is beginning of śraddhā. If you have got still doubt, then you have not come to the stage of śraddhā even. Superfluous. You may come, but when you actually believe that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if I engage myself in Kṛṣṇa's service, I am perfect"-two things-that is śraddhā. And the more you increase this śraddhā you become advanced. The beginning is this śraddhā. Ādau śraddhā.

So how this śraddhā, this faith can be increased? Sādhu-saṅga [Cc. Madhya 22.83]. If you keep yourself associated with the devotees, then this śraddhā can be increased. If you simply believe, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is Supreme Personality," but you do not live with the sādhus or devotee, then it will drop. It will finish. So just to keep the standard, the temperature right, you must keep always yourself warm. If you go away, then your (indistinct) is gone. Again you become cold. You see. This is the process. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Everything is perfect. The first thing is that you must believe that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yes. And to keep this faith strong and going on, you must keep association with devotees. Otherwise whatever little faith you got, it will be lost. It become again under the clutches of māyā. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgaḥ [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. And if you actually associate with sādhu, then the next stage is bhajana-kriyā, initiation, how to worship Kṛṣṇa. Then anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. If you are actually engaged in devotional service, anartha, which are not required, things will vanish. Just like we ask our students, "No illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling, no meat-eating." Simply by hearing it you cannot follow it. It is not possible. If you make bhajana-kriyā, if you're actually following-chanting sixteen rounds-then you can follow the others. Otherwise, if you are spiritually weak, you cannot. The government is spending so much money to stop this intoxication, LSD, in your country. They're all failure. But here, with our pure association, a person can give up immediately. Just see how much the association is strong. Ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu..., bhajana-kriyā [Cc. Madhya 23.14-15]. Anartha.

Then after one is free from these sinful activities, then he comes to the understanding stage. So long one is sinful, he has no possibility of understanding. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpam. One who is completely free from all sinful activities, anta-gatam, finished, yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām. And how you can become free from sinful activities unless you act piously? Because we must have some engagement. If you have no pious engagement, then you cannot become free from sinful activities. You must act. If you do not act piously, then you must act viciously. This is the way. The Māyāvādī philosopher, they simply wants to stop impious activities. But they do not engage themselves in pious activities. Therefore they fail. They fail. You must have side by side. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59]. If you get something better, then you can give up inferior. But if you do not get better, you cannot give up the inferior. That is not possible.

So you can give up this impious activities provided you are engaged fully in devotional service. Otherwise it is not possible. Simply by moral instruction, that "Stealing is very bad. Don't steal," nobody likes it. Nobody likes it. It is practical. One man has stolen, and he's arrested and he's going to the police custody. So everyone has seen, and he has heard also that the government says that if you steal, you'll be punished. In the Bible or in any other religious scripture it is said that stealing is not good. So he has heard it, and he has seen it that a man who has stolen, he is going to jail. So these two things are experienced: hearing and seeing. In spite of all his experience, why does he steal? Because he has no good association. He knows that stealing is bad; otherwise why he steals at night? Nobody can see. He knows he is doing some bad thing. But why he cannot give up that bad thing? Because he's not associating with good person. That is it.

So association is so... Therefore we have named this Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Society. Not Kṛṣṇa consciousness only. Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Society. A society's so beneficial we should understand. So, in this way, atha bhajana-kriyā anartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt. If we prosecute our devotional activities and keep our association with the devotees, then we can be free from sinful activities. And when you are completely free from sinful activities, then we get niṣṭhā. Yes, it is full faith. Niṣṭhā means full faith. Tato niṣṭhā. Tato ruciḥ. Ruci means taste. Why you are hearing about Kṛṣṇa daily, the same thing? We are speaking nothing new. "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and you have to surrender." This is our daily business. But why you are coming to see..., hear the same hackneyed words? Because it is very pleasing. This is called ruci, taste, "Yes, I want to hear this repeatedly. Yes. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, I am the eternal servant." You have got a taste. Unless one gets the taste, then you'll say, "What is this hackneyed word?" Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, twenty-four hours you can chant because you have got the taste. Others cannot do. This is called ruci. And ruci means āsakti, attraction: "I must go. I must chant. I must do." Tato niṣṭhā, tato ruciḥ, atha āsaktiḥ. Tato bhāvaḥ. Then bhāva: "Ah, Kṛṣṇa. I will associate with Kṛṣṇa. Then Kṛṣṇa's love, that is perfection."

So those who are not attained to this stage, first stage is how to become free from sinful ac..., anartha. Anartha you don't require, but you are habituated. And māyā is so strong, you don't require to smoke, but the māyā is advertising, "Here is one cool cigarette, or this hot cigarette, or this..." This is called māyā. You don't require it. It has no existence. There is no pleasure, but still you are attached to it. That is called māyā, illusion. That is called illusion. So we have got so friend, so nice friends all over the world, that we... You do not require... They are simply illurimous(?), "Here is whisky, here is this wine, here is that wine, here is this woman, here is this illicit sex, here is this cigarette, here is meat-eating, here is..." This is going on.

So therefore this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the only humanitarian work who can save the human society. All are helping them to go to hell. This is a fact. All are helping simply... So many innocent human beings are being slaughtered by education, by culture, by so-called society, friendship... It is very vicious cycle. Therefore here it is said, Kṛṣṇa sai... Arjuna said, yathā..., saṅgrāma-mūrdhani, kāla-karma-tamo-ruddham. This nice instruction of Bhagavad-gītā becomes choked up by the time, kāla. The time, you know, everyone, time's business is to destroy. You construct very nice house-ten years or, say, five years after, you have to again replace it because the time has destroyed it, so many things. The time..., time destroys. This is the business of time, kāla. And karma, our karma, because we are always engaged in sinful activities, karma. Kāla, karma, and tamas, ignorance. Ignorance. Tamas means darkness, and the symptom of tamo-guṇa is laziness and sleep. Those who are lazy and sleeping, you must know he's under the influence of tamo-guṇa. And rajo-guṇa, always acting foolishly. Just like these people are running. They're rajo-guṇa. But actually in this world there are two guṇas-rajas and tamas, ignorance and foolishly active. Foolish active is very dangerous. There are four classes: lazy intelligent, busy intelligent, lazy foolish, and active foolish. The active foolish is a fourth-class man. So at the present moment they're very active, but they're all foolish. Therefore the world is in danger. Active foolishness. Foolish, if he stops, he does not work, it is better. But as soon as he becomes active he becomes more dangerous.

So this rajas-tamo-bhāva is prominent. There is no sattva-guṇa, goodness. It is very rare. The symptom of goodness is that he can see everything right. That is goodness. Prakāśa. Just like in sunshine you can see everything clearly. Similarly, one who sees clearly things as they are, they are in the goodness, mode of goodness. There are three modes of the material nature. One who's acting foolishly, he's in rajo-guṇa, and one who does not know what is the meaning of life, simply laziness and darkness, that is tamo-guṇa. So those who are in the tamo-guṇa, jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ. So they will go to the again to the animal kingdom. They'll go again animal kingdom. Rajo-guṇa may have their human birth again, but that is also very difficult. But if you stay in the sattva-guṇa, then your life is successful even if you do not get Kṛṣṇa in this life; you'll get next life if you keep yourself sattva-guṇa. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18], they will gradually be promoted to the higher planetary system or in the spiritual world.

Therefore we are trying to keep ourselves, our students always in the sattva-guṇa. Cleanliness, sattva..., to remain a brāhmaṇa. If you remain a brāhmaṇa then you'll not fall down. You'll not fall down. Otherwise, if you remain in tamo-guṇa, then you are going to be next animal. This is the process of nature. You cannot check. You may be very great scientist, but you cannot check the process of nature. That is not... Daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. That is not possible. That is natural. I've given the instance that if you contaminate some poisonous disease you must suffer. That is natural way. Not that why you shall suffer. No, you must suffer because you are already contaminated. Therefore the contamination of the material world is going on, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. If you contaminate with the tamo-guṇa, then you must suffer. If you contaminate rajo-guṇa, you must get disease. That is not in your hand. You cannot say. But people are so foolish they do not know how nature is working. They're puffed up with little knowledge and thinking they're master of the thing. That is not possible.

Thank you very much.

Devotees: Jaya! Hari bol! (end)





731209SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.31

-

Los Angeles, December 9, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Because of his possessing spiritual assets, the doubts of duality were completely cut off. Thus he was freed from the three modes of material nature and placed in transcendence. There was no longer any chance of his becoming entangled in birth and death, for he was freed from material form." [SB 1.15.31]



Prabhupāda: Viśokaḥ, without any bereavement. Brahma-sampattyā, by achieving spiritual assets. This is the sign how one is advanced in spiritual life. That will be tested by this word viśokaḥ, without any bereavement. That is explained in Bhagavad-gītā the same thing: brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati [Bg. 18.54]. Prasannātmā means there is no more lamentation and no more hankering. That is prasannātmā. We are subjected to two things. Aḥ... If our possessed... If our possession is lost, then we lament, and if we don't possess, then we hanker. So here, viśokaḥ sampattyā. When one is fully identified with Brahman... Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. So when you fully surrender and you become freed from other desires: only surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is our only business. No more any other business. That is brahma-sampattyā. Sanātha-jīvitam.



Just like the child is sitting on the lap of the father. So the child is confident that "I'm secure." So it has no more any second desire. In the material world, because we have not surrendered to Kṛṣṇa we are always wandering helpless. Everyone here feeling helpless. Even though one is millionaire, even though one is president, but he's feeling helpless. This is the position, material conditional life.

bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ

praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ

kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ

praharṣayiṣyāmi sanātha-jīvitam



This is a prayer by Yāmunācārya. He's aspiring, bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ: "I shall always live in Kṛṣṇa consciousness." Bhavantam. He's addressing the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, bhavantam. Bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ. Nirantara means without any stop, continually. "When I shall live in Kṛṣṇa consciousness without any stop?" Bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ. Praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ. Manas means mind here on the chariot, and the mind is the driver and the senses are the horses. So we are being driven here and there by the... This chariot is this body. The mind is the coat-man or the chariot driver, and the senses are the horses. So, in this way, we are being forced to wander in so many planets, in so many species of life. This is our material condition. Bhrāmayan yantrārūḍhāni māyayā. Bhrāmayan yantrārūḍhāni māyayā.



This is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā:

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



So īśvara, the Supreme Lord, is there. Now He's giving chance, "You living entity, you did not surrender to Me. You wanted to enjoy this material world. So you take this chariot and take this driver and go on." This is going on. Kṛṣṇa is very kind. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante [Bg. 4.11]. "Whatever you want, you do it. But you'll never be happy." That is the point. "You can do whatever. I will give you chance. I'll give you." Just like you want a Rolls Royce car. "All right, it is." If you want this car, "All right." So you are changing this car. Sometimes you are carried by the doggish cars, sometimes goddish car. These are all cars, but we are different from the car. We wanted to sit down in a certain car, so Kṛṣṇa is giving us the chance. Bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni yantrārūḍhāni [Bg. 18.61]. Yantra means car or machine. It is very easy to understand. So this is going on because we are identifying with the car. Just like foolish man, if he rides on a Rolls Royce car, he's thinking "Now I am very rich man. I have bought a Rolls Royce." Similarly, if one body has got inferior car, he thinks that "I am poor"; identifying with the car.



But he's not car. He's different from car. This knowledge is required. This is called viśoko brahma-sampattyā. When we understand our spiritual identity, then we are no more lamenting or jubilation, equilibrium. Read the purport. It is very important verse.

Pradyumna: "Doubts of duality begin from the misconception of the material body, which is accepted as the self by less intelligent persons. The most foolish part of our ignorance..."



Prabhupāda: That we were discussing in our walking, that the basic principle of this modern civilization is wrong. Everyone, the so-called advanced scientists, so-called advanced philosopher or politician, everyone is thinking that "I am this body." So on the basic principle they're wrong. Therefore the so-called advancement of civilization is wrong. It's... At one point mathematical calculation, if you have done mistake in one point... Two plus two equal two. Why if you have made up three, the mistake, then the whole calculation will be mistaken. The balance, it will never tally. Similarly, our present civilization... Not present; it is always there. Now it is very strong bodily conception of life, so the basic principle is wrong. Therefore what..., whatever we are advancing, that is wrong. Parābhava That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Parābhavas Basic principle is wrong, abodha, in ignorance. In ignorance. Abodha means without any perfect knowledge.



So we are born without any perfect knowledge. That is natural. We have to sent..., we have to be sent to school for learning. Therefore these books are there. Why for these books are being written? Just for the learning of the human society. So they can learn it. Cats and dogs cannot read these Bhāgavata or Bhagavad-gītā. It is meant for human society. So they should take advantage of this knowledge. But if they remain in the darkness of ignorance, then what is the meaning of their advancement? It has no meaning. So that is going on. They too do not accept knowledge from the authority. They manufacture. How you can manufacture? You are a fool, so whatever you manufacture, so-called knowledge, that is also foolish. How can we depend on your foolish knowledge? Abodha-jāta. Everyone is fool. He cannot manufacture. He has to learn to take knowledge from a person who knows. The he's perfect. That is our system. We are taking knowledge from Kṛṣṇa. We are taking knowledge is perfect. We are taking authority. As we are, we are defective. Our position is sometimes we do mistake-"two plus two equals five." But it is not fact. So two plus two must be four. But if we make "five" or "three," that means the whole background becomes wrong. That is... we are liable to do that mistake. And illusion. Illusion means two plus two equal to four; I have written "five," but I am seeing it is all right. I'm seeing it is all right: "two." Therefore one should not correct himself. Another person should take the editorial correction work, because the man who has written he sees that it is right. This is called illusion.

So to commit mistake, to get into illusion, overpowered by illusion, and cheating. Cheating means you have made mistake, "two plus two equal to five." "Yes," you're persisting, "Yes, it is right." That is cheating. Everyone in this material world, they're born foolish and still they're manufacturing knowledge. That is cheating. That is going on. The so-called scientists, so-called philosophers, their basic principle is wrong, and they're presenting some theories and that is being accepted by people. That is cheating. For example, just like the insistence of the scientists that "Life is production of matter." They have no experience, neither they can make any experiment in the laboratory that from matter one can produce life. But every child knows that "My father is life and my mother is life, so I am produced from that combination. I am also life." So life comes from life. The dead body of father, the dead body of mother cannot produce. Any man can understand. Very simple. But these rascals, so-called scientists, they're insisting that life is produced from matter. Insisting, simply. Their only idea is to prove that there is no God. Imitation.

That Dr. (indistinct) said that imitation barking is very much appreciated. People go to see imitation bark. If you give a sign board that "Here is an expert imitator who can imitate the sounds of all animals," you will purchase tickets ten dollars and go and see how this man is imitating. But you don't care for the real dog who is barking. This is the position. The scientific advance means the imitation barking. That's all. The dog is already there. Everyone can see. The barking is there. But if a scientist can imitate how dog barks, then he's advanced. The already life is being produced millions and millions of lives. Now they are going to check life production. Or we see if a rascal scientist says that "Now I produced one life in laboratory." "Oh, wonderful!" The... Real life they are going to check, and some imitation life he has produced, he gets Nobel Prize. This is going on. This is going on. Simply wasting public money. That's all. The so-called sci...

And now they have failed to go to the moon planet. Now they are trying to go to the Venus planet. People are not asking that "You have spent so much money, forty million dollars for one coat(?), going to the moon planet, so what you have done? Ha?" Now suppose when Columbus discovered this American... Not discovered... Anyway, the people are interested to come here to colonize. Similarly, if you've actually discovered moon planet-not discovered; it is already there-if you have gone there, now go and live there, colonize there, then it is successful. "No, we have gone there. We have seen there is a big crack and we are studying that." That is our advancement. In this way foolish people are exploiting innocent public. Yes.

This is our charge against this so-called advancement of life. And they are forgetting real thing. They do not understand what is soul. They do not understand. They do not understand that the soul is transmigrating from one body to another. Soul is immortal. Soul is eternal. These things are described in the Bhagavad-gītā. In the beginning, this is the beginning lesson: dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāram [Bg. 2.13]. This is the beginning of spiritual understanding. But they do not understand this beginning lesson, and still they are advanced. This is going on. Simply cheating. So this cheating process is going on under the misconception that "I am this body." The basic principle is cheating. Wrong. And on the wrong platform they are building phantasmagoria, big, big ideas.

Go on.

Pradyumna: "The most part of our ignorance is our identifying this material body with the self. Everything in relation with the body is ignorantly accepted as our own. Doubts due to misconceptions of 'myself' and 'mine,' in other words, 'my body,' 'my relatives,' 'my property,' 'my wife,' 'my wealth,' 'my country,' 'my community' and hundreds of thousands of similar illusory contemplations, cause bewilderment for the conditioned soul."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This is our ignorance. Just like this example is given in the śāstra that the river waves are flowing, water is flowing, and by the combination of the waves many straws come together at one time, and, after some time, again they are distributed, thrown here and there. We have got everyone experience. Similarly, in this material world everyone of us we have gathered together like the straws. Actually we are under the waves of the material nature. So, when we gather together, we make a community that "We are Americans," that "We are Indians," that "We are this," "We are that," "We are family..." That is exactly like that. By chance we meet together; again, by the waves of the nature, we are separated. No more son, no more country, no more... Everything's finished. This is going on. But so long we've gathered together, we take it very seriously. We forget that at any moment we'll be kicked out of this gathering. That is ignorance. They do not try to understand what is our real position.



Real position is that we are being carried by the waves. We have no independence. That is... Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings, māyār bo..., Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi: "You are being carried away by the waves of material nature. You are sometimes becoming drowned, sometimes you're floating. In this way your life is going on." You have no fixity. The fixity is when you are Kṛṣṇa conscious. Jīva kṛṣṇa-dāsa e viśvāsa... When he takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and develops this cult, then he becomes perfect one day. Then tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9], he comes back. Kṛṣṇa gives guarantee, "After giving up this body, he comes to Me." That is perfection. Otherwise now I am in this family. Suppose now I am American or Indian. Is there guarantee that next life I should be able to become American or Indian? No. There's not. Kṛṣṇa does not say that. Kṛṣṇa says, dehāntaram, tathā dehā... You have to change your body. You have to change your body. Tathā dehā... As you are changing constantly our body, this fact. Similarly, if when this body is no more useful, then you're transferred to another body. That's very simple to understand. Suppose you are living in a room, if it is not good then we change another body. But that does not mean "I'm finished." But these foolish people, the so-called scientists, so-called advanced philosopher, they do not understand this simple. And still they are very much proud of their education. This simple thing they do not understand and they are very proud of edu...

Go on.

Pradyumna: "By assimilating the instructions of the Bhagavad-gītā one is sure to become released from such bewilderment."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Therefore you have to understand Bhagavad-gītā is left for you. Kṛṣṇa has left before going away from this planet. He gave the instruction: "This is the position. You are like this. Your position is like this. You are now in trouble. You are in material existence. Why you are struggling for existence simply making your mind as the guide?" Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā that "These living entities, they are My part and parcel. They're as good as I am, but..." Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣa... "They have made the mind, given the power of attorney to the mind, and therefore they are forced to the struggle for existence." This is the statement of Bhagavad-gītā.



So sane man should take lesson from Bhagavad-gītā that "If I am as good as Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is eternal, I am eternal; Kṛṣṇa is spiritual, I am spiritual; Kṛṣṇa never dies or never takes birth, I do not take birth; I never die," in this way actually we understand that I'm identical in quality with Kṛṣṇa. Then that is called brahma-sampattyā, this knowledge, brahma-sampattyā viśokaḥ. This is it. Then you become free from all lamentation.

Go on.

Pradyumna: "One is sure to become released from such bewilderment because real knowledge is to know that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa, is everything, including oneself."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudur... [Bg. 7.19]. But Kṛṣṇa says, "The living entities, My part and parcel." So just like father and son-the son is part and parcel of the father's body. So when the son is under the protection of father, that is his natural life. But if the son foolishly wants to live separately, although the father is the most opulent, (Sanskrit verse), full wealth, full opulence, full power, full wisdom, everything. Kṛṣṇa, the father, is full, and everyone can share the father's property. That is the lawful inheritance of the father. Then why you should suffer here? This intelligence is not coming. They are so fool. They are so... The father is coming, canvassing, "My dear sons, why you are struggling? You give up this nonsense engagement. Your so-called leadership of the family, so-called leadership of community, nation, these are all false. This is creation of māyā, illusion. Don't be bewildered with all these things. Just come back to Me. I've come to call you." Oh, but they'll not accept. This is their dog's obstinancy. So what can be done? They... Everyone can share the father's property. Here is also... the material is also God's property. But they'll not understand. They'll make the division, "This portion United States of America." Then why you've got this United States of America? It is Kṛṣṇa's property. Why you are saying, "No, this is Chinese, this is Russian," and they're fighting unnecessarily, unnecessarily?



So it is a factual thing that if people are saved, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, all these false identification will stop. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. The United Nation, if you simply understand that "Why you are talking of unity? You're already unity, in unity, because this property belongs to Kṛṣṇa. So why you are claiming that this is mine?" We have created disunity. This is a fact. Otherwise, if the whole... They have now created United Nation. They can govern the whole world under United Nation; let it be accepted that the whole property belongs to the human society. Then what is the trouble? But that thing they will not accept. This is foolishness. This is māyā. Actually it is the property of God. We come here as guests, fifty years or sixty years or hundred years, then we are kicked out: "Get out!" That we do not understand. Because we are allowed to live here for a certain number of years we think it is my property. This is ignorance.

So brahma-sampattyā. So actually if you want to be happy, then you have to acquire this brahma-sampattyā viśokaḥ, then there will be no more lamentation. Everyone is... Know that it is our Father's property, Kṛṣṇa's property. So there is (indistinct) supply. Why you are fighting? There is no cause of fighting. Actually this is a fact. There's so much space still vacant-especially I've seen in Africa and Australia-ten times population can be accommodated and ten times foodstuff can be produced. But that they will not do. They will not allow. "No, this is my property. You cannot come here. Bow! Bow! Bow!" This is the immigration department, the "Bow! Bow! department." They say, "Why you have come here? Why you have come here?" We say, "It is God's property. Why you are making barking? Is it not your father's property?" But this ignorance is prevailing.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is a challenge to all the rascals and fools, that's all. So those who have taken this movement very seriously, they should be very sober and understand at least you must expose all these rascals. That will be very much appreciated by Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



731210SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.32

-

Los Angeles, December 10, 1973



Pradyumna: "Upon hearing of Lord Kṛṣṇa's returning to His abode, and upon understanding the end of the Yadu dynasty's earthly manifestation, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira decided to go back home, back to Godhead." [SB 1.15.32]



Prabhupāda: So hearing all the details how Kṛṣṇa has gone back to His abode and how the Yadu dynasty was destroyed by fighting amongst themselves, so naturally... Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was very sober and very advanced. He thought what to do next. Everyone should think that... The Yadu dynasty, they belonged directly to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nobody could conquer them, but still, they were also finished by... Others could not conquer them, but they fought amongst themselves, and then vanquished.



So everyone should take care that after all, we have to give up this body, estate, and whatever we possess, we have to give up. So after giving up, what is next? We have to give up. That is a fact. If you don't give it up now, at the time of death you must give it up, everything. Mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham [Bg. 10.34]. You may try to keep in possession whatever you have got, but at the time of death you have to give it up. By force it will be taken away. Everyone should think like that. That is soberness. One who is thinking that "My family, my nation, my society, my bank balance, my skyscraper building, my motorcars-these will save me," that is not possible. That is not possible. That is the conclusion of the foolish person. Pramatto nidhanaṁ paśyann api na paśyati. Those who are mad, they do not see that everything they possess will be vanished. It will not stay. He'll be vanished, his body will be vanished, everything. Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api [SB 2.1.4]. Asatsu api. All these things are temporary, but I am eternal. They do not think very seriously that "I am eternal, and I am engaged with temporary things. Now, what is my eternal business?" They do not know. That they do not know. This is called foolishness, mūḍha.

But you are eternal. About you, you have heard from the śāstra, and you are experiencing that "I was a child, I was a boy, I was a young man. So my body, childhood body, boyhood body, youthhood body is gone. This body is not that body." Nobody can say, "I have got a different body." But I know that I had a childhood body, I had a boyhood body, youthhood body. That I know. So I am eternal, and this body is not eternal. It is changing. It is very simple thing. Why people cannot understand it? Very simple. Avināśi tu tad viddhi yena sarvam idaṁ tatam, antavanta ime dehāḥ. This is the instruction in the Bhagavad-gītā. This body is antavat. It will be finished. But that thing which is spreading all over the body, avināśi, that will not be annihilated. Avināśi tu tad viddhi yena sarvam idaṁ tatam. That consciousness, the consciousness is spread all over the body, and Kṛṣṇa says that that thing which is spread all over the body, consciousness, that is immortal.

So now our consciousness is immortal consciousness or mortal consciousness, that is to be seen. I am absorbed in thought of this mortal consciousness, "This is my country, this is my body, this is my family, this is my community, this is my nation..." They are all mortal. But immortal consciousness is that "I am Kṛṣṇa's." That is immortal consciousness. "Kṛṣṇa is mine, and I am Kṛṣṇa's." This is immortal consciousness. When you come to this consciousness-that is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness-then you are saved. Immortal consciousness. So long you have got temporary consciousness, then... Just like our mind changes. I accept something now; I reject something again. So this body is being manufactured according to the acceptance and rejection of my mind. The body is formed. Otherwise why we have different body? We are sitting here, so many boys and girls, ladies and gentlemen. Nobody's body will exactly tally with others' body. No. Because the face is the index of mind. You have got different types of mind; therefore you have got different types of body, not every one.

So this is to be understood. Therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, svaḥ-pathāya matiṁ cakre. This is meditation actually. "What I am? Wherefrom I have come? I am eternal. Why my body is not eternal? I would have been very happy if my body would have been eternal, but that is not being possible." Everyone knows. "But I desire that I may not die, my body may not be vanquished. That is my desire." But nobody is meditating upon this subject matter. They have learned some meditation-I do not know what kind of medi... This is meditation, matiṁ cakre. Svaḥ-pathāya matiṁ cakre nibhṛtātmā yudhiṣṭhiraḥ. So these things are to be solved. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, now he will retire after this. So he will give up the kingdom. Not that... This is the Vedic system. However rich you may be, however prosperous you may be at your home or in your nation or in anyway as you think, but you have to think that "Actually these things are temporary. I am eternal. So what is my eternal function?" That is meditation. "What is my eternal function? What is my eternal duty? Where is my eternal home?" That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not ordinary movement, manufacture something for recreation. No. It is very serious science. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. We are searching after some permanent place, permanent settlement on the world. Nobody wants to die, but that is not possible. But if there is possibility of going somewhere where no more death, why don't you search after that? That is intelligence. That information (is) there in the Bhagavad-gītā, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] "If you go to the topmost planet which is known as Brahma-loka..." Now, the Brahma-loka, the duration of life, you cannot calculate even their one day's time. That we were discussing this morning. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā.. Their twelve hours, our twelve hours and their twelve hours, different. Their twelve hours you cannot calculate: forty-three hundred thousands of years multiplied by one thousand. Now see how many years. That is their twelve hours. So live hundred years, they also. So even if you go there, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ, or any planet, or any place, there must be death. Death you must have. But I am eternal. Why shall I accept death? That is intelligence. That information is given in Bhagavad-gītā, mad-dhāma gatvā punar janma na vidyate: "If you come to My place, My planet, then you will have no more to come back again to this mortal world." Mad-dhāma gatvā. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. Where going, nobody returns. That is, actually, we want.

In another place Kṛṣṇa says, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya: [Bg. 4.9] "My dear Kaunteya, Arjuna," tyaktvā deham, "after giving up this body," punar janma naiti, "no more coming into the womb of material mother." Then where does he go? Mām eti. In his Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta Sanātana Gosvāmī has stated that if you become perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then immediately after death you will be sent where Kṛṣṇa is having His pastimes within this material world. In the material world, just like the sun rotates, similarly, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes is going on. That is another feature of His activities. Because He wants to reclaim the fallen souls, and there are millions and trillions, unlimited fallen souls within this material world, so He goes everywhere. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. As soon as there is discrepancies in the understanding of eternal life, He appears. He teaches. So Kṛṣṇa is teaching somewhere. There are so many innumerable universes. Just like Kṛṣṇa takes, appears, as janma, janmāṣṭamī in this universe, immediately in another universe there is janmāṣṭamī; immediately in another universe there is janmāṣṭamī. So therefore it is called nitya-līlā. Nitya-līlā means the janmāṣṭamī is going on. His govardhana-līlā is going on. Everything. Everything, what He displayed when He was present, that is going on. Just like the sun. Now it is half past seven. Now, half past six, there is sun somewhere. The half past six, it is not that because the sun has passed half past six, in this country, therefore there is no more half past six. Half past six is somewhere. Is it not? Half past six is there. Similarly, it is not that because Kṛṣṇa has now finished His janmāṣṭamī, therefore no more janmāṣṭamī. Janmāṣṭamī is going on. This is kṛṣṇa-līlā.

So Kṛṣṇa is present. There are innumerable universes. In one of them He is always present. These is rotation. Just like sun rotates, morning to evening, similarly, Kṛṣṇa's līlā is going on. Just like something, a horse, is passing before your eyes. You see the horse is passing through your windows, and then you do not see the horse. Does that mean the horse is finished? No. The horse is running. But when it comes before your window, you see. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa's līlā, pastime, is going on. And when He appears here... Exactly like the sun. The sun is always present, but the planet is rotating. So when it comes before your eyes, you see the sun. But if you do not see the sun, it does not mean sun is finished, as formerly they used to think like that "The sun is dead."

So if you become perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness... Perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness means no more material desire. That's all. Only Kṛṣṇa. That is perfection. So long you will have a pinch of material desire, you will have to take birth. According to your desire, Kṛṣṇa will give you facility. Why there are so many types of body, eight million? Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram, sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6]. We are making our next body by thinking of something. We have got so many thoughts, material thoughts. So at the time of death, when that thought is prominent, then I get the next moment a body like that. So if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa only, then you get a body where by which you can go to Kṛṣṇa. You can go to Kṛṣṇa. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma [Bg. 4.9]. It is very scientific and very practical. So by going to Kṛṣṇa, you can talk with Kṛṣṇa personally. You can play with Kṛṣṇa personally. You can dance with Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa-loka. Just like we have got a picture, rāsa dancing. Here is picture, Kṛṣṇa's. Everyone can get this opportunity. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes to show practically how enjoyable life with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa is simply jolly, ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). In Vṛndāvana life you will see, everyone is jolly. The birds, trees and the water, the land, the cows, the calves, the inhabitants, the cowherd boys-everyone is happy simply by loving Kṛṣṇa. Simply by loving Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa therefore manifests His līlā that "Why you are rotting in this material world? Come to Me and enjoy life eternally." That is Kṛṣṇa business. He is so kind. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. People, when they become debauch to enjoy life in this material world... What is the enjoyment? The last enjoyment is sex life. Is that very good enjoyment? But they have accepted. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Maithuna means sex intercourse. That is their life and soul. They do not know. They have no information. There is better pleasure, eternal pleasure. That they do not know.

Therefore there is need of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to understand that... What is that? Niśamya bhagavan-mārgam, The way of God. The rascals do not understand what is God, they do not know what is the feature of God, and still, they will not accept this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We are giving, "Here is God. Here is the form of God. He is so nice. He is so beautiful. His address is this. You can go there by this process." "No. We don't want." "Then what you want?" "I want to become a pig. (laughter) That's all." "All right, you become pig. What can be done? And what shall you eat?" "I will eat stool. That's all." "All right. Not prasādam?" "No."

So what can we do? We are distributing you prasādam, and he will go to eat some rascal thing in the restaurant. Just see. This is misfortune. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. Because unfortunate in this age, they will accept something wrong. Therefore our task is very responsible. We have to canvass. We have to plead, solicit, "Please come here. Please come here in this temple and learn something."

Thank you very much. (end)



731211SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.33

-

Los Angeles, December 11, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Kuntī, after overhearing Arjuna's telling of the end of the Yadu dynasty and disappearance of Lord Kṛṣṇa, engaged in the devotional service of the transcendental Personality of Godhead with full attention and thus gained release from the course of material existence." [SB 1.15.33]



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa has got two kinds of existence: prakaṭa and aprakaṭa. Prakaṭa means when you see Kṛṣṇa personally. When Kṛṣṇa is present on this planet, everyone can see Kṛṣṇa. And actually, everyone saw. But only the devotees could understand that "Here is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." So that is called prakaṭa, "physically present." And there is another phase, which is called aprakaṭa, "not physically present." But that does not mean Kṛṣṇa is dead or God is dead. That does not mean. Prakaṭa or aprakaṭa, physically present or not present, it doesn't matter.



So after all, He is adhokṣaja. This word is used, adhaḥ. Adhaḥ means subdued. And Akṣa, akṣa means eyes or senses. Akṣaja. Ja means generated. So our senses are there-eyes, ears, hands, legs, nose, so many. Ten senses are there. So we are acquiring knowledge, generated. Knowledge is generated from the senses. But so long our senses are materially contaminated, we do not get real knowledge. We have to acquire knowledge through the senses, but unless our senses are purified, we do not have real knowledge. So we cannot appreciate or understand God, His form, His name, His quality, His pastime, His entourage, nothing of them we can understand by our these present material senses. That is not possible. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. Adhaḥ. Adhaḥ means cut (curbed) down. You cannot approach the Supreme by your these blunt material senses. That is not possible. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. Adhah-kṛta akṣaja-jñānaṁ yatra. The adhokṣaja means... Jñāna means experimental knowledge. Just like these modern scientists, they believe in experimental knowledge. But they are so rascal, in their own case, they will say, "Yes, we are trying. In future it will be successful." Why not experimental knowledge now? If you say that life is generated from matter... You are writing so many books and getting Nobel Prize. Why not by experimental knowledge prove that "Here are some matters and chemicals and here is life"? That they say, "We are trying." This is their escape. But actually, science means two things: observation and experiment. If you do not experiment practically in the laboratory, simply observation is not sufficient. That is not science. That is theory.

Anyway, this experimental knowledge is not very helpful in the matter of understanding the Supreme. Experimental knowledge there is, but not by these blunt senses. When the senses are purified, then that experimental knowledge, that means spiritual experimental knowledge, that is perfect. Therefore it is said adhokṣaja. And our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to understand that Adhokṣaja. Adhokṣaja means who is beyond the perception of these material senses. This is our subject matter. Our subject matter is not anything material. Material is within the purview of my material senses. But our subject matter is beyond the senses. Adhokṣaja, therefore it is said. Adhokṣaja. Just like Kuntī and others. Kṛṣṇa was not present before their eyes. Kṛṣṇa has already gone to His abode. But still, it is said that ekānta-bhaktyā bhagavaty adhokṣaje. Adhokṣaje. The same word is used. But if you cannot see God now, how there can be ekānta-bhakti?

Ekānta-bhakti means unalloyed devotion. This is the secret of devotional life. Even God is not physically present, a devotee can be very much exalted by devotional service. That is the teaching of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because the sahajiyās... Sahajiyā means persons who take things very easily, according to his sense perception, manufactured. They are called sahajiyās. But these Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, the devotees following the footprints of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they are not sahajiyās; they are devotee of the Adhokṣaja. Beyond the sense perception, still, they are devotee. This is the secret of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava. Beyond the sense perception. Just like Gosvāmīs. They were living at Vṛndāvana. And what sort of living? Simply in separation and search. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also taught us like that. He was searching, "Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?" and feeling separation. Just like you feel sometimes with your lover separation and you search, this is our process. Always feel separation from Kṛṣṇa and try to search out. This is ekānta. This is explained here, ekānta-bhaktyā bhagavaty adhokṣaje. Adhokṣaje, "He is beyond my perception. Still, my devotion is unalloyed." Not that "I cannot see where is God. Oh, what is devotion?" Just try to understand. It appears to be contradictory. Because foolish people say that "If you cannot see God, where is the question of devotion? You want to serve God, but if you cannot see God, then how you can serve?" Therefore, particularly this word is used, ekānta-bhaktyā bhagavaty adhokṣaje niveśitātmopararāma saṁsṛteḥ. That is the process.

So even though we cannot see God with our present eyes, but God is so merciful that He becomes present before us in a manner by which we can see Him. That is this vigraha, arcā-vigraha. God is beyond our sensual perception, adhokṣaja. But those who are neophyte, they may become atheist that "We cannot see God, that... How can I serve Him?" But those who are advanced, they can see God every moment, although physically others cannot see. The example is that Hiraṇyakaśipu and Prahlāda. Prahlāda is seeing God, but his father, he is asking, "Where is your God? Where is your God?" He was saying to the column, pillar: "Is your God there?" But he is seeing God there; he says, "Yes." So he became angry. He broke the column, and actually God came out.

So it is the question of advancement. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His followers taught us that if you feel separation... How you will feel separation unless you love? And you simply worship the Supreme in a feeling of separation, then that is perfection. Then that is perfection. Therefore the Gosvāmīs, their prayer, their method of worshiping the Lord at Vṛndāvana... They left their ministerial post and went to Vṛndāvana by the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So what was their process? The process was tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat. They gave up their materialistic way of life as very insignificant. They were ministers. They were ministers. Their associates were very big, big men. But tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati. Maṇḍala-pati means leaders, leaders of the society, poli..., big, big politician, businessmen, important men. Because they were minister, everyone used to come to see, and they were associated with. But they gave up. Tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīm. How it was given up? Sadā tuccha-vat: "Oh, it insignificant. What is this? There is no need of..." And bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karu... Why? Why they gave it up? Because they thought... Under the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they understood that "So many mass of people are suffering without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we have to do something for them." Therefore they gave up. Not a fancy, "I become naked, that's all." What is the use of your becoming naked? You must do something. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Not that "I have become mendicant. I have given up all material things." You cannot give material things. Instead of coat, pant, you may have a shabby cloth. That's all. You cannot give up. That is not possible. You have to accept something. But they are thinking that "Because I have given up this coat, pant, and I am now a shabby dress, I have become advanced." Not that. You must some positive engagement. And that is...

We find in the life of Gosvāmīs,

tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha-vat

bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau



Kaupīna-kanthāśritau, loincloth only, minimizing the bodily necessities of life. Bhūtvā. Because they were prepared, dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā, to give mercy to the mass of people. Mass of people. If you become so much dependent on the bodily necessities of life, then you cannot become fully and wholly for the benefit of the mass of people. Our Gandhi, he imitated this. For the mass of people... But that was to extent, to a certain extent successful. But it was political purpose. It was political purpose. These things are not for any material purpose. Then it will be failure. If you imitate spiritual life for material benefit, then it will be failure. So the Gosvāmīs did not do so. They gave up this material opulence for spiritual advancement, positive. If you don't get something positive, simply by negative process you will never be happy. Then again you will fall down.



Just like big, big swamis in India... Sometimes they come to your country also. They say that "This world is false," jagan mithyā, mithyā. But we don't say that it is false. We say it is reality, but temporary. That is right philosophy. How it can be false? Because everything is produced by the truth, by the Absolute Truth. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Nothing can come out except from the Absolute Truth. Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the origin of everything." If Kṛṣṇa is truth, He is the origin of everything, so how everything can be false? Is that very logical? No. If something has come from gold... Just like we have got so many preparations of gold: gold bangles, gold earring, gold necklace. But it has come from the gold; therefore it is gold. How it can be false? Gold is never false. Gold is gold. So this philosophy that brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā, that "Gold mine is right, but the gold earring is wrong..." No. That you cannot say. If gold mine is right, then gold earring is also right because it has come from the gold mine. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa says that ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the origin of everything." And the Vedānta-sūtra also says, janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] "Absolute Truth is that from whom everything emanates." So everything has emanated from Kṛṣṇa. So how this material world can be false? It is true. Then what is that false? It is not false. It is temporary. But the idea that "This material world is for my enjoyment," that is false. That is false. As soon as you take things that "It is for my enjoyment," then it is false. Because you cannot enjoy. You are not the proprietor. God is the pro... Why the trouble? Why the problems of the world? Because people are taking things for their enjoyment. Why this petrol problem? Actually, that petrol, stock of petrol, in any part of the world, that is God's property. But these rascals, they are claiming that "My property." That is false. Neither the petrol is false, neither God is false. Everything is right. But this conception, that "This petrol belongs to me," this is false. And as soon as this false conception is moved, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Very simple thing.

So we are trying to remove these rascals' false conception. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We don't say that this world is false. Why this world is false? It is not false. It is fact. It may be temporary, but it is fact. Just like this winter season. It will not stay. It will be for three months. Again summer season will come. So we cannot say that this winter season is false. No. It is not false; it is fact. But it is temporary. So temporary things, although it is real, so if we can utilize that reality, sense of reality, for the supreme reality, then our life is successful. That is called ekānta-bhaktyā. That is stated here: ekānta-bhaktyā bhagavaty adhokṣaje. Ekānta-bhaktyā. Ekānta means without any diversion. Everything. Īśāvāsyam idam... Thinking that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Why shall I use it for my personal sense gratification?" This is called ekānta-bhaktyā. Ekānta. Eka. Ekaṁ evādvitīyam. Eka, Kṛṣṇa is one. There cannot be any competition of Kṛṣṇa. So eka anta, that one end bhakti, serving that Supreme. Ekānta-bhakti. Bhajate ananya-bhāk. Bhajate mām ananya-bhāk, sādhur eva samantavyaḥ. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. That ananya-bhāk means simply concentrated to Kṛṣṇa. That is required. That devotion in any circumstances. It doesn't matter whether Kṛṣṇa is personally... Kṛṣṇa is present, but because we want to see with our material eyes, therefore we claim this, that "I want to see Kṛṣṇa." He does not accept that he has no eyes to see Kṛṣṇa. But with his blunt eyes, he wants to see Kṛṣṇa. Therefore His name is Adhokṣaja. Kṛṣṇa is there. The sun is there in the sky, but the person who is in darkness at night, he wants to see sun. He is in darkness. Otherwise one who can fly from this country to other country, he can see immediately the sun is there. Sun is everywhere. But my eyes are, being covered by māyā, I cannot see. Therefore He is called Adhokṣaja, Adhokṣaja.

So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to understand that Adhokṣaja, and that is the bhāgavata-dharma. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. Not to become a rascal, that "Here is the avatāra of Kṛṣṇa. Let us go and see." One who can see Kṛṣṇa, he can see Kṛṣṇa everywhere, he can see Kṛṣṇa here. Why one should go to a rascal, another rascal? No, that is not. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is Adhokṣaja. There are so many things to be learned. Everything is there in the authoritative scripture. If we take advantage of these books-we are taking so much labor to present-you can understand this science of Kṛṣṇa very perfectly, and your life becomes successful. It is not the question of seeing Kṛṣṇa personally or not. Kṛṣṇa is personally present everywhere. Simply you have to purify your eyes to see Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted. That is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. This is the process. You have to be above the designation. Sarva upādhi-vinirmuktam. In this way you have to become purified, nirmalam. Malam means dirt, and nir means no dirt.

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



In this way, when your senses will be purified, then you will be eligible to serve Kṛṣṇa. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam. Because Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor of the sen... He is the proprietor of everything. So our senses, as we claim, "This is my hand," actually this is not my hand. It is Kṛṣṇa's hand. Kṛṣṇa has given me to use it. Therefore this hand. Just like my hand is utilized for my benefit. I am not using this hand for your benefit. This is natural. My hands, my legs, my eyes, are used for my purpose. So if it is actually Kṛṣṇa's hand, how it can be used for your purpose? So when you learn this science, that "This hand, I am claiming... It is not my hand; it is Kṛṣṇa's hand. It should be utilized for Kṛṣṇa," that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So that we have to learn by the process ekānta-bhaktyā bhagavaty adhokṣaje. Then what is the benefit? Niveśita-ātmā-upararāma saṁsṛteḥ. If you can utilize your senses for the service of Adhokṣaja, beyond your sense perception, if you adopt that method, then the benefit will be niveśita-ātmā, fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness always. That is very easy. But those who are not doing, for them it is very difficult. Kṛṣṇa says... He gives the prescription that satataṁ cintayanto mām: [Bg. 9.14] "Always thinking of Me." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. Here is the chance. You come to the temple, engage in the temple service. Naturally your mind will be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. This temple is open not for making a force; just to make this process, niveśita-ātmā, always absorbed in Kṛṣṇa though. That is the process. Always, twenty-four hours. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. This is the process. Twenty-four hours we shall be engaged. Not that five minutes' meditation and then twenty-three hours, forty minutes engaged in other business. No. Twenty-four hours engaged in Kṛṣṇa's business. That is called niveśita-ātmā.

Then what will be the result? Now, upararāma saṁsṛteḥ. Upararāma means then you become, you cease from this repetition of birth and death. This will be the result. This is the actual aim of human life. Animal life and human life, this is the difference, we repeatedly say. The animal cannot understand, neither they can perform how to check birth, death, old age. That is not possible for the animals. But human being can do that. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. What is that process? Niveśitātmā: always be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought and you are saved from the repetition of birth, death and old age.

Thank you very much. (end)



731212SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.34

-

Los Angeles, December 12, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "The Supreme Unborn, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, caused the members of the Yadu dynasty to relinquish their bodies, and thus He relieved the burden of the world. This action was like picking out a thorn with a thorn, though both are the same to the controller." [SB 1.15.34]



Prabhupāda: So Kṛṣṇa's two business is going on in this material world. One is paritrāṇāya sādhūnām [Bg. 4.8], and the other is vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām. One business is to give protection to the law-abiding devotees. Devotee means who accepts the Supreme Lord as the supreme controller and accepts himself as subordinate. This is devotee. Devotee is not very... Actually, we are subordinate to the laws of nature, and the nature is being manipulated by the Lord. Therefore, ultimately we are subordinate to the Supreme Lord. God is great; everyone knows it. But I am not great; I am subordinate. Acceptance of this philosophy means, I mean to say, godly conscious or Kṛṣṇa conscious. Very simple thing. There is no difficulty. But the demons are so rascal, they will not admit it. They are already under control-prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]-under the control of the stringent laws of material nature. Still, foolishly that rascal demon is thinking that he is free. This is rascaldom. Just like a outlaw, an outlaw is thinking that he doesn't care for the government. Although he is put into jail, he is punished there, still, he is declaring, "No, I don't care for the government." Madness.



So as Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us to understand, that jīvera svarūpa haya nitya-kṛṣṇa-dāsa [Cc. Madhya 20.108-109]. A living entity is eternally servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is his position. He can never become master. Just like there are four classes: the śūdra class... Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. By nature, one who is śūdra, he cannot work very freely. That is not... Better..., his better life is to remain subordinate. Just like women, children. It is better for them to remain subordinate, to remain subordinate. It is practical. I have seen in our country and the Western countries, the woman are given freedom. By such freedom they are not happy. It is a fact. It is a fact. Therefore Vedic system is that it is the father's duty when a girl is mature, before attaining puberty, she is handed over to a suitable boy, "Please take charge of her. This girl..." Our marriage system is that "So long she was under my charge. Now I..." This is the process.

So women, by nature they should remain subordinate. It does not mean, "Because somebody is my subordinate, therefore I shall cut his throat or her throat." No. Just like sometimes the Christian philosophers say, "The animals are given under the control of man. Therefore they should be slaughtered." This is their philosophy. Control of man does not mean they should be slau... They should be taken care of. That is the law. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā: kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. The productive class, they should give protection to the cows. The cows are given under their protection, not that "Because the cows are given under my protection, therefore I must open a slaughterhouse and kill them." Similarly... So children under the protection of father and mother... Just like this child is sitting on the lap of... He is comfortable. But if the father thinks, "He is under my protection; therefore I shall cut throat..." Now it is going on. The abortion means that. The child is taken shelter of the mother's womb for protection, but now she is being killed. The time is so bad. You see?

So the idea is that subordinate does not mean he is in difficulty. No. Similarly, we are subordinate to God. That is a fact. Nobody can deny. So remain under the protection of God. That is our natural state. That is our natural state. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. What is God? God... Just like here is God, Kṛṣṇa. What is the difference? No difference. He has got two hands, you have got two hands. He has got two legs, you have got two legs. He has got head, you have got head. So from the bodily feature, "Man is made after God." There is no difference. But the difference is that He gives you protection, and you are protected. Therefore we are worshiping God. This is the difference Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān, nityo nityānām. This is the Vedic injunction. God is also nitya, eternal; we are also eternal. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. We do not die. This is our conditioned life. We are changing our body because we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa; there is no Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But we are manufacturing different consciousness. And as we are manufacturing different consciousness, we are being contaminated by the particular quality of nature. They do not know that.

How are we becoming contaminated? There are three modes of material nature: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa; goodness, passion and ignorance. And we are, according to the association... Just like here we can see, somebody cannot live without smoking. It is practical. But none of our devotees smoke. So it is possible. Because a devotee is associating with the devotees, therefore he is acquiring the quality by association, contamination. This is a fact. If you go to a contaminated, diseased person, you are infected. We should be very careful.

dadāti pratigṛhṇāti

guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva

ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam



Intimate relation with somebody, so there is bhuṅkte bhojayate. When you become intimate with certain friend, he gives to eat you, something you eat, and you also give him something to eat, he eats. But if there are different quality, then by eating, you contaminate, you are contaminated by his infection, and he is contaminated by infection. That is practical, medical science. If you eat the remnants of foodstuff of a tuberculosis patient, then you are attacked with tuberculosis. Or cholera patient.



So there are so many diseases. Therefore eating is so important thing. And the germs, they come out from the mouth very easily. Very easily. Formerly there was politics. They were called viṣa-kanyā, "poison girl." The politicians used to keep. I do not know whether nowadays the politicians keep. But we find from Vedic literature, viṣa-kanyā. Viṣa-kanyā means a girl, from the childhood, is injected poison, little by little, little, little, little, little. So when she is grown up, she, whole body is poisonous. So the politician used to engage such girl to kill his opponent politician. Very nice, beautiful girl, and (s)he will go, and as soon as the kissing will be there, he will die. Just like poisonous. Yes, it is fact. It is not story. I read in medical journal. There was one... Not medical journal. In logic class. It is called some "Typhoid Mary." "Typhoid Mary." A girl whose name was Mary, wherever she would go, all the people associating with her will be attacked with typhoid. Then the medical board examined her blood, that she is full of typhoid germs. So therefore wherever she goes, people become infected. These are medical facts.

So therefore association is so important. Saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ. According to association we infect different qualities. That they do not know. But nature's law is so particular, as soon as you infect by association a particular type of quality, you have to suffer for that. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He was asked by one devotee, gṛhastha devotee, householder, "Sir, what is the duty of a gṛhastha devotee, Vaiṣṇava?" Devotee means Vaiṣṇava. So He immediately informed him, asat-saṅga-tyāga ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra: [Cc. Madhya 22.87] "A Vaiṣṇava's behavior should be that he should give up the company of asat, nondevotee." That is his first business. He should give up the company of nondevotee. This is first business. Because he will be infected. Therefore we insist our students that "Don't go out." Even you are discomfortable, you should tolerate, but you should not go out of the society. Then you will surely fall down, surely fall down. So if there is inconvenience, little... That is advised in Bhagavad-gītā, mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ [Bg. 2.14]. These, just like extreme cold or extreme heat, they are troublesome to the body, mātrā-sparśāḥ. On account of this material body, we feel extreme cold, extreme heat. But Kṛṣṇa says, "They come and go." It is not that winter season will remain forever or the summer season also remain. They will come and go. If it is intolerable, please tolerate, please tolerate. Then it will be all right. I have repeatedly said... Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, tāṅdera caraṇa-sevi-bhakta-sane vāsa. Why we have opened this society? I could have initiated, and let him remain at his home. No. The society required. So by association we become good or bad. If you associate with goodness, then you acquire goodness quality, and if you associate with bad, passionate, ignorant, then you get that quality. So according to that quality...

This Yadu-vaṁśa, they were Kṛṣṇa's descendants. Just like when a king comes, he comes with his associates. So when Kṛṣṇa appeared, He had to marry so many wives because it was a stage to show Kṛṣṇa's supreme authority, supremacy. So the demigods came down also from different planets to help Kṛṣṇa. So these demigods became Kṛṣṇa's family. Some of the woman denizens, they became Kṛṣṇa's wife, and some of them became their sons. In this way, a huge family of Kṛṣṇa, Yadu dynasty. One crore, very big family, 16,108 wives. Each wife had sons, ten sons, and each son had ten sons. In this way children, grandchildren, and the whole family, big dynasty, Yadu family. It is estimated 100,000 hundred times. So many. Now, Kṛṣṇa wanted to leave this planet. So what will happen there? If they remain... Although Kṛṣṇa knew that they have come from different planets, but they knew that "We are sons and grandsons and grandchildren of Kṛṣṇa." They were very much puffed up. So what is the difference between a demon and devotee? A demon is puffed up. That's all. Falsely. That is demon. And a devotee is submissive, meek and mild. This is the difference. The demons will... We go, "My dear sir, we have got these books to understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. So you kindly read this book. You will be benefited." "Ah, what is God? Who is God? I am God." This is demonism. And demigod or a devotee means "Oh, here is a book, something about God, Kṛṣṇa. All right, let me read it." That is the difference. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ means they don't care for God. That is the disease. Although they are under the stringent laws of God, still, they don't care for God.

So this Yadu dynasty, Kṛṣṇa thought that "In My absence they are powerful... Because they, to assist Me..." "To assist Me" means... He had two missions: paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. They have killed so many demons. Everywhere they came out victorious because Kṛṣṇa was there. Now, in the absence of Kṛṣṇa, they would be puffed up. Therefore they would be turned again into demons: "Oh, I belong to Kṛṣṇa's family." Just like in our country, Nityānanda-vaṁśa: "I belong to the Nityānanda Prabhu," exploiting people. The Muhammadans also: "I belong to the family of Muhammad, Hazrat Muhammad." Christ has no family; he did not marry. Otherwise some would have been very much puffed up, "I am family of Christ." So this material nature is such thing that as soon as you get little power, you become puffed up. That is demonic nature. That is demonic nature. So Kṛṣṇa wanted to take them with Him, because they came to help Kṛṣṇa, and after His departure, these demigods would turn into demons. That He did not like to see.

Therefore this Yadu dynasty was placed amongst themselves. Because there was no other person to kill the Yadu..., and any one of the Yadu dynasty. Therefore this fratricidal war was manufactured and they died. Yayāharad bhuvo bhāraṁ tāṁ tanuṁ vijahāv ajaḥ, kaṇṭakaṁ kaṇṭakena. Kaṇṭakaṁ kaṇṭakena. Just like if you have got some thorn pricked in your leg, you take another thorn and get it out. This is the law of nature. One demon is killed by another demon. That is the keeping balance. There is war. We have experience. One demonic nation has grown up very strong, so immediately another demonic nation declares war, or he declares war-both of them are finished. This is going on.

So read the purport.

Pradyumna: "Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura suggests that the ṛṣis like Śaunaka and others who were hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Sūta Gosvāmī at Naimiṣāraṇya were not happy to hear about the Yadus' dying in the madness of intoxication."



Prabhupāda: (aside:) Don't move the leg, not... Ah.



Pradyumna: "To give them relief from this mental agony, Sūta Gosvāmī assured them that the Lord caused the members of the Yadu dynasty to relinquish their bodies."



Prabhupāda: Yes, everyone will be sorry, that "How Kṛṣṇa's descendants could fight amongst themselves and die like this?" It was not very happy to think by other devotees. Therefore the explanation is given. Go on.



Pradyumna: "...by which they had to take away the burden of the world. The Lord and His eternal associates appeared on earth to help the administrative demigods in eradicating the burden of the world."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Yadā yadā hi dharma... The beginning of Kṛṣṇa's appearance... You know that in the Kṛṣṇa book, how Kṛṣṇa appeared. There was an appeal by the earth, mother earth, that she is overburdened with demons, and it was unbearable for her what to do. So this petition was submitted to Viṣṇu by Brahmā, and Viṣṇu replied that "Kṛṣṇa is coming and He will do the needful." This was the beginning. So as soon as there is yadā yadā hi dharmasya glāniḥ [Bg. 4.7], the planet becomes overburdened by the sinful demons, so they require to be moved and the burden lessened. That was the function of Kṛṣṇa's coming. Whenever Kṛṣṇa comes in different incarnation, there is need. Glānir bhavati bhārata. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glāniḥ [Bg. 4.7]. Dharmasya glāniḥ means... We have explained several times. You have read in the Bhagavad-gītā. Glāniḥ means discrepancy, discrepancy. And dharma means obedience to God. That is dharma. Religion means..., religion does not mean anything else. You can manufacture so many formulas and theses. The real meaning is obedience to God. That is religion. Simple definition. If a man is obedient to God, it doesn't matter to which religion he belongs. He may be a Christian, he may be Hindu, he may be Mussulman. It doesn't matter. Religion means... This is the... I have given.



Religion means the laws of God. There must be laws. God is the Supreme. As the state laws are there, now the so many affairs in the cosmic manifestation is going on, how they can think of that there is no law? There is law. The sun is rising exactly in time. The Pacific Ocean is exactly in its position. It is not coming even a few yards beyond the area. Such a huge water, it can overflood immediately the whole Los Angeles city in a second. But why it is not coming? You are sure. We are walking by the beach. We are sure that "The water cannot come here." By whose order? By whose law? But these rascals they cannot understand. They are saying, "Nature." They give the explanation, "Nature." But nature is dull. Nature, material nature is dull. We do not find anything... Material nature... Just like this is a material thing. But it is being manipulated by a living being. This has... This iron or other metallic preparation, they have been turned into microphone by a living entity, not that the matter has come automatically and combined together and it has become microphone. Where is that instance? Nature, material nature, does not combine together. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat [Bg. 7.5]. He is defining very nice. You read book. Kṛṣṇa says, "There are two kinds of nature: inferior nature and spiritual nature. The inferior nature is matter." Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4], and superior nature is the living entity. So why superior, living entity? Because the living entity can manipulate the material nature.

So matter, matter is manipulated by a living entity and it has become useful. A microphone. It is common sense affair. So a living entity is not matter. He is superior nature. We should understand that. So everything... Now this superior nature, living entity. He has got mind, intelligence. That is also material. But under the direction of Kṛṣṇa, the mind, intelligence, ego is working. And how it is working? As you wanted. He is giving simply permission. I want to... Just like I want to manufacture something in chemical laboratory. My intense desire is how to make it successful. Then when Kṛṣṇa sees that you are so much, mean, burst to do this, so Kṛṣṇa gives you intelligence that "You do like this." Then He becomes a scientist, discoverer. He cannot do it independently. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]. One man is committing mistake and one man is doing right. Why? Because within the heart, there is Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is giving direction as he wanted.

Actually, Kṛṣṇa does not want you to do anything else except to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is Kṛṣṇa's desire. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That is His desire. People say foolishly, "What is the desire of God?" And here is the the desire of God. Openly it is said that "You give up all other occupations. Simply take to this occupation, how to become a devotee." Man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ. That is Kṛṣṇa's desire. But we shall not do that thing. We shall do everything except that thing. That is our problem. And therefore we are suffering. That is demoniac. That is demoniac. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ. Āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ, disobedient to Kṛṣṇa.

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



Āsuraṁ bhāvam is there. So in order to save sometimes, āsuraṁ bhāvam, that is increasing the āsuraṁ bhāvam, so immediately there is death.



So this law is going on, nature's law. Nature is not independent. Nature is working under the direction of the Lord. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]. So everything is under the law, under the order of God, but He is not under anyone's order, anyone's guidance or anyone's order. That is God. That is the difference. This morning we were discussing that if everything has got cause, then God has got also cause. Some of our... Yes. But that is the difference, that if God also has got cause, then how He becomes God? He is one of us. God has no cause. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1].

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam. He is cause of all causes. Because He is anādi, means He has no cause. Ādi, He is the original cause. This is to be understood.



That is the difference between God and ourself. Eko bahūnām. God is also two hand. But the mūḍhas: "Because God has got two hands, therefore He is also like me." That is mūḍha. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]. "Because God comes as human being with two hands, two legs, one head, therefore He is one of the, one of..." No. It is miscalculation. Just like in the hospital, there are so many patients lying down on the bed, and when the doctor comes, if the patient thinks, "Now he is also patient," how is that? He is not patient. He has come to treat patient. Similarly, God may come like us. Because otherwise he will not accept. If He something... God never incarnates with four-handed viṣṇu-mūrti. This will be something extraordinary. So He comes like exactly like us, but He is not one of us. That is God consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Go on reading.

Pradyumna: "He therefore called for some of the confidential demigods to appear in the Yadu family and serve Him in His great mission. After the mission was fulfilled, the demigods, by the will of the Lord, relinquished their corporeal bodies by fighting amongst themselves in the madness of intoxication. The demigods are accustomed to drinking soma-rasa beverage, and therefore the drinking of wine..."



Prabhupāda: Now, we can take one lesson that intoxication is so bad that it had a bad effect in the family of God, Yadu dynasty. And what to speak of others? Intoxication is so bad. Go on.



Pradyumna: "Therefore the drinking of wine and intoxication are not unknown to them. Sometimes they were put into trouble for indulging in intoxication. Once the sons of Kuvera fell in the wrath of Nārada for being intoxicated, but afterwards they regained their original forms by the grace of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This is goodness. One may be intoxicated. When he comes to his senses that "This is not good," then he is godly. That is the difference. But the demon cannot understand that. They continue. Just like our devotees. They are all godly. Because they had some bad habits, it doesn't matter. But they have given up. That is difference between the demons and the devotees. A devotee understands what is what and he does according to the direction of God. Therefore he is demigod. And the demons, they will never agree. That is the difference. Yes?



Pradyumna: "...for the Supreme Lord, both the asuras and the demigods are equal."



Prabhupāda: Yes. All of them are sons. They, whether one is demon or demigod, both of them are sons of God. But what is the difference between them? Just like a father has got two sons or more sons. One son is very obedient to the father, and the other son is not. That is the difference here. God has not made anyone demon or demigod. For God, everyone is equal. Samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29]. Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, "I am equal to everyone." Otherwise, how He is God? He is equal to everyone. But they are creating their own situation and becoming god or demon. So in the human form of life, advanced consciousness, instead of becoming demon, we should become demigod. That is the fulfillment of human life. And if we remain demon, then this opportunity is missed. This human form of life is missed.



All right. Thank you. (end)



731213SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.35

-

Los Angeles, December 13, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "The Supreme Lord relinquished the body which He manifested to diminish the burden of the world. Just like a magician, He relinquishes one body to accept different ones like the fish incarnation, etc." [SB 1.15.35]



Prabhupāda:



rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.39]



Govindam, Govinda is ādi-puruṣa. So ādi-puruṣa means the original person. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said by Kṛṣṇa Himself, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya [Bg. 7.7], "I am the Supreme Person." Now there are different forms of God, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. There are different incarnations. Just like īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. That Kṛṣṇa, He is staying in everyone's heart. This is also another incarnation, antaryāmī, Supersoul incarnation. Just imagine how many. Anantyāya kalpate, these living entities are unlimited, so this incarnation, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām [Bg. 18.61], the Lord in everyone's heart is staying. So how many you cannot count, there is no question. Not only that; it is said that aṇḍāntara-stham, He is staying as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu within this universe.



We should always remember that without spirit soul there cannot be any material development. That is practical. Just like the seed, the living soul, for changing his body, he is put into the semina of a male. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. This is the process of changing body. Daiva-netreṇa. This is being how you have to change your body. That is not under your control. After your death you are unconscious. Just like when you are on a surgical operational table you are completely under the surgeon. He puts you on the table, you unconscious, and he is operating as he likes. You don't protest. Similarly, we have got three condition. This is awakened stage we are talking, but at night we dream. That is called svapna stage, dreaming stage. And there is another stage, when you don't dream, you are simply unconsciousness. If somebody has gone surgical operation he might have experienced that completely unconscious. So then dream comes. When you come to consciousness from unconsciousness, you come to dreaming condition. From dreaming condition you come to this awakened stage. Similarly, you go from this awakened stage to dreaming condition and from dreaming condition to unconsciousness.

So as in the unconscious stage surgical operation takes place, you have no hand in it, you simply do not know what is happening, similarly, you are creating a condition of next life by your karma. Just like a clerk in a big establishment, he is creating situation by his work whether he will be promoted to a higher official position or he'll be degraded or he'll be (indistinct). He is creating. Similarly, we are creating our next life. This life is a chance for creating next life. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. You have to change your body. But that depends on your work. It is not the, na kaśca(?) (indistinct) karma. This karma is not created by Kṛṣṇa, or God. You create your karma. You like this. Somebody wants to come here and somebody does not want to come. That independence is there. That independence is; otherwise there are millions of people here in Los Angeles. Who is coming here? Nobody. Because they are not interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So this is the position. You create a situation of your own. Just like when the surgical operation, you have got a boil, then you... You have created by contamination, and the surgeon is simply operating. He has not created that situation. Similarly your transference to another body is not God's creation, it is your creation. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-janma-yoniṣu [Bg. 13.22]. Those who have read Bhagavad-gītā, you have seen. Why one is born in low-grade family, one is born high-grade family, one is born animal, one is born human being, one is born as demigod? Why? What is the cause? Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya. Kāraṇam. The cause is as he has infected the modes of material nature. The material nature is going on in three modes, sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. It is up to you if you associate with tamo-guṇa, then you become next life animal or tree or fish. There are so many degraded condition. Jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Those who are in the darkness modes of material nature, they go down, adhaḥ. Adho gacchanti, degraded.

So we create that situation, and after death we become unconscious. And the superior agent, prakṛti, he takes you. Just like the air carries the flavor. You do not see how the air is passing and where the air is there, but it is there. You are smelling, "Oh, very good flavor," because the air is carrying. But you do not see. So these rascal scientists they think that because you cannot see, there is no soul. Subtle laws he doesn't know how the soul... Soul is so minute particle: ten-thousand, one ten-thousandth part of the top of the hair. How can your material science can see or understand? Therefore they say "No soul," but the soul is there, and he is being carried. He is being carried by nature's subtle intelligence, mind and ego. These are subtle material things. He is covered. As long he is in the material world, his subtle body..., the subtle body is being carried to another gross body. This is the, I mean to, science of transmigration of the soul.

So you are also changing body. We, everyone we have to change body. Similarly, advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Kṛṣṇa has got also ananta-rūpam. Our rūpam, our this form, is imitation of one of the forms of Kṛṣṇa. This is imitation. So but His forms are not like our form. His forms are spiritual. He is existing in different spiritual forms. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs. 5.33]. Ananta means unlimited. But every form is spiritual. So He is changing. He is changing, yathā naṭaḥ. He is changing like naṭaḥ. Naṭaḥ means actor, dramatic actor. Just like in the stage the dramatic actor is sometimes coming as a king and next time by changing the dress he is coming as (indistinct). This is an example. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the same but He has got different manifestations. That different manifestation He takes. Why? Bhū-bhāraḥ kṣapitaḥ. Bhū-bhāraḥ. He comes in different forms just to liquidate the burden of the earth, bhū-bhāraḥ. Bhū-bhāraḥ kṣapitaḥ, just to reduce the burden of this earth.

When demons are, demonic civilization is there, then the whole planet becomes overburdened with their sinful activity. It is very easy to understand. Where in the state everyone is rogue and rascal, then the state becomes overburdened. Overburdened means the duty of the state for arranging police, military and other things becomes very much confused. Similarly, if the people are all law-abiding citizens then the government has no burden. Let things go on nicely, everything is going nicely. Similarly, this is also great state, the universal state. So when people become rascals, rogues and demons, it becomes very much overburdened. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7]. Dharmasya glānir bhavati. Dharma means not a sentiment. Dharma does not mean. Dharma generally is translated as "religion." So everyone can say, "I have got my own religion, you have got your own religion. Why you trouble to convert me or convert...?" They say like that. But actually dharma does not mean that, that you make your own sentiment, I make my own sentiment. No. That is not dharma. Your sentiment, your creation of dharma... Just like the, our Gandhi in India. He was preaching nonviolence. Nonviolence. So some Hindus approached him, "Sir, you are preaching nonviolence. These Muhammadans, they are killing cows, so why don't you ask them to stop, nonviolence?" So he replied, "Oh, this is their religion. How can I stop?" What is this nonsense? If you believe in philosophy of nonviolence, one may say that "This is my religion," that you cannot indulge in that? If somebody says, just like state is neutral to religion, if somebody says, "My religion is to cut throat," the state will allow, "Go on with your religion. Yes, it is your religion"? Will the state allow? No.

Similarly, we cannot create religion. We cannot create religion, "This is my religion." Then everyone will escape(?) in the name of religion. Because you have created so many rascaldom as religion, therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya: [Bg. 18.66] "You rascal, you give up all these religion. Real religion is surrender to Me." This is religion. Otherwise why Kṛṣṇa says, "Give up all religion"? Sarva-dharmān parityajya [Bg. 18.66], He says in the beginning. Dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya. "I come, I descend just to reestablish the principle of religion." Does it mean that He came to support Hindu religion, Muslim religion, Christian religion? No. He came to reestablish religion. People do not know what is that religion. They have created their own religion. And some rascal swami is supporting, yata mata tata patha. How you can create? Religion is personal? "You can create your own religion and be satisfied"? This is going on. In the name of religion, every rascal is creating his own religion and he is satisfied. He is satisfied, "I have got my own religion." But they do not know. These rascals, they do not know what is the meaning of religion. Religion means to abide by the laws of God, simple definition. Religion. That is religion, to abide by the laws. Now if you are religionist, you cannot deny God. Without God there is no question of religion. If somebody says, "I don't care for God. But my religion is simply to cut throat." Is that religion? So therefore one must know what is religion. That religion, very simple definition. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. Religion is the law given by God. This is religion.

So what God is giving as law? The law is that "You give up all nonsense religion, simply surrender unto Me." This is religion. So a religious person, it does not mean whether he is Hindu or Muslim or Christian or Buddhist. He must accept God and surrender unto Him. This is religion. This is religion. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati [Bg. 4.7], that means when religion becomes polluted, at that time Kṛṣṇa comes as bhū-bhāraḥ. Because as soon as... Religion means to abide by the laws of, to abide by the laws of God. So dharmasya glānir bhavati means when people do not abide by the laws of God. That is dharmasya glāniḥ, discrepancy in the matter of discharging religion. Just like when you begin to break laws, everyone, then government becomes very furious, arrest, punish, hang-these things are going on. But if you are abiding by the laws of government, there is no such question to harass you. There is no... You live peacefully. This is the process going on. And bhū-bhāraḥ, when people become irreligious, not abiding by the laws of God, then it becomes burdensome. How one can say that "To cut throat is my religion"? Nobody can say like that. That is not religion. That means he has no sense of God consciousness. He's a rascal.

God consciousness person, God conscious person, what is the symptom of God conscious person? That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. What is that?

vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 5.18]



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]



This is sign of a perfect God conscious or Kṛṣṇa conscious. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. One who has understood God, he is paṇḍita, learned. Without being learned, a fool, rascal, cannot understand what is God. One who understands God means he is paṇḍita, he is learned because he has got the knowledge. Veda, Veda means knowledge. What is the purpose of knowledge? Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. That is Veda, that is knowledge. Any kind of knowledge, it doesn't matter whether it is political or scientific or philosophical or mathematical-there are different-but the ultimate aim should be to understand what is God. That is knowledge. Because you, human being, you are advancing in knowledge, but what is the goal of knowledge? The goal of knowledge is to understand God. That is the difference between dog and me. He has no goal of knowledge. He is simply eating, simply jumping and barking, that's all. That is a dog's business. If you go on like that, eating, sleeping and begetting children and barking in political conference, then you are dog. You are not God or godly. Nobody can become God, that is... But you can become godly. Similarly, people have become just like cats and dogs. This is dharmasya glāniḥ.



Therefore the incarnation is already there, Kṛṣṇa is there, Kṛṣṇa's instruction is there, but people are not taking advantage of it. Not taking advantage of it. Everything is there. Therefore our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to rescue these rascals from this ignorance and give Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Most philanthropic work. They will become dog next life; we are trying to save them, "Don't become dog. Just become god or godly." This is our movement. But they are persistent to become dog. Even they are coming here, again falling. Persistent to become dog. So that is nature's law, what can be done?

So this is the bhū-bhāraḥ. Bhū-bhāraḥ, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is also incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is absolute. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the same. That is absolute. In relative world consciousness is different from the person, but in the absolute world consciousness and the subject matter of consciousness is the same. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's name is the same; Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's form the same. Therefore when you worship Kṛṣṇa's form it is not waste of time; it is worshiping Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is omnipotent, He can accept your service by presenting Himself in His form. But Kṛṣṇa can do that, that is His omnipotency. Otherwise why Kṛṣṇa will say patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati tad aham aśnāmi: [Bg. 9.26] "If somebody gives me something to eat, it doesn't matter very valuable, very palatable dishes. It doesn't matter. Even patraṁ puṣpam, little flower, little fruits which any poor man can collect"? Just like if you are very, very poor man, you have nothing to offer to Kṛṣṇa, but you want to offer something. So Kṛṣṇa says, "All right. Offer Me a little fruit, little flower." So if you have no money to purchase, if you go to a friend, "Sir, I want to take little flower to offer to Kṛṣṇa," at least if he is human being he will never deny. "Yes, take it." If he's a dog, that is a different thing. If he's a human being you can collect this little flower and fruit anywhere, any part of the world.

So Kṛṣṇa worship is so easy, universal. Other worshiping method you have to collect so many things, then you can worship. Or you must have temple, you must have church, you must have worshiping place. But Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. And you can collect this patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalam anywhere. You can worship Kṛṣṇa anywhere, but you have to learn how to worship. What is that learning? Bhaktyā, that is the method. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati [Bg. 9.26]. This patraṁ puṣpam is not important thing. The important thing is bhakti, devotion. That is wanted. Without bhakti, if you offer Kṛṣṇa very big plate, Kṛṣṇa is not hungry to take your food. He'll not accept it. He'll not accept anything if you do not offer with your love, bhaktyā, love and serving spirit: "My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are so opulent. I have nothing to offer You because You have got everything. But I have tried to collect the things to my best power, so I am offering You. Kindly take it." This is mantra. This is mantra. Don't require much mantra. That meekness, that humbleness, "Kṛṣṇa, I am most insignificant. I have nothing to give You, neither You are very much hungry or You... You have got many, many..." Lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam [Bs. 5.29]. Kṛṣṇa is served by the goddess of fortune, not one, many millions. Here we are praying to goddess of fortune, "My dear goddess of fortune, kindly give me little fortune. I am very poor." That is our position. We are praying. But Kṛṣṇa's position is that lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānam. The goddess of fortune is praying Kṛṣṇa. Just like the gopīs, they are all goddess of fortune. "Kṛṣṇa, kindly take little service..." This is the position.

So why Kṛṣṇa will come to you, take your foodstuff? Because Kṛṣṇa wants that you surrender. That is required. That is required. Therefore we should serve Kṛṣṇa, because without bhakti, many times Kṛṣṇa has said, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] "simply through bhakti." You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa by your so-called scholarship, scientific knowledge and speculation. These are all useless, nonsense things. You cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa clearly said, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]. Bhaktyā. Simply by devotional service one can understand. Bhakti means serving, service. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. When you become in service attitude, just to serve Kṛṣṇa with humble attitude, with devotion, then Kṛṣṇa will reveal. Otherwise you cannot understand Kṛṣṇa. It is not possible. If you think that "I am very rich man, I can offer Kṛṣṇa so many things, nice dress, nice foodstuff. Kṛṣṇa now is within my grip." No. Kṛṣṇa is not so cheap. There also it is said that vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. You cannot understand Kṛṣṇa because you are very learned scholar in Vedic knowledge. No. Vedeṣu durlabham, it is very difficult. But adurlabham, He is very cheap unto His devotees. He is very cheap. Like Vidura. Vidura invited Him, and Kṛṣṇa did not to go Arjuna's house..., I mean to say, Duryodhana's house, very palatial building. Vidura, a cottage, so He went there. And Vidura being in ecstasy was offering Him some banana. So he was so overpowered by ecstasy that instead of giving the fruit banana, he was giving the skin, and Kṛṣṇa was eating. So when he came to his senses he saw that "I have given only the skin, and Kṛṣṇa is eating." So this is bhakti. This is bhakti. Kṛṣṇa wants that. Kṛṣṇa can eat anything, either you give the pulp or skin, He can eat anything because He is all powerful and everything is equal to Him.

So real thing is bhakti. So when people become rascals and nonsense and do not care for God consciousness, devotion to God, that is become bhū-bhāraḥ, burdened. That has now become. Now Kṛṣṇa has, because at the present moment in the Kali-yuga... Kṛṣṇa formerly came to kill big, big giant demons like Rāvaṇa and Kaṁsa, Hiraṇyakaśipu, very, very big giant. But that the present moment where is that big giant? They are all poor. There is no... Although by mentality they are all rogues and rascals and demons, but in material condition they are very very poor. That is stated. Mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. People are so unfortunate that even the bird and beast, they can get their two meals, eating, sleeping, mating; they have got their arrangement. At the present moment a human being has no arrangement what he is going to eat in the morning or in the evening, whether he has got any chance of sex life. These things are preliminary requirement, but nobody is guarantee of these things, they are so unfortunate. They are not getting the preliminary necessities of life, what to speak of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They are so unfortunate. So why should come Kṛṣṇa to kill them? They are already killed by the laws of nature. They are already killed, half-killed. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has come in the form of His name. Please chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much.

Devotees: Jaya Prabhupāda. (end)





731214SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.36

-

Los Angeles, December 14, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "When the Personality of Godhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, left this earthly planet in His self-same form, from that very day Kali, who had appeared partially before, become fully manifest to create inauspicious conditions for those who are endowed with a poor fund of knowledge." [SB 1.15.36]



Prabhupāda: Here is one word, jahau. Jahau sva-tanvā śravaṇīya-sat-kathaḥ. So when Kṛṣṇa left, He left with His, the self-same body. In the Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham [Bg. 4.7]. In another place Kṛṣṇa says, ātma-māyayā. Ātma-māyayā. Māyā means potency, energy. So there are three potencies... There are many potencies. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. God has unlimited potencies, but learned scholars, saintly persons, they have not rejected potencies, because they cannot be. There are certain philosophers, they are of opinion that God has no potency. But that is not fact. From Vedic information we see potency. What is that? How to understand the potency? The potency, you can understand. Just like from the fire you have got two potencies: heat and light. Nobody can deny it. Similarly, as fire is placed in one place but it expands its potencies heat and light... That is within our experience. It is not very difficult. Similarly, the sun also... Everyone can see that the sun planet is a big planet, the biggest planet. Or star, as somebody says. Whatever it may be, it is lying in one corner of the sky. But it expands its potency throughout the universe. The sunshine is distributed all over the sky, all over the planetary system. And similarly, heat also. We are feeling 99,000,000 miles away... Is that ninety-nine miles? What is that? Scientists say?



Devotees: Ninety-three.



Prabhupāda: Ninety-three million miles away from us; still, we are feeling scorching heat, 120 degree, 135 degree. In Middle East the temperature the temperature is 135 degrees. It is impossible to stay on the surface of the globe. One goes down to the earth. So potency is there. If in material thing like the sun-sun is a material thing; it has got so much potency-so how much potencies the Supreme Personality of Godhead got? That is called inconceivable potency. Acintya, beyond your perception. He has got that potency.



So that is the statement of Vedas.

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

[Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]



The is description of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Person. Because it is said, tasya. Tasya means He's a person. So what kind of person? Like me? Whole day working, for money? No. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vid... He has nothing to do. See here. Kṛṣṇa has nothing to do. Simply He is enjoying, playing on flute and enjoying with Rādhārāṇī. That's all. He hasn't got to go to office, to the factory. (laughter) He hasn't got. He is simply to enjoy. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). And we also take, imitate that enjoyment. We also want to mix, young boys and girls, dance together. Because we imitate Kṛṣṇa. The same thing is there. With gopīs Kṛṣṇa is dancing. Here also we are dancing, in nightclub, and this club, that club. But that will not give you satisfaction, because it is imitation. If you want real dancing, come to Kṛṣṇa. That is wanted.



That is Kṛṣṇa conscious movement, that we are trying to take the misled people from illusion to the reality. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they see that there is no more any pleasure in this dancing. "Make it zero. Forget it." No. We don't say that. We say that this dancing is there in the original conception in the Absolute Truth. That is... The Vedānta-sūtra says, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Whatever you are experiencing, wherefrom it has come? It has come from the Absolute. That is the Absolute idea. But here, in the relative world, it is pervertedly reflected, and because it is not reality, therefore you are confused, baffled. So our proposition is come to the reality. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The same dancing... Just like here is a picture, Kṛṣṇa is dancing with the gopīs. We also like, anybody of us here. Even in old age they are dancing with young girls. In Paris there is club. All going to die, such old men, they are coming in the club, paying fifty dollars as entrance fee; then they have to pay for young girls and wine. But still, they come. They cannot actually enjoy. Vayasi gate kim yuvati nārī:(?) "When one is old man, what is the use of mixing with young girls?" Yes. But they like it. They like it. They pay for it. But they do not enjoy, Because if they have enjoyed, they would have been satisfied, but they are not satisfied. Frustrated.

So this is the position. This is the position. Just like the heat and light. If... You are feeling the heat in the sunshine, but that does not mean the sun is there. You cannot say that. Sun is there and not there. This is called simultaneously inconceivable presence of God everywhere. He is present everywhere. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā.

mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ

jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ

[Bg. 9.4]



Mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam. Kṛṣṇa says, "By My impersonal feature, I am spread everywhere, everywhere." Everywhere is Kṛṣṇa. Mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni: "Everything is resting on Me." This is the fact. Just like in this material world everything resting on the sunshine. That is scientific. Is is not scientist, the sunshine? The planets, they are rotating on account of this heat and sunshine. It is not a theory?



Svarūpa Dāmodara: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So now what do we mean by "everything"? Just like this planet. Everything with this planet-the trees, the rivers, the mountains, the cities, the cars-everything within this planet, that is an unit. So this is one planet. And there are millions and millions, trillions of planets. But how they are existing? Existing on the sunshine. So wherefrom the sunshine comes? The sunshine comes from God, or the sun comes from God. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Everything is born, everything is emanating form the Absolute. Therefore, indirectly, everything is depending on Kṛṣṇa's potency. Mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni: [Bg. 9.4] "Everything is resting on My potency." Na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ: "But I am not there." This is the acintya-bhedābheda-tattva, simultaneously one and different. This is our philosophy.



So our point is that Kṛṣṇa, or God, is there, and He is working through His potencies. Just like a big man, he is sitting on his parlor. He hasn't got to go. Just like we have seen Mr. Birla in... Those who are with me, they have seen. He is sitting in his home, but he has got many potencies. He has got secretaries, clerks, and this and that, so many things. So they are doing all work. He hasn't got to work. A big man means he hasn't got to work personally. He has got so many assistants. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa, He is the Supreme. He hasn't got to work Himself. He hasn't got to work. Vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya padam ekaṁ na gacchati. He is always engaged in His playing flute and dancing with the gopīs. That's all. Pleasure. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). That is pleasure. So His potencies are working. What kind of potency? That is described. I have given the example. Just like the sun is there and the sunshine is there, and the sunshine is working everything. By the sunshine, the trees are coming out, the leaves are coming out. They are dropping when there is no sunshine. Everything is depending on sunshine. That is explained in the Vedic literatures:

eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner

jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis

tathedam akhilaṁ jagat



Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ. Whatever you are seeing in this cosmic manifestation, they are simply demonstration of the potency of the Lord. Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ.



So we are... We take our birth and we accept our death not independently. We are under the another potency. We are also one potency. The potency... There are... Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate [Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport]. Those potencies have been divided into three. Multi, but roughly, they have been divided into three. One is called internal potency, one is called the external potency, and one is called the marginal potency. So the external potency means this material world. The whole material universe-so many universes, so many planets, stars, skies, and everything-these are the demonstration of the external potency. And similarly, there is the spiritual world. Spiritual world. That we cannot see. That is not within our experience. But we get it from the śāstra. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, paras tasmāt tu bhāvaḥ anyaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. Kṛṣṇa says, "There is another nature." Paras tasmāt. "This material nature, beyond that there is another nature." Paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. That is eternal. This material nature is not eternal. Just like your body, my body, it is not eternal, similarly, this gigantic body of universe, that is also not eternal. It has a date of creation, and it has a date for dissolution. That is the nature. Therefore it is said that "That material nature is sanātana. That is never created; neither it is annihilated."

So we, marginal... Marginal means actually we belong to the spiritual nature. Because we are spirit soul, but we have come in contact with this material nature, some way or other. So therefore we are seeing our position incompatible. We cannot adjust here. Therefore we are getting one type of body and enjoying or suffering another type of body, another type of body, another type of body. This is going on. Therefore we are called marginal. If we like, we can transfer ourself to the spiritual world and remain eternally, because we are of the spiritual nature. That is described in the Bhagavad-gītā: na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācin nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. This is the description of the soul. The soul is never born, na jāyate. Na mriyate, neither he dies. Na jāyate na mriyate vā. Kadācit, at any time. Not that sometimes we wish to live or sometimes we wish to die. No. Everlastingly, eternally, we never take our birth, never we die. Then what is this death? This death is of the material body, not of the soul. Therefore it is said, na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20], more distinctly, that "We don't think that the soul is dead after the annihilation of this body."

So now the conclusion is that because we are marginal, in between the spiritual nature and the material nature, although we are spiritual, although our real nature is na jāyate na mriyate, we never take birth, never die, but on account of our contact with this material nature, we are getting this material body and the body is changing. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. Body is changing. And that we have taken as our nature, birth and death. That is not our nature. We are spirit soul. We are put into marginal because... Just like the margin is explained: taṭastha. That is... We have translated into "marginal." Just like we go on the Pacific beach. Some day we find the water is covering the beach, and some day we see it is open. There is no water. So that is called marginal. Marginal. Sometimes it is covered by water; sometimes there is no water. Similarly, we, being marginal potency, we are sometimes influenced by this material nature, not always. Because at the present moment for sometimes we are under the material nature, now, if we try, then we can get out of this covering of material nature and come to the spiritual nature. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means don't remain in the marginal position. Come in the land so there will be no disturbance by the water. This is the position. If you remain on the marginal position, then sometimes you will be covered by the water and sometimes it will be dry. But if you little come forward this side, land side, the ocean has no power to touch you.

But Kṛṣṇa is not like that, and that is described here. Although Kṛṣṇa left this world, that does not mean that He left this world as we leave. Our leaving this world means we are leaving this material world and accepting another body. Therefore, at the present moment we are not in our own body. Our body is changing. Now this American body, and next birth may be Russian body. This is going on. You are fighting against the Russians, Americans, but he may get the Russian body next life. Therefore as American, he fought the whole life with the Russian, and he is going to become a Russian. Sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6]. This is the law of nature. This is the law of nature. Then again fights with American as soon as he gets the Russian body. Then he becomes again American. This is going on. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. Sometime Russian, sometime American, go on fighting. That's all. So this is called māyā. (laughter) This is māyā. Everyone is doing that. Everyone is doing that. Therefore Lord Caitanya said, ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva [Cc. Madhya 19.151]. The living entities are loitering like this, sometimes that body, sometimes this way, sometimes that way. He is simply loitering. He is not getting where to take shelter. Where permanent life, permanent happiness, he does not know. He does not know. He does not know. Simply changing. In the material world also, they are simply changing some form of government, electing one rascal, again rejecting, another rascal, another rascal. Because they are all rascals, they have no other alternative than to elect more rascal. But they are thinking that "By rejecting this rascal, we shall be happy." He does not know how to elect. He does not know how to elect. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31]. They are themselves blind, and they are accepting a leader who is also blind. So what will be the profit? If you are led by... You are blind, and if you are led by another blind man, then what will be the profit? Both of you will fall down in the ditch. That is going on.

Therefore, if you want real happiness, you must take the leadership of a man who has got eyes to see. Then it will be all right. So whose eyes are open? And that is in the Vedic literature said,

ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



It is the business of the guru... Because everyone is blind or in darkness, cannot see, so it is the guru's business to open his eyes, or to help him to see things as they are. That is guru's business. Ajñāna-timirāndhasya. Everyone is covered by the darkness of ignorance. So how darkness can be moved? If there is light. Immediately, if you make the switch off of electricity, this room will be dark. And again you make the switch on, there will be light. Just like at night, we cannot see. Everything is dark because the light, sun, is not there. In the morning, as soon as the sun is there, again everything you can see. So things are there. Because we are in the darkness of ignorance, we cannot see them properly. I am there, you are there, God is there, everything is there. Simply we have to get the light or the proper situation to see things as they are. That is wanted.



So Vedic literature therefore advises that if you want... First of all Vedas advises, "Don't keep yourself in the darkness." Tamasi mā jyotir gama: "Don't keep yourself in the darkness." This is human life. In the human life... In the animal life you kept yourself in darkness because there was no possibility of come to the light. If I invite all the dogs and animals of Los Angeles city to come here to hear about Bhagavad-gītā, it is not possible, because they are animals. But if I appeal to the human being, because he is human being, he may be interested. He should be interested, but the time is so bad that nobody is interested, but still, he may be interested. But that is not possible for the animals, cats and dogs. So in the human form of life, there is necessity of coming to the light and make a solution of the problems of life. Therefore Kṛṣṇa comes. That is the statement of Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā: yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham, ātma-māyayā [Bg. 4.7].

So Kṛṣṇa comes... He does not come like us. We are under the control of the material nature, but Kṛṣṇa is not under the control of material nature. That is to be understood. Therefore here it is said that jahau sva-tanvā. Sva means "own," and tanvā, tanu, tanu means "this body." We have got distinction, "I am the soul, but my this body is material." This distinction we have got because we are conditioned soul. Actually, I am not this body. I am soul. But I have become conditioned by this material body. And in case of Kṛṣṇa, He is not conditioned by this material body. Therefore it is said, sva-tanvā: "by His own original, spiritual body." This is the distinction you must understand. One scholar has described... Because he does not know Kṛṣṇa and still writing comments on Bhagavad-gītā, when Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Just think of Myself, just become my devotee, offer Your obeisances unto Me, worship Me," this rascal says, "It is not to Kṛṣṇa the person, but to the soul." Now he says... Just see how much ignorant he is. He does not know that Kṛṣṇa has no such division as His self or soul and the body, and he is writing comment. And this is very scholarly. It is... He is a rascal number one, and he is accepted as scholar. This is going on. This is going on, all over the world.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] "Mūḍhas, the rascals, they think, because I appear as a human being, they think as ordinary human being." Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ: "They do not know the great potentiality of Myself." Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ. Still, they will go on explaining Bhagavad-gītā, writing Bhāgavata, comments on. These rascals, mūḍhas, one who does not know that Kṛṣṇa has no distinction, as we have got distinction body and soul, Kṛṣṇa has no such distinction. Kṛṣṇa has no distinction between this Kṛṣṇa's form of stone and Kṛṣṇa Himself. Because the stone is also Kṛṣṇa's energy. Bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4]. The earth, water, air, fire, everything is Kṛṣṇa energy. That we have already explained. Parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktiḥ. Everything Kṛṣṇa's energy. So He can appear in any form from anywhere from anything. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa.

So we have to understand what is Kṛṣṇa. And as soon as you understand Kṛṣṇa, janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, in truth, if you understand Kṛṣṇa, then you become liberated. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. So we have to understand Kṛṣṇa like that. Sva-tanvā: He left this body not as we leave our body. No. We are leaving and accepting our body by the force of nature, material nature. Prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]. Our business is going on being forced, enforced by the laws of nature. Kṛṣṇa is not under the laws of nature; neither He has got distinction between His self and body. This is to be understood. Sva-tanvā. If somebody thinks that "Kṛṣṇa left His body and died like us..." There are a party, they think like that, "Kṛṣṇa also died like us." But that is not the fact. Kṛṣṇa left His so-called body just to befool the rascals. Because the rascals are thinking, "Kṛṣṇa is like us," therefore to bewilder them, Kṛṣṇa leaves a māyā body so that they may think that "Kṛṣṇa is like us." But actually here is the secret, that jahau sva-tanvā. He left this world in His original body. He has no such distinction. Śravaṇīya-sat-kathaḥ. If His body is like our body, material body, then what is the use of hearing about His activity? We are interested in the words of Kṛṣṇa. If Kṛṣṇa is like us, He has got the same material body, then why we should be interested to read Bhagavad-gītā, He is also a man like us?

Therefore here it is said, śravaṇīya-sat-kathaḥ. By hearing about Kṛṣṇa, you become liberated. So if He is equally as good as you are, then what is the use of reading His book, reading His instruction? But here it is said, śravaṇīya-sat-kathaḥ, tadāhar apratibuddha-cetasām. These things are spoken by less intelligent class of men, apratibuddha-cetasām. They say, cetasām abhadra-hetuḥ kalir anvavartata: "Because Kṛṣṇa passed away, therefore Kali got the opportunity to enter." That is, to some extent it is fact. But Kṛṣṇa, although left this planet, and if He is everything, how Kṛṣṇa can go away? Kṛṣṇa can remain with you eternally. And even if you say that "Because Kṛṣṇa went away, therefore Kali got the chance of entering," but if you keep yourself with Kṛṣṇa, where is the chance of Kali to enter? Where is the chance? So you keep yourself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kali will not be able to touch you.

Thank you very much. (end)



731215SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.37

-

Los Angeles, December 15, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was intelligent enough to understand the influence of the age of Kali, characterized by increasing avarice, falsehood, cheating and violence throughout the capital, state, home and among individuals. So he wisely prepared himself to leave home, and he dressed himself accordingly." [SB 1.15.37]



Prabhupāda: So Yudhiṣṭhira, anyone, any experienced man can see how things are going on. One has to possess such perfect eyes. When these things are in progressive way... What is this? Lobha, greediness; anṛta, falsehood; jihma, means diplomacy; and hiṁsa, violence or jealousy. When these things will increase, one should know that the influence of Kali-yuga is increasing. Anyone can understand. This world... This material world is so made that these things are very prominent: greediness, kāma-lobhādayaś ca, lusty desires and greediness, kāma and lobha. Generally, people are attached to these things. Then diplomacy, "How to satisfy my lusty desires, my greediness?"



But the king was so responsible that now he wanted to retire. There is no other way. As far as possible, he controlled. That is king's business. The government's business is to control these things, and citizen must be happy in every way. Even Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time, there was no excessive heat or cold; neither there was prominence of disease or pestilence, famine. These things were absent. Because Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja himself was very pious, and he conducted his government in such a way that people were also pious. Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhaḥ lokas tad anuvartate [Bg. 3.21]. If the leaders are perfect, then the citizens will be perfect. If the leaders are rascals... Just like in your country, now your president is caught up. Just see. Such an exalted post is occupied by a person who is subjected to so many criticisms. Why? "The Caesar's wife must be above suspicion." There is a... The king or the president, why he should be under suspicion? And if he is under suspicion, then immediately he should resign, "Oh, people are now suspecting." But this these rascals will not resign. You see? Just see how much our leaders are polluted. He has been charged with so many things. Why he? Everyone is. He is weak; therefore he has been caught up. That's all. He is not so perfect diplomat. Otherwise he would have not been caught up.

So the leaders must be perfect. Therefore, according to Vedic civilization, at least three persons in the society... The first: the priest or the spiritual master, who are engaged in teaching people about religiosity, he must be perfect, above suspicion. Similarly, public leader, he must be also above suspicion. A brāhmaṇa... Brāhmaṇa means priest also. He must be above suspicion. And the king must be above suspicion. Then things will go on. But there is no such restriction. Nowadays it is the days of vote. Any rascal, if he gets vote somehow or other, then he acquires the exalted post. That is also written in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that in the Kali-yuga there will be no consideration who is fit to occupy the exalted post of presidentship or royal throne. Simply somehow or other, by hook and crook, he'll occupy the seat. Therefore people are suffering. It is not... Nowadays, in democratic days, the government by the people, government for the people. So if the government is by the people, yes, you select your representative. If you are a fool, then you will select another fool. So Bhāgavata says, śva-viḍ-varāha uṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ. Anyone who is not a devotee, Kṛṣṇa conscious devotee of God, then he may be in a exalted post, but he is praised by some people who are exactly like śva. Śva means dog, and viḍ-varāha means pigs who eat stool. Śva-viḍ-varāha. Viḍ-varāha. And uṣṭra, uṣṭra means camel. And uṣṭra-kharaiḥ. Khara means ass. Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ [SB 2.3.19]. If a person who is not a devotee, he is praised or he is exalted, then the praisers, the persons who is praising him, he must be among these animals: dog, camel, pig and ass.

So the whole population is like that, like dog, like camel, like ass and like viḍ-varāha, pig, the stool-eater, the whole population, at the present moment. So he must elect another big animal who is also in this category. Because he has no knowledge. If you takes votes from the camels, to whom he will vote? Another big camel, that's all. If you take votes from the dog, then whom he will elect? Another big dog. Therefore, anyone who is not a devotee of God, Kṛṣṇa, he is either of these animals. And if he is praised, it is to be understood that he is being praised by the similar type of animals. So if we remain śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-khara, then we must elect another big śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-khara. So how there can be good situation of the state? It is not possible. Therefore the public must be educated so that they may not elect another big dog or big camel or big ass to the exalted post. It is the public's fault. Nowadays it is democratic days. So why should you complain against such-and-such person or president? You have elected him, and now you find fault with him. So it was your fault that you selected such a rascal, śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra. It is very right conclusion.

So why they have been described as dog? Dog means he is very faithful to his master. But if you pass through him without any fault, he will bark, "Gow! Gow! Gow! Gow!" That is dog's fault. One qualification is that he is very faithful to the master, but to the others, he is inimical always. In your country we have got experience. They have written, "Beware of dog." And if you pass, you are not entering the house, still, unnecessarily, the dog will bark. Even if he is on the top of veranda corridor, by seeing another unknown person, he will bark. That is offensive. So that is dog's business. And at the present moment the dog is happy only when he has got a good master. Otherwise dog is not happy. A street dog, he cannot eat. He has no eating. He has no place. He is lean and thin. You have seen. But he has got a good master, he is very stout, fatty, and very expert in barking. (laughter) So this is dog's qualification. He is very faithful.

So at the present moment people are like that. They are being educated, but technologist or computer expert or this, that, so many... The father spends so much money. He becomes an expert. But if he does not get a good master to employ him, he is useless. He is useless. His technological knowledge will be useless if he does not get a master. So therefore the modern education system is to create dogs. He will never be happy unless he gets a good master. Actually, we are constitutionally all dogs. But we do not know whom to serve. That is our misunderstanding. Actually, every one of us, servant. That's a fact. But we are missing the point, where to engage ourself in good service. That is Kṛṣṇa. We have to serve. You cannot avoid this. If you do not serve Kṛṣṇa, then you will have to serve māyā. That's all. But you have to serve. So in that respect, if we do not know who is the best master, then we will have to serve our senses, our lusty desires. If I do not become servant of Kṛṣṇa, then I shall become full of desire, to my lusty desires for sex life. I have to become servant. That is a fact. You cannot become master. Therefore the most intelligent person is he who knows that "Why shall I serve my lusty desires? Why not serve Kṛṣṇa?" Because I have to serve. This is intelligence.

So then again, śva-viḍ-varāha. Viḍ-varāha means the stool-eater. It has no discrimination. Anyone who is eating anything available, he is like viḍ-varāha. He has no discrimination. A human being should have discrimination. Eatable, everything is eatable. Stool is also eatable. Does it mean a human being should eat eatable stool? No. It is eatable for the pigs, for the hogs, not for you. Similarly, a human being who does not know what is eatable for him, he is just like this viḍ-varāha, viḍ-varāha, hog, who has no discrimination, "Oh, everything is all right. Eat. Everything is all right." That is viḍ-varāha. And uṣṭra. Uṣṭra means camel. Camel enjoys his own blood. The camel eats thorny twigs. So the tongue is cut, and the blood comes out, and the blood is mixed up with the thorns, and he finds it very tasteful. He is tasting his own blood, and he is finding very tasteful. Similarly, everyone in this material world, he is enjoying sex life. He is enjoying his own blood, but he is thinking, "It is very good enjoyment." That is camel's enjoyment. One drop of semina is manufactured by so much blood. So unnecessarily we discharge semina means we are enjoying, spending your own blood. But the camel does not know. Similarly, camel-like man does not know. Therefore he falls diseased. It is to be used only for purpose of having good children, not for enjoyment. That is false enjoyment. So therefore it has been described as the camel. And ass. Ass means fool number one, because he works very hard. He carried the washerman's load of cloth, two tons of, but not a single cloth belongs to him. Not a single cloth. And he will agree to carry so big burden. What is the profit? The profit is that the washerman will give a little morsel of grass, and he is satisfied. This rascal does not know, "I can get grass anywhere. Why shall I be employed by this washerman?" And another ass's qualification is that when he goes for sexual intercourse, the lady ass kicks on his face. Fut! Fut! Fut! Fut! You have seen it? (lots of laughter) So these karmīs, they are like ass. They will eat two breads, pieces of bread, and the lady karmī will kick on his face at the time of sex intercourse, and he is very happy. And for this purpose he has no time: "Sir, I have no time." He is very busy. You go into a karmī office, he will say, "Oh, I cannot see you. I cannot talk. I am very busy." So what is the result of your business? "Now I will eat two pieces of bread at night, and my wife will kick on my face." (laughter) Just see the ass.

Therefore how Bhāgavata has selected the specific animals, how they are suffering, very instructive. Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ [SB 2.3.19]. He forgets his own business, that he has got this human form of life to understand "What I am, why I am suffering, what is the remedy, how to relieve, how to become relieved this problem." He has forgotten that. Simply he is busy earning money. Divā cārthehayā rājan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā [SB 2.1.3]. These karmīs, they are thinking that...

dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati

[SB 2.1.4]



For want of real knowledge, ātma-jñāna... First of all one has to learn actually what he is. Is he this body or something else? That is the beginning. But they do not know. He thinks that "I am body," deha. And because from this body, I have got relationship with my wife, "Oh, she is my great friend," and the children, "They are my soldiers. They will protect me." Dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu ātma-sainyeṣu. He is very safe. "I have got good wife. I have got children. They will save me." Nobody will save you, sir. When death will come, you have to give your own account. If you are going to be next life a dog, not your wife, children, or nation or community or anyone will save you. No. Nobody can save you.



The same example, as I have given many times. When the aeroplane, they are going on, but if one aeroplane is in danger, no other aeroplane can save him. But he's finished. Similarly, every one of us is responsible for my own work. Nobody. Even in material world, suppose you have done something wrong. Now you are condemned. You are criminal; you are condemned to death. Will your wife, will your children, will your family, will your community, will save you? No. Nobody can save you. So therefore those who are thinking that "This material atmosphere, relatives, will save me," they are mistaken. They are ass. They do not know that every individual being is responsible for his own work. Therefore we must be very careful that "Why should I waste my time in working hard? What is my problem?" These things have to be known. Therefore Vedic injunction is that how you will be saved? Then tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU 1.2.12], that "You must approach to a bona fide spiritual master." He will let you know how you will be saved. Otherwise, your so-called society, friendship and love will not save you.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, such a exalted king,... And the Battle of Kurukṣetra was fought for Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. Kṛṣṇa wanted that Duryodhana is not a fit person. Kṛṣṇa had no business to take part in the battle. Because He is God, samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ [Bg. 9.29], He has no enemy. Nobody can become His enemy. If he becomes enemy of Kṛṣṇa, he will be vanquished. Therefore He has no enemy. So why He took part in the battlefield? Because He wanted this Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, the pious king, he should occupy the throne. So that is the mission of Kṛṣṇa. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati... [Bg. 4.7].

paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge

[Bg. 4.8]



So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja's another name was Dharmarāja. Dharmarāja. Dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya... So to enthrone Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira... Because king is representative of God. That is Vedic conception. King or president, the chief of the executive... He should be exactly the representative of God. As guru is representative of God, similarly, the king or president is also representative of God. In every planet... Because every planet... Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1]. Everything belongs to God. Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram: [Bg. 5.29] "I am the supreme owner of every planet." So every planet is the property of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore to govern that planet, there must be a king who is actually representative of Kṛṣṇa. The king's business or the president's business is to see that the citizens, they mistakenly have come to this material world to enjoy sense gratification. They should be trained up in such a way that they can go back to home, back to Godhead. That is king's responsibility. Similarly, that is father's responsibility. Similarly, that is guru's, spiritual master's, responsibility. Similarly, the relative's responsibility. Suppose one has no father, mother; then it is the responsibility of the relative. It is the responsibility of the king.



The whole target is how to train the citizens, go back to home, back to Godhead. Because they have come from God. Kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. He has come to this material world to enjoy false gratification, and he is loitering throughout the whole universe, simply "Where is better sense gratification, better sense gratification?" But he will never be happy by sense gratification. That is not possible. He has forgotten what is actually happiness. Actual happiness is not sense gratification. That is... They are described in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriyaṁ grāhyam: [Bg. 6.21] "What is real happiness, that is to be understood beyond sense gratification." Not sense gratification. Therefore you will find nobody is happy, even he has got facility for sense gratification. Ask anybody, "If you are satisfied fully?" No, that is not possible. Because that is not happiness. That is illusion. That is illusion. We are accepting false thing as happiness. That is not happiness.

Happiness beyond sense gratification. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriyaṁ grāhyam. Atīndriya means the senses, when they are purified, with that senses, when you try to enjoy, then that is real happiness. That is real happiness. Just like if your tongue is diseased, or if you are diseased, then you cannot taste what is actually rasagullā taste. Because the tongue is distasteful, you cannot enjoy it. Similarly, so long your senses are diseased in condition, you cannot enjoy senses. You shall... It has to be purified. That purification method is this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You purify your senses. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Nirmalam means purified. So how these things can be purified? Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam. You have to be free from all designation. Designation. So at the present moment I am thinking, "This is my hand. I am American. Therefore this is my American hand." "I am Indian; therefore it is my Indian hand." So you have to forget this, or you have to purify: "This hand is neither American nor African nor Indian. This hand belongs to Kṛṣṇa." This is purification.

So, so long you will engage this hand under illusion for American service or Indian service, you will never get happiness. You purify this hand, that "This hand belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it should be engaged in cleansing the temple with my hand," then you will be satisfied. Then you will be satisfied. Similarly, your tongue. Similarly, your legs. Similarly, everything, all senses. When you are purified of all these designations, sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170], when with that purified senses you will engage the senses, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam, in the service of the master of the senses, then you will be happy. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Otherwise you'll never be happy.

So the representative of God, the king, he is very responsible for his... The king or president. So as soon as they take the post for his own sense gratification, he will be charged with so many fault things. So when he is also purified... Therefore Kṛṣṇa wanted that such purified soul is Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; he should be posted. He should be enthroned. That is the Battle of Kurukṣetra, to make the people happy. Kṛṣṇa is worshiped, jagad-

dhitāya: He comes for everyone's benefit.

namo brahmaṇya-devāya

go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca

jagad-dhitāya kṛṣṇāya

govindāya namo namaḥ



Jagad-dhitāya. He comes for the welfare of the whole world. So sometimes it is necessary to take part in the politics. But unless one is perfectly free from all designation, he will be implicated in politics. If I become an American politician or Indian politician, then I will be implicated. But if I become a politician on behalf of Kṛṣṇa, then I will not be implicated. If my aim is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa's mission is that He said, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. So if we teach people this philosophy, that "You surrender to God, either by politics or by philosophy or by culture or by anything," that is perfection. If you teach people that "You feel like American," "You feel like Indian," "You feel like Hindu," "You feel like Christian, " this will never give you happiness, because it is polluted. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena... [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Therefore Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was exalted.



So now he concludes that things have deteriorated. It is not for Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's fault, but the time. Just like when there is winter season, however clever you may be, you cannot check the process of nature's work. So Kali-yuga is also another phase of this material world. So he saw that things have deteriorated... Pure ca rāṣṭre ca gṛhe tathātmani. "Things have deteriorated. They are now full of these sinful activities." What is that? Lobha anṛta jihma and hiṁsa. "People are becoming too much," I mean to say, "jealous, too much diplomatic, too much untruthfulness, and so things are deteriorated, not only state-wise, family-wise, personal-wise. Everything is deteriorating." So after all, one has to retire. One has to re... So he concluded that now he should retire.

Now question may be: "Such a king, why he should retire?" That question was raised by the Naimiṣāraṇya ṛṣis about Parīkṣit Mahārāja. But the answer is that you have to do your duty. So long you are, you must try your best to do things according to the prescription, according to the injunction. But it is also your duty to retire from family life. Therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja... It is not that he has to work up the end point of his life. No. The life is divided... That is Vedic civilization: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa. So at the end of life, one must retire from family life. Therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja decided, "Now things are deteriorating." But that was taken care of, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, his next descendant. That is king's duty. But so far Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is concerned, he did not like to bother any more, because he has his personal duty also. That is retirement, completely engage himself to the service of the Lord.

So everyone should retire at a certain age. Pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. As soon as one is fifty years old, he must retire. He must retire. Not that he will say, "I have got this duty, that duty, that duty." No. Within this age, whatever duty you can perform, that's all right. Next, to retire. That is Vedic civilization. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja concluded to retire from the service.

Thank you very much. (end)



731216SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.38

-

Los Angeles, December 16, 1973



Nitāi: Translation: "Thereafter, in the capital of Hastināpura, he enthroned his grandson, who was trained and equally qualified, as the emperor and master of all land bordered by the seas." [SB 1.15.38]



Prabhupāda: So it appear that five thousand years ago, all the lands of this globe were known. It is a mistake that "America was discovered." (laughter) It was known. Otherwise how it is said that "the land encircled by water" unless it is known? So our so-called Hindus, they say that if somebody goes on the other side of the sea, he becomes fallen. Does it mean that the emperor did not go outside? The capital was Hastināpura, which is now near New Delhi. They say... The Pāṇḍava fort is there. Anyway, so the whole world was being governed by the emperor situated in Hastināpura. One state. There are many evidences. Therefore the history of the whole world is called Mahābhārata. Mahā means greater. Mahābhārata. The history. Mahābhārata is history. They call it epic. No. It is history.



So formerly, the whole planet, Bhāratavarṣa... It was named Bhāratavarṣa. And it was being governed by one emperor. Therefore it is said here, sva-rāṭ. Sva-rāṭ means completely independent. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was not dependent on any other king or any other state. He was fully independent. Whatever he liked, he could do. That is king. That is emperor. If the so-called king or the president is dependent on the votes of some rascal voters, then what kind of sva-rāṭ he is? At the present moment, the so-called president is dependent on the votes of some rascals. That's all. The rascals, they do not know whom to vote, and therefore another rascal is elected, and when he is not doing well, they cry. You have elected. Why you are crying now? Because they are rascals. They do not know. So this is going on. But actually, the head of the state should be sva-rāṭ, fully independent. Not on the votes of the prajā. He is only dependent on Kṛṣṇa, just like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. All the Pāṇḍavas, they were under the order of Kṛṣṇa.

So the king or the emperor, is representative of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he is so honored, naradeva. The king's another name is naradeva, "God in, as a human being." "God as human being," the king is so respected. Because he is representative of Kṛṣṇa. Any representative of Kṛṣṇa... Just (as) king... Not the present king or president, but this is the ideal. So he should be so perfect representative that... It is said by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. If the king is real representative of God, then simply by pleasing the king, you please the almighty father, God. This was the... So why Kṛṣṇa wanted this Battle of Kurukṣetra to install Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira on the throne? Because he knew that "He is My right representative, not Duryodhana. Therefore there must be fight, and this Duryodhana and company should be finished, and Yudhiṣṭhira should be installed."

So selection... This is paramparā. So Yudhiṣṭhira's responsibility is that next king... Because he is going to retire. "So next emperor, he should be also equally qualified like me." Therefore it is said, susamaṁ guṇaiḥ. Susamam, "Exactly my representative. He has got... My grandson, Parīkṣit, he has got the equal qualification. Therefore he should be installed," not a vagabond. No. That cannot. When Mahārāja Parīkṣit was born, he was the only child in the whole Kuru family. All others were killed in the battle. No. He was also posthumous child. He was within the womb of his mother. His mother was simply pregnant. His father, sixteen years old only, Abhimanyu, Arjuna's son, he went to fight in the battle. He was so great warrior. So seven big men required to kill him: Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa, Duryodhana, like that, all combined together. So there is no mercy. This Abhimanyu was grandson, great-grandson of all the heroes who encircled him to kill. Very beloved grandson or great-grandson... Bhīṣma's great-grandson, Duryodhana's grandson. But it is fight, kṣatriya. When you have come to fight, you must kill the opposite party. It doesn't matter whether he is my beloved son or grandson or great-grandson. This is duty.

So this Abhimanyu, father of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, only sixteen years old... His mother Uttarā... So king of..., Mahārāja Virāṭa... So when he was born... There is Vedic ceremony, jāta-karma ceremony. After a child is born... Oh, what a horrible age we are now! We are killing before the birth of the child. This is Kali-yuga. Such... It is so welcome, auspicious, a child is born in the family. There is ceremony, jāta-karma ceremony. Before the child is born there is ceremony, garbhādhāna ceremony, sarva-bhaksana(?) ceremony. Such a nice culture. Where it has gone now? Now child is killed within the womb of the mother by the mother. This is called Kali-yuga. And it is scientific advancement. The scientists, the priests, they give order. The doctor gives out, "Yes, do it." Just try to understand what is Kali-yuga. So anyway, this is the Vedic system, that when a child is born, immediately his horoscope is made. Astrological science is so perfect. The moment the child is born, immediately calculated, "What is the position of this moment?" Then they derive calculation, "This child will be like this, this will be this, will be this, this." I had also horoscope-the other day I was talking-and it was clearly written, that horoscope, that "This child, after seventy years, he will be great religious propagator and establish so many temples."

Devotees: Jaya!



Prabhupāda: Yes. This is astrology. Those of my students who have seen my horoscope in India, it is clearly written there. So that is horoscope.



So while the brāhmaṇas were writing horoscope, so Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's anxiety was... They were describing, "This child will be so, such a great hero, he will do this..." And it was mentioned that "He will die also, being cursed by a brāhmaṇa." That was... So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja did not take care of that, how he will die. He simply took care how he will live. He inquired from the learned brāhmaṇas, "Whether this child will be exactly prototype of our dynasty? Because this is a... Kuru dynasty is the paramparā system of emperors, all-perfect. So whether this child will be like that?" That was his inquiry, first. So all the brāhmaṇas replied, "Yes, sir, this is just quite fit, your family." Therefore it is said here that susamaṁ guṇaiḥ: "By quality, exactly like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira."

So unless one is qualified, highly qualified, how he can be installed as the head of the executive of the state or the world? And this has been given charge to a third-class voters who have no character. So how you can expect the elected persons to be perfect? That is not possible. This is not the system. This is the system. The head of the state should be perfect and the next head should be selected by this perfect head of the state, not by the rascal voters. This is perfection. If the head of the state is perfect, then naturally the citizens will be perfect. Because all the laws are there. If the head of the state says, "No more meat-eating," all slaughterhouses will be closed. If the head of the state says, "No more intoxication," then all the cigarette factories and liquor factories will be closed. Is it not? Because... So therefore the head must be perfect. Then yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥ [Bg. 3.21]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that "What the chief man beḥaves, others will follow." Therefore it is called leader, leader.

So you have read in Bhāgavatam about the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, how perfect it was. That at that time the cows were supplying so much milk, the bag was packed with milk, that where the cows were moving milk was dropping, and the pasture ground became muddy with milk, so much milk was being supplied. And it is said, sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. And exactly in right time, the right quantity of rainfall was there. Not like nowadays, sometimes there is no rain and there is sometimes excessive rain, flood. What the scientist can do? They cannot check. These regulative principles depend on nature. And nature is being conducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate

[Bg. 9.10]



This cosmic manifestation is going regularly. The sun is rising exactly at the time, it is setting exactly..., the seasons are coming exactly, under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So when the king is a debauch or the president is a debauch, and the citizens are also debauch, there is restriction of supply by nature, under the order of the Supreme. Just like there is now petroleum problem. Now, by the order of the Supreme, the restriction is there. Now they are howling, cowling. You see? So everything will rest, tasmin tuṣṭe jagat tuṣṭa. If you keep Kṛṣṇa satisfied, if you all become devotees, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no question of scarcity. There is no question of scarcity. There is immense supply. Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān.



We have seen it. You have also seen. Sometimes in season, there is so much mango supply that they rot on the ground. Nobody cares to take it. So supply is not in your hands. You cannot supply by factory. You can manufacture bolts and nuts, not rice or ḍāl or ghee or mango or fruits. So supply is... Eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti kāmān. What is the difference between God and ourself? We are also living entities, God is also living entity. Nityo nityānām. I have several times explained this. Just like Kṛṣṇa, what is the difference of Kṛṣṇa? You have got two hands; He has got two hands. He has got two legs; you have got two legs. So the appearance, Kṛṣṇa is equal or in quality. But the difference is that He maintains everyone, and you are maintained. You are now maintainer. You cannot maintain even your family, what to speak of maintain everyone. But God maintains everyone. Eko yo bahūnām, bahūnām. Bahūnām means many, unlimited. Unlimited number of living entities are there. There are millions of elephants in Africa; He is maintaining. At a time the elephant eats about forty kilograms. And who is supplying food? He is eating. The small fish in the ocean, he is also eating. A small ant within the hole of your room, you are not supplying any food, but they are... They have got their family, their friends and everything. Sometimes they come out in hundreds. (laughter) Who is maintaining? Therefore eko yo bahūnāṁ vidadhāti: Kṛṣṇa is maintaining, God maintaining.

So the king is required because the human being has got developed consciousness. So the chance is given. Just like this your president's post is a very exalted post, but he has... Some way or other, people say that he has misused, "Therefore you should go away." Similarly, amongst all living entities, human being is the eldest or the chief or the supermost. So they should use their intelligence properly. But because every human being has got little independence, because he is part and parcel of God... God has got full independence, so he has also little independence. Just like big fire and small fire, a spark. The spark is also fire. When the sparks fall on your body, it immediately burns your clothes, because it is fire. Similarly, in quality, we are as good as God. We are spirit soul, and Kṛṣṇa is the supreme spirit soul, Paramātmā. So qualitatively, there is no difference. But quantitatively, there is difference. His intelligence, His power, and my power, my intelligence, is not the same.

You can manufacture a toy sputnik to fly in the sky, to float in the sky, by so many mechanical arrangements. As soon as the machine is gone out, immediately falls down. But just see what machine is there, millions and trillions of airplanes, big, big planet with big, big mountains, oceans, they are floating. So that is His intelligence. Your intelligence may be that you can also float a big airplane. But what is that big airplane in comparison to this big, big planet? It is nothing. There is also petrol stock, and in the airplane there is also petrol stock. Perhaps it is floating by petrol, and you are taking out all the petrols. One day it will fall down. Yes. You are disturbing God's arrangement. Just like we had the history of Lord Varāha's lifting this planet, earth planet, from the Garbhodaka Ocean. So any time it can fall down. But it is being floated by the supreme power. Otherwise by calculation how such a big planet can float just like a cotton swab? Yes, it is floating. Not only one, millions. So that is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, gām āviśya ojasā dhārayāmi [Bg. 15.13]. He enters. He enters in each and every planet, in each and every universe, each and every atom. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. And maintaining them, maintaining them.

So the emperor should be representative of God. He should be qualified, fully qualified. That was the Vedic system. Monarchy, but fully qualified. Therefore he could maintain the kingdom. The citizens were fully qualified, so qualified that they did not suffer even from disease, excessive heat, excessive coldness, no. Very peaceful. Supply was properly... Sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. Everything was being supplied. Whatever you want, that is supplied through the earth, throughout the earth. Even if you take meat, that is also coming from the earth. The grass is there, the animal is eating, the cow or the goat. Then you are able to eat the animal. So sarva-kāma-dughā mahī. But a human being is not meant for eating animals. Although the nature is that one animal eats another animal, that is the nature, but you have got discrimination. God has given you... When you are in the jungle, you are a tiger, you can eat animals. But when you are civilized, when you can produce nice foodstuff, so many nice grains, fruits, and milk, why should you eat meat? That means you are misusing your advanced intelligence improperly. Therefore you must suffer. You are using your intelligence... Your intelligence was given to understand what is God, what is your relationship with God, why you are rotting in this material world under shadow illusion of so-called happiness. These things are to be known in human form of body. Not like working very hard like cats and dogs and asses and eat little food and do all sinful activities. This is not human intelligence.

So who will control? If the king, the head of the government is perfect, then he will control. So that is all gone. Therefore we are suffering. Therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, first business is, before appointing his grandson, he was very eager to know, "Whether he is competent, exactly my representative?" This is the business of the king. And toya-nīvyāḥ patim. Toya-nīvyāḥ patim means the whole world, not the modern India, a few yards of land, no. The India was governing. India, the king or the emperor of Hastināpura, he was the emperor. Now, seven seas, seven islands, they are mentioned in the Vedic literature. Seven islands. So the emperor would be emperor of the whole earth and there was everywhere the Vedic culture. Everywhere the Vedic culture was, more or less, principally in that part which is known as India. But in other parts also, the Vedic culture was there. And the Europeans, they belonged to the kṣatriya family, and the Americans also coming from them. Now, in due course of time, five thousand years, there is no history. The modern history can give detail up to three thousand years. They do not know what is beyond three thousand years. But you can get history of the human society for millions of years from Vedic literature, not poor fund of knowledge, only two thousand years or three thousand years. Just like this Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja was emperor five thousand years ago. So this is the history. That is Mahābhārata. This is their characteristic. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Everything is there. These rascal scholars, they say that these literatures within 1,500 years or like that. No. That is not accepted by us or our ācāryas. That is not accepted. There are many evidences, archaeological evidences also.

So five thousand years ago the king was so perfect, and there was one king who was ruling all over the... In the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, from all parts of the world, the subordinate kings they joined to cooperate with either of the parties, Pāṇḍavas and the Kurus. So bhūmer abhyaṣiñcat. Abhiṣeka. Abhyaṣiñcat. Just like we install Deity. We bathe the Deity with so many waters. Similarly, during installation of the king, the same ceremony takes place. Before the prince or the emperor sits on the throne, the same ceremony, abhiṣeka ceremony, is performed. Therefore it is said, abhyaṣiñcat, Gajāhvaye. Gajāhvaye means Hastināpura. Hasti means elephant. So because it is Hastināpura, therefore the name... And gaja means also elephant. It is named after elephant. There were many elephants. Just like Gokula. Kṛṣṇa's planet is known as Gokula. There are many cows, surabhī cows. Go means cow. Similarly, this capital of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Hastināpura, may be taken that there were many elephants. Formerly the kings used to maintain. Otherwise who will maintain elephants? Suppose I bring one elephant, I present to you, will you accept? You will be finished. (laughs) You can keep one dog, "Gow! Gow! Gow!" but if I say, I present you one elephant, "Please keep it," "No, sir. No, sir, it is not possible." So who will maintain?

There... In India, there is a place near Patna where up to ten years before, it was a market, yearly market, for selling cows, horses, elephants, camels, like that. Now there is no customer. At the present moment, that fair of selling big, big horses and... Nobody can purchase horse. They have got this tin car. That also not everyone. So people have become poor. Nobody can maintain now horses or elephants or number of cows. No. That is not possible. So they are condemned now. Formerly they were maintaining. Instead of keeping a big car, they used to keep two, three elephants, number of horses, number of cows. This is domestic animals. They are domestic animals. They used to be maintained. But nowadays they cannot. But during Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time or before that, the city was so full of elephants that it is named after elephant, Hastināpura: "Many elephants." Still in India, in big procession, marriage ceremony, they bring some elephants. But that is in procession, elephants, horses, are demonstrated. And especially royal family. But those things have now gone. Now, instead of Hastināpura, it is now "Motorcarpura." (laughter) Just see.

Thank you very much. (end)



731217SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.39

-

Los Angeles, December 17, 1973



Nitāi: "Then he posted Vajra, the son of Aniruddha, grandson of Lord Kṛṣṇa, at Mathurā as the king of Śūrasena. Afterwards Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira performed a Prājāpatya sacrifice and placed in himself the fire for quitting household life." [SB 1.15.39]



Prabhupāda: So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira first of all appointed his grandson, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, the emperor of the whole world. Then he distributed... [break] ...or only intimate families, because Kṛṣṇa's family, Yadu dynasty, and this Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's family, Kuru dynasty, they were related in so many ways by marriage. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's mother, Kuntī, belonged to the Yadu dynasty-means Kṛṣṇa's aunt, Kṛṣṇa's father's sister. Similarly, Arjuna's wife Subhadrā..., here is Subhadrā, she became the wife of Arjuna, sister of Kṛṣṇa. So there were so many family relationships, Kṛṣṇa's family and the Kuru family. Kṛṣṇa was not present. Therefore Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was taking care of the children, grandsons. As his grandson was posted as emperor, similarly, Kṛṣṇa's grandson was also situated as the king of Śūrasena, in which province the Mathurā is there: mathurāyām.



So you can read the purport.

Nitāi: "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, after placing Mahārāja Parīkṣit on the imperial throne of Hastināpura, and after posting Vajra, the grandson of Lord Kṛṣṇa, as the king of Mathurā, accepted the renounced order of life."



Prabhupāda: Yes. This was the system, that one must retire. Just like at the present moment, although people are asking the president that "You retire, you resign," he is not resigning, obstinate. Because he knows, "This is the first and last chance. I am not going to be elected again. So stick to the post and take as much money as possible." That's all. But formerly, they voluntarily retired, the kings. In India also, we have seen. So many big, big politicians, they could not give up their political job. Even Gandhi. I wrote a personal letter to Gandhi that "Mahatma Gandhi, you are recognized all over the world as a very pious man, and you are supposed to be very devotee of Bhagavad-gītā. Now you have got your independence. You fought for independence. Now you have got your independence. So I request you to take the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā to preach all over the world." That was my request. Because I was thinking of preaching this Bhagavad-gītā. So I thought that "Gandhi's position is better. If he takes up this job, preaching of Bhagavad-gītā, many people will give attention. Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhaḥ [Bg. 3.21]. He is a recognized good man, so people will follow." But he did not do so. He stuck up to the politics. And unless he was killed by another opponent party, he did not give it up. Similarly, I have seen other politicians also, Jawaharlal Nehru, Panth,(?) they would not give up. Panth(?) was so weak, I have seen. He could not stand even. He was doing like this, always. Still he would not give up. Similarly, Jawaharlal Nehru, he was paralyzed. Unless he was dead, he could not give up.



So this is not Vedic civilization. Vedic civilization is that at a certain age, you must retire. Never mind. The age is divided into four parts: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. So Vedic civilization means varṇāśrama-dharma, accepting the institution of four varṇas and four āśramas. Social and spiritual order. For social order there must be brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, and for spiritual order, there must be brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, and sannyāsa. This is the system. So unless you accept this institution of varṇāśrama-dharma, you are not considered as civilized man, Ārya, Āryan.

Āryan means who are making progress under the institution of varṇāśrama-dharma. That progress means to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the goal. But people do not know that. Not only now; formerly also. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know what is their ultimate goal of self-interest. Why Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is taking, retiring, from the...? That is not... To become king is not the ultimate goal of life. No. He has got another ultimate goal of life. He remained as a king as a matter of duty. Just like you work in some office or as a professional man. You work as a lawyer. You work as an engineer. You work as a medical man. That you can do, because you have to do something to live, livelihood. It doesn't matter. But to become an engineer or to become a scientist or become a medical man or a lawyer, that is not my ultimate goal of life. That is needed to maintain the body and soul together, but that is not ultimate goal of life. For that purpose, you may be what you are, but you must retire.

At the present moment, people retire by force or by some way or... But they do not know what is the ultimate goal of life. There are many retired men's house in your country, but they do not know what is the ultimate goal of life. Ultimate goal of life is to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because in your busy life, you have got very little time; therefore after gṛhastha life, fifty years, up to, not more than that, pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet, then you must retire. It doesn't matter whether you have finished your duty or not. It doesn't matter. You must retire. And then, after being trained for sometimes, being retired from the family life, living secluded life-not exactly secluded, but detached from family life-let the elderly sons, daughters, they can take care of the family, and the husband, wife, they travel in different places of pilgrimage. Again they come for some time, but without any attachment, as guest in the house of his son. In this way, when he is trained up, then he says to the wife, "Now you live with your sons. They will take care of you. I am taking sannyāsa."

So everyone has to take sannyāsa. It is not that a particular man, simply Caitanya Mahāprabhu has to take sannyāsa. No. That is obligation. You must. In Buddha philosophy, everyone has to take sannyāsa and live as a sannyāsī for some years. That is their duty. So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira prepared himself for becoming sannyāsī. Sannyāsī means renounced. No more family responsibility or any responsibility. Simply to become pure devotee of the Lord. That is sannyāsa. Anāśritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ sa sannyāsī [Bg. 6.1]. What is the sannyāsī definition? Sannyāsī means he works, but not as the enjoyer of the fruit of the work. That is sannyāsī. Everyone, karmī... Karmī means he is working hard, day and night, but he wants the fruit of the work to enjoy himself. That is karmī. Sannyāsī also will work hard, day and night, but he will not take the fruit. It is for Kṛṣṇa. That is sannyāsī. Sannyāsī means sat-nyāsī. Nyāsī means renounced, and sat means the supreme truth. One who renounces everything for the sake of supreme truth, he is called sannyāsī. That sannyāsī formality is to change the dress. But anyone... Just like this Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuna and his brothers, they were all sannyāsīs. But still, formality, they accepted sannyāsa, gave up attachment for the house. In this way, because he is king, if he does not set example, then others will not accept sannyāsa.

Go on.

Nitāi: "The system of four orders of life and four castes in terms of quality and work known as the varṇāśrama-dharma is the beginning of real human life. And Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, as the protector of the system of human activities, timely retired from the active life as a sannyāsī handing over the charge of the administration to a trained prince, Mahārāja Parīkṣit. The scientific system of varṇāśrama-dharma divides the human life in four divisions of occupation and four orders of life. The four orders of life as brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa, are to be followed by all, irrespective of the occupational division. Modern politicians do not wish to retire from active life even if they are old enough, but Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, as an ideal king, voluntarily retired from active administrative life..."



Prabhupāda: Yes. We have referred to the politicians, because king means he is also politician. As soon as we speak of king, he is in politics. So these are the example. Although he was also great politician, he had to fight in the Battle of Kurukṣetra, he had to adopt diplomacy, everything, but not that he would forget his real duty. This is perfect civilization, that one should not forget the real duty. The real duty is to fulfill the mission of the human life. The mission of human life is to understand God. And God is there, you cannot deny, God is there. But we do not know what is God, what is our relationship with Him. That we do not know. Just like in your country, the currency notes are advertised, "In God We Trust." But if we ask anybody that "This is the slogan of your state. What do you know about God?" nobody can reply. They will say, "It is something like this, something like that." But no... Everything vague idea. Nobody knows what is God, neither he knows how to trust in God. That is instructed in the Bhagavad-gītā: what is God and how to trust in Him. This is the subject matter of Bhagavad-gītā. But the people do not know. They simply have the slogan, "In God We Trust." Nobody knows what is God.



But we are trying to give the contribution, what is God. Not only God-His form, His name, His address, everything we are giving. Here is the form of God, Kṛṣṇa. If you do not believe, that He is not God, then you must say what is your idea of God. If you do not know what is the idea of God, then you must accept from me. And how can you deny that Kṛṣṇa is not God? First of all you have to know what is God. God means the Supreme. That is the dictionary word, "Supreme Being." So Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Being. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Being. Here we see a rich man, he enjoys, and his assistants, his managers, his secretaries, they work. They bring money from business, from factory, and the proprietor enjoys. This is a crude example. Similarly, here is God. He is in the enjoying spirit. He is not going to the office to manage his factory. No. He doesn't go. He simply enjoys. That is the injunction of the Vedas: na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca... Definition of God, what is God.

What is God, the idea is given in the Vedas, Upaniṣad, na tasya kāryam. First thing is that He has nothing to do personally. That is first qualification of God. If He has to do something personally, then He is not God. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate: "Nobody can be equal to Him or greater than Him." This is definition of God. Any subject matter... Suppose opulence, riches. So nobody can be richer than God or nobody can be equal with God. This is greatness. "God is great." How He is great? That is defined every..., particularly. He is great because nobody equally rich with Him. Nobody is richer than Him. That is God. Everybody is poorer than Him. Therefore na tat-samaḥ. Sama means equal, and adhika means greater. How God can be great? If somebody is greater than Him, how God is great? If somebody is equal to Him, then how He is great? Just see how the definition is given perfectly. Na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate: "He has nothing to do." Because He is great, why He should work? All the subordinates will work. We are all subordinate. Therefore we shall work for God. But we have made our formula, that "God shall work for me." "God, give us our daily bread. We have nothing to do. Simply give us our bread." What is this? But the Vaiṣṇava idea is that "Without giving bread to God, God will die." Yaśodā-māyi is thinking, "If I do not give Kṛṣṇa to eat something nice, Kṛṣṇa will become lean and thin." That is love of Godhead, how to serve Kṛṣṇa, how to serve God. Sevonmukhe. That is real religion. When we are not to take service from God, but we are ready to give service to God, that is real religion. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. Adhokṣaje. God is beyond our senses. Therefore He is Adhokṣaja.

So that type of religion which teaches the followers how to serve God, how to love God, that is perfect religion. It doesn't matter whether it is Christian religion or Hindu religion, no. If the followers are trained up how to love God, how to serve God, that is perfect. That is being taught here. In this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, there is no such teaching to ask from God. No. To give everything to God. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That is required. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja is a devotee. Therefore, although he was the powerful emperor, still, he is now sacrificing his life for the service of the Lord. This is human civilization. At least, at a certain point of your life, you must sacrifice. If you haven't got anything, money, then you can sacrifice your life.

Prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā etāvaj janma-sāphalyaṁ dehinām iha dehiṣu. This human form of life can be perfected. How? How it can be perfected? Prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā. Prāṇa means life. Artha means riches. Prāṇair arthair dhiyā. Dhiyā means intelligence. And vācā, vācā means words. So we have got four things. We have got our life, and everybody has got some riches, either one pound or one million pounds. Everybody has got something. That is called artha. Prāṇa, artha, and everyone has got intelligence, and everyone has got the power to speak. So we have to engage all these four things. Either four or three or two, at least one, we must engage. Prāṇair arthair dhiyā, śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā. This is the principle of religion or perfection of life. Etāvaj janma. Then our life will be... There are many other ślokas in Bhāgavatam.

ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam

[SB 1.2.13]



This varṇāśrama-dharma we have already explained. So any civilized man must be within this category of varṇāśrama-dharma. Otherwise he is animal. Unless you accept some institution of making progress in spiritual life, you are animal. That is the difference between animal and man. Man has got some institution, some social structure, religious structure, political structure. Otherwise what is the difference between animals? The animals, they haven't got any president or senate house or parliament or church. That is the difference.



So this varṇāśrama-dharma means one has to accept these principles of varṇāśrama-dharma and act accordingly. A brāhmaṇa should act accordingly to brāhmaṇa principles. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā. The kṣatriya should act accordingly. The vaiśya should act according. The same example, as we have given many times, that I have got my head department, arms department, belly department, and leg department. To keep the body fit, everyone should act very nicely. Brain should work nicely, arms must be strong, belly must be fit to digest foodstuff, and legs must work. Similarly, these things... The varṇāśrama-dharma is necessary. It is not a convention. It is not a convention, that "The Hindus or the Indians, they are our only brāhmaṇas." No. Here are also brāhmaṇas. Because it is creation of God. God's creation must be there.

So now this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is picking up who are the brāhmaṇas. They mixed up. They are mixed up. So long there was no picking up of the brāhmaṇas. Now, by this movement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are picking up the brāhmaṇas. Because there is need of brāhmaṇas at this time. Because brain is not there. The brain... Brāhmaṇa means the brain. They must have knowledge. That is brāhmaṇa. In India, the brāhmaṇas are called paṇḍita, although nowadays he is fool number one. But it is a title of the brāhmaṇa to become paṇḍita. Paṇḍita. He must know everything. Satyaṁ śamaḥ, jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. He must be very wise man. Jñānaṁ vijñānam, and practical application, vijñānam. Jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyam. And not nāstika, not atheist. Jñānaṁ vijñānam means one must know what is God. That is jñāna. And brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. Brāhmaṇa means one who has already known God, or brahma-vastu. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate [SB 1.2.11]. That is brāhmaṇa. Therefore people should go to brāhmaṇa. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. Without becoming a brāhmaṇa, one cannot become guru. Because if he does not know Brahman, Paramātmā, Bhagavān, what kind of brāhmaṇa he is, and what kind of guru he is? So therefore one must know the ultimate truth, Bhagavān. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti. Not silent, simply by understanding Brahman or Paramātmā, but he must know what is Bhagavān. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. Bhagavān is Kṛṣṇa. That is the verdict of the Vedas. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam.

So a brāhmaṇa, even with good qualification, but if he does not now Kṛṣṇa, then he cannot become guru. That is the injunction. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipraḥ. Vipra means brāhmaṇa. Nipuṇa means very expert. One... Now, ṣaṭ-karma. Brāhmaṇa's business is six. Paṭhana, pāṭhana, yajana, yājana, dāna, pratigraha. A brāhmaṇa must be learned, and he must make others learned. That "I am learned man. I don't care for others..." No. He must teach others to become brāhmaṇa. Paṭhana pāṭhana. Yajana yājana. He must worship God, and he must teach others also how to worship God. Yajana yājana. Dāna pratigraha. Brāhmaṇa's business is not to do any trade or professional... He takes charity, pratigraha. But dāna. Therefore in India it is said if a brāhmaṇa gets one lakh of rupees, still he is a beggar. Why? Because he does not keep it. If he gets one lakh of rupees now, next moment he will spend it for Kṛṣṇa. Dāna pratigraha.

So even though one is expert, paṭhana pāṭhana yajana yājana dāna pratigraha, avaiṣṇavo gurur na sa syāt. Ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ, he is expert in reciting all the mantras, Vedic mantras, he knows everything-but he is not a Vaiṣṇava. You find nowadays, impersonalists, voidists, so many brāhmaṇas, they have no idea what is God, who is God. That is called avaiṣṇava. Vaiṣṇava knows what is Viṣṇu, what is God. But avaiṣṇava, non-Vaiṣṇava, they do not know. So this is the formula, that even one brāhmaṇa is expert in all knowledge, but he does not know who is God, gurur na sa syāt, he cannot become guru. This is the stricture. Sad-vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ. That is śva-paca. Śva-paca means dog-eaters. They are considered to be lowest of the mankind, dog-eaters. There are different types of eaters, cow-eaters, goat-eaters and camel-eaters, this eaters, that eaters. There are so many. Out of that eaters, one who eats the dog, he is considered the lowest. So even a person coming from the family of dog-eaters, if he knows who is God, he can be guru. This is the injunction of the śāstra. One who knows God, he cannot remain dog-eaters. But sometimes he comes from there. So... But śāstra says, "Yes. When he has learned the science of God, then he can be accepted as guru."

That is the confirmation of Caitanya Mahāprabhu,

kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei 'guru' haya

[Cc. Madhya 8.128]



Who can become guru? Anyone who knows the science of Kṛṣṇa, he can become guru. That is the injunction. Yei... It doesn't matter. Kibā vipra kibā śūdra, nyāsī kene naya. He may be a brāhmaṇa, he may be a śūdra, he may be a sannyāsī, he may be a gṛhastha. It doesn't matter. He may be a European, he may be American, he may be Indian. It doesn't matter. If he knows the science, yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei guru haya [Cc. Madhya 8.128].



So it is not limited under certain country, certain atmosphere or certain population. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is open for everyone. So therefore our request is that these Europeans and Americans who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, just become perfect in the understanding of this science and become guru and deliver the whole world.

Thank you very much. (end)



731218SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.40

-

Los Angeles, December 18, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira at once relinquished all his garments, belt and ornaments of the royal order and became completely disinterested and unattached to everything." [SB 1.15.40]



Prabhupāda: This is required. If you want to go back to home, back to Godhead, then you will have to completely become detached to any material things. Even if you have got little attachment for material things, then you will not be allowed. Prakṛti will say, "You just satisfy yourself. You want this. Do it."



So this is renouncement. If you... God has given us freedom, little freedom. Just like a child is given freedom. Naturally, out of affection, mother, father, gives freedom. But not complete freedom. Because child's freedom is nonsense. It must be protected. Therefore all the living entities who have come to this material world for enjoying, it is also exactly like the child. A small child, you let him be free-he will catch up sometimes this, catch up sometimes that. He does not know what is his real interest. But because he is child, he is catching this, catching that, catching that. Sometimes he catches fire and burns his hand. Sometimes he falls down in the water. Sometimes he catches snake. These are all dangerous things, but he does not know.

So similarly, we are in the modes of material nature. There are three modes of material nature: sattva-rajas-tamaḥ. Those who are in darkness, tamaḥ, completely in darkness, do not know anything. Exactly like the child does not know what is his actual interest. Know to..., not. Generally, everyone who is in this material world, he does not know what is actually, what thing he should capture. He does not know. That is the difficulty. Mūḍha. They are therefore mūḍha. Real interest is to capture Kṛṣṇa. That is real interest. But he does not know. The capturing power and capacity is there. Even a child... In the beginning, the children, there are so many other things. But the child will capture that biscuit, because he knows it is eatable something. But he does not whether it is poison I am giving. He does not know that. That discrimination he hasn't got. But because it appears something to be eatable... The example, as I was giving in walking, that the fish, he has got enough food within the ocean. God has provided. But still, he will capture that tackle, fish-catching tackle, a little something. For taste, he will capture it, and that means lost life. Similarly, the bees, the enter the flower, a big flower like lotus flower, enjoying the smell, but in the evening, with the set of sunset, the petals close and they remain and suffocated, loses their life.

For... We have got different senses. So this bee is losing his life on account of this nostril, very powerful, wants to smell. Similarly, the fish is losing its life on account of this tongue. Similarly, the elephant. Elephant loses... Such a big powerful animal. But he loses his independence for sex life. You know how the elephant is captured? A female elephant is induced to attract the male elephant, and for sex, the male follows the female elephant, and the female elephant is trained up. He puts him in a ditch. He falls down. Then he cannot move. You see. That means in spite of his becoming such a giant animal, powerful animal, simply for sex life he becomes captivated. You see? So someone is becoming victim for this sense. Someone is becoming victim of the sense. This is the world, whoever wants to study. Similarly, the deer, when the hunter wants to kill them, he plays very nice flute, and... They are very fond of hearing musical sound. They stand, and the hunter kills. So one is losing for ear, one is losing for smelling, another for sight seeing, sight seeing. We have seen the insects. When there is fire, thousands of insects will fall and die. What is that? Sight-seeing. "Oh, very beautiful fire." Fall down.

So we have got all these senses, and each of us, each, every one of us living entities, we are being victim of these material laws, being captivated by one sense or other. But an animal or an insect, they have got one sense very powerful, but we the human being, we have got all senses very powerful. So in the Bhāgavata it has been explained. Just like a man has got six wives, and when he comes from office, his six wives are waiting. One wife has captured his one hand, another wife has captured another hand. One wife has captured one leg, another one leg. In this way, some, hair... So in this way he is incapable. Everyone is asking, "You come to my room." But how he can go? He is captured. So this is the position. A materialistic person is captivated by so many objects of sense gratification. That is his prison house. The state laws, if you are criminal, they put him into the jail. But nature's law is such that you don't require... Your senses will keep you intact in jail. You don't require to be handcuffed. The senses are so strong that it will keep you in this material world, incapable. You cannot move. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Guṇamayī. Guṇa means qualities. Everyone is compact, bound up by different qualities: sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa, tamo-guṇa. And guṇamayī means... Guṇa means rope also. In this way he was bound up by the ropes. Just like if I tie your hands and legs with rope, you are helpless, similarly, the guṇamayī, the mother nature, has tied up, and we are bound up by the laws, stringent laws of material nature. So daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā. You cannot get out of it. It is not possible. How to get out of it? Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. If one is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, he can get out of it. That is the only way.

So the one process is voluntarily giving up. Just like Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. He is the king. He is giving up a royal dress. Valayādi. A king is decorated with fine jewelries, bangles and many other, here, here, here. You have seen. Nowadays nobody has seen also how many different types of ornaments there is. They do not know it. Simply plastic plate or a paper plate, and he thinks something. That's all. They do not know what is golden plate, what is silver plate, what is jewelry. All forgotten. All forgotten. And still, they are proud of advancement of material civilization. What you have got? Plastic and paper plates only. That's all. No more ornament, no jewel, no house, no garment, no life-everything is gone. And still, they are proud: "We are advancing in this material civilization." Money. "We have got money." What is that money? Paper, that's all. (laughter) And everyone is cheated. "Take hundred dollars." What is this? A paper. That's all. So it is the society now at the present moment, the cheater and the cheated. Similarly religion. Similarly science. Similarly philosophy. Everything is cheating. Because all of them are rascals, and people are rascals, they cannot protest. They cannot protest.

Just like this morning there was talking. Some boy suggested that "Creation is... There was something." Who was speaking?

Devotee: Big bang.



Prabhupāda: Big bang. "Big bang" means what is that?



Devotee: Noise or explosion.



Prabhupāda: Explosion. So people have no brain to ask that "How this explosion took place?" When there is some bomb explosion, immediately there is inquiry by the police, that "Who has put this bomb? How it took place?" But these rascals... One scientist says, "First of all there was explosion." But nobody will question, "How the explosion took place?" Because they are śūdras. They have no brain. The rascal scientist says. "There was explosion," and he accepts. That's all. This is going on.



So at the present moment, Kali-yuga, it is very difficult to become perfectly realized soul, or Kṛṣṇa conscious. There are two methods. One method is voluntarily giving up all unwanted things. That is one method. Just like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is doing. He is the emperor, most opulent. His position is most exalted. There was nothing, material unhappiness, but still, voluntarily he is giving up. This is civilization. Not sticking to this, "Oh, I have got this emperor. I have got my good brothers, good wife, good children, good influence, good dress, good food, everything good. Why should I give up?" Nowadays even an ordinary post, just like elected post, say, for five years or three years, still, he will stick to that. The president, your president, he knows that "After three years it will be finished. So people are protesting. Why shall I...? Let me give it up." No. He is so much attached to the post that he cannot give it, even for two years or three years or for one day. And here you see in comparison, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the emperor of the whole world, and so much opulence... I think any executive officer of any state has bangles or ornaments or jewels? No. There is no possibility. But he is giving up, everything. He divided the kingdom to his grandsons, to the grandson of Kṛṣṇa and others. And now he is becoming completely nir, no possessions. No possessions. Why? Nirmama nirahaṅkāraḥ. Nirmama. Nirmama means... Mama means "my." Mama means "my." And nir means negation. This is called nirmama. And nirahaṅkāra. Ahaṅkāra, "egotism," and nir means "not."

So in order to become nirmama... Because here, material world, we are simply fighting, "It is mine, mine." The Arabians, they are, "This oil tank, this oil deposit is mine." Or "our." The same thing, individually or collectively. You just make up a gang, and you steal something, and then you say, "It is our." Your possession is by stealing, but still, you are claiming, "It is our." So the petrol tank belongs to God, but some way or other, they are in possession. They fighting it, "It is our." So this is called mama. So one has to become nirmama. "It is not mine. It is Kṛṣṇa's." Immediately you become nirmama. Everything is bondage so long you claim, "It is mine." And as soon as you understand, "It is not mine; it is Kṛṣṇa's," then you are free. This is the difference of bondage and freedom. Actually, everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. Everything. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1].

So this consciousness required. So somebody is trying to be nirmama, to become free from false idea, "It is mine," by renouncing. And if one knows perfectly well that "It is not mine; it is Kṛṣṇa's," then he hasn't got to do anything artificially. If you know that "Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa. I am not the owner. I am given the chance to use it," tena tyaktena bhuñjīthāḥ, whatever allotment is given to you, you can use. Prasādam. Kṛṣṇa... Actually, eatable belongs to Kṛṣṇa. So after eating, whatever He gives you, you also eat this. That is required. So one is trying to renounce this world by practice. Because unless you become fully conscious that anything you are possessing, that does not belong to you, that belongs to Kṛṣṇa, so long you will be allowed to enjoy it under the false impression, egotism, that "It is mine." Because you have come here to possess something as your property, so Kṛṣṇa will give you. Just like father gives children... They are fighting. So father gives some toy, "Now it is yours. So that's all right, play. Don't fight." So similarly... The toy does not belong to the child. It is purchased by the father. It belongs to the father. But the father give you, "No, it is yours. Don't fight with the other child," so they are satisfied. Similarly, we have been given by the supreme father, "Now this is your America. This is your India." But nothing belongs to the American or to the Indian. It belongs to the father, supreme father. So unless they come to the consciousness, that "The father has given me to enjoy that this is mine, but actually it belongs to father..." This is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is called Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Therefore those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, fully conscious that "Nothing belongs to me. Everything belongs to..." Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ yat kiñca [Īśo mantra 1]. "Even the minute thing, even atom, that belongs to God. I am not proprietor." If this sense comes to you, then you are free. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



The bondage is guṇamayī māyā, being wrapped up by the qualitative modes of nature. That is bondage. But if one is engaged in devotional service, he is not under this bondage because he knows things as they are. So... Just like I am foreigner and I am... So I have come to your country. So if I claim that "This country is mine," then there is trouble. But if I know that I have come as a visitor or as a foreigner I have come here, so there is not trouble. I can freely move. I can get all the facilities of the United States government. There is no trouble. Similarly, we come here as traveler, as visitor, within this material world, and if we claim that "This material world belongs to me," or a group of men, or group of nation, that is called ignorance.



So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to move this ignorance, to make people intelligent, that "Nothing belongs to you. Everything belongs to God." So here is the general process, renouncement, that Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, he's saying... Because as I have already explained, that because we are too much absorbed in the conception of ahaṅkāra, "I am this body, and anything in relationship with this body that is mine," this is illusion, moha. This is called moha, illusion. Janasya moho 'yam. Moha means illusion. This is illusion. What is this illusion? Ahaṁ mameti: [SB 5.5.8] "I am this body, and anything in relationship with this, it is mine." This is called moha, illusion. The body even does not belong to him, because the body is awarded by God according to your karma. Just like according to your payment, the landlord gives you an apartment. The apartment does not belong to you. That's a fact. If you pay $500 per week, you get very nice, good apartment. And if you pay $25, then you get another. Similarly, these different types of bodies we have got... Everyone we have got, different type. This is apartment. Actually, it is apartment because I am living within this body. I am not this body. That is the instruction of the Bhagavad-gītā. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. Asmin dehe, there is the dehī, the occupier, not proprietor. Occupier. Just like in any apartment, the occupier is somebody and the owner is somebody. Similarly, this is apartment, this body. I am the spirit soul, occupier. I have rented it according to the payment or according to karma.

They say... Darwin's theory is a failure because he cannot explain that why there are different types of... Even in human society, every man is different from the other man. Why? If it is nature's process, then all the bodies should have been equally the same. But why different? Just like in an apple tree the formation of apple is the same. So if it is nature's evolution, then why there are white men, black men, colored men, deformed men and...? No one's face will be equal to anyone. That he cannot explain. This is the explanation, that... Just the same example, just a man, as he pays for it, he gets a different apartment. So we have got different bodies, different apartments, according to our karma. And whose karma? The soul's karma. But he has no information of the soul or how the soul is working, how he is getting a different body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. This science is unknown to him, but still, he is known as the master of evolution, and people are following him. This is ignorance. Andhā yathāndhaiḥ. One blind rascal gives some theory, and the followers are also blind rascals; they follow. They do not take instruction from the perfect.

Therefore our position is perfect, because we are not following rascals and fools. We are following Kṛṣṇa, the supreme perfect. I may be imperfect. That's a fact. I am imperfect. Just like a child is imperfect. That's a fact. But so long he follows the father, catching his hand, he is perfect. He is perfect. He has no danger. He has no danger. Similarly, anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, and following blindly some rascal, he is imperfect and he will suffer. And because we have taken Kṛṣṇa's shelter, Kṛṣṇa says sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇam [Bg. 18.66]. He will give guidance. If you follow perfectly, you surrender unto Him, He will guide you. He is within you, everyone. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. He is there. He is not far away, although He lives in His own abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. That is Kṛṣṇa. Although He is in His abode, but He is everywhere. Here is Kṛṣṇa. Although He is living in Goloka Vṛndāvana, He is in this temple, He is within our heart. Simply we have to take advantage, how He is present, how He is advising. That is the technique. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. God is everywhere. He is prepared to guide you. He is prepared to help you. Because He is father, He is always prepared. But we do not take His guidance. We do not take His shelter. That is the difficulty.

So why you do not take? Because ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8], we have attachment, "This country is mine. This family is mine. This wife is mine. The children is mine. Mine, mine, mine, mine, mine, mine, mine." So you have to become nirmama, without "mine." And why we are accepting this "mine," ahaṅkāra? Ahaṅkāra. Ahaṅkāra means false ahaṅkāra, false identification. So everyone is fighting because the false identification, "I am this body." He does not know. In this way we are so much in ignorance. Therefore the word used, mūḍha, is the appropriate word. Mūḍha, "rascal." We call everyone rascal. That is a harsh word. But actually that is the fact. They do now know what is what.

So if you actually are serious about stopping this rascaldom and wish to go back to home, back to Godhead, then you have to take this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Because by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, you become fully qualified. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra... [SB 5.18.12]. Because this surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, that is the perfection of intelligence. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā,

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



Because everyone is struggling... Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati. Prakṛti-sthāni, in this material nature, everyone is struggling, prakṛti-sthāni karṣati, with the mind and the senses, that's all. Compact, in the direction of the mind. Mano-dharma. Mano-dharma. So long we are directed by the flickering mind, then we are in danger. We have to go Above mind there is intelligence. The intelligence is where to consider, "Whether I am this body or I am something else?" So on this way, from the mental platform, you have to elevate yourself to the intellectual platform, and from the intellectual platform, you have to raise yourself to the spiritual platform. Then you will be able to give up so-called material possession, completely freed and surrender to Kṛṣṇa and become wise.



Thank you very much. (end)



731219SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.41

-

Los Angeles, December 19, 1973



Pradyumna: "Then he amalgamated all the sense organs into the mind, then the mind into life, life into breathing, his total existence into the embodiment of the five elements, and his body into death. Then, as pure self, he became free from the material conception of life." [SB 1.15.41]



Prabhupāda: Read the purport also.



Pradyumna: "Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, like his brother Arjuna, began to concentrate and gradually became freed from all material bondage. First of all he concentrated all the actions of the senses amalgamated in the mind. Or in other words, he turned his mind towards transcendental service of the Lord. He prayed that since all material activities were performed by the mind in terms of actions and reactions of the material senses, and since he was going back to Godhead, the mind would wind up its material activities and return towards the transcendental service of the Lord. There was no longer need for material activities. Actually, the activities of the mind cannot be stopped because they are the reflection of the eternal soul. But the quality of the activities can be changed from matter to the transcendental service of the Lord. The material color of the mind is changed by washing it from contaminations of life breathing and therefore getting it freed from the contamination of repeated birth and death and getting it situated in pure spiritual life. All was manifested by the temporary embodiment of the material body, which is a production of mind at the time of death. And if the mind is purified by practice of transcendental loving service of the Lord and the same is constantly engaged in the service of the lotus feet of the Lord, there is no more chance of the mind's producing another material body after death. It will be freed from the absorption of material contamination. The pure soul will be able to return back home, back to Godhead."



Prabhupāda: So this verse describes in the manner of yogic practice. The yogic practice means controlling five kinds of air within the body: prāṇa, apāna, vyāna, like that. That is breathing exercise, yoga practice.



So it appears that Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira knew how to practice the yoga. Not only Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, practically any high-class man, especially the brāhmaṇas and the kṣatriyas, every one of them knew this practice, yoga practice. So at the time of death they could utilize, how to give up this body. That is perfection of yoga. The yogis, they can give up the life or give this, relinquish this body, according to his own desire, not compelled by the material condition. That is yoga system. Generally, a man dies under the obligation of material laws. But a yogi, he controls in such a way that he leaves the body...

Just like Bhīṣmadeva. Bhīṣmadeva especially, his father gave him the benediction that so long he would not himself like to die, he'll never die, Bhīṣmadeva. He got this benediction from his father because his promise was very stern, severe. You know the story, that Bhīṣmadeva's father was captivated by the young girl, Satyavatī, and he wanted to marry her. A kṣatriya could do that. But Satyavatī's father disagreed. Although he was king, he could marry anyone he likes. But his (her) father... Still, with the permission of the parents. So the father denied, "No, no, I cannot give you my daughter to you." "Why?" "Because you have got grown-up son, and he will be the king. Why my daughter shall be married with you just like a maid-servant? No." So Bhīṣmadeva could understand that "My father desires to marry this young girl, Satyavatī, and there is some hindrances." So he approached, that "Why don't you give my father your daughter?" So he said, "Because you are his eldest son. You will become king." So he immediately promised that "No, your daughter's son will become king. I will not become king. Give my father, sir." So he said, "No, no, still it is not possible." "Why?" "Because you may not become king. Then your son will become king. I don't want that." So in this way Bhīṣmadeva said, "No, then I shall not marry. Is that all right? Still..." Then he gave his daughter, "Yes." Satyavatī.

So his father, Śantanu Mahārāja, saw that Bhīṣma is so affectionate to his father that for the father's sense gratification he has sacrificed his own. So he gave him this benediction, "My dear son, you are so stern in keeping your promise. So I give you this benediction, that you will never die unless you desire." Therefore Bhīṣmadeva was lying on the bed of arrows, and he left this material world when he desired. So the yogis can do that. The yogis they control the soul. The soul is floating in different airs. So they can control. That is called ṣaṭ-cakraḥ. From the rectum to the abdomen, abdomen to the heart, heart to the collarbone, then collarbone to the palate, and then here. So one who can bring the soul here, they can get out from this hole, it is called brahma-randhra.

So they can go, the yogis, as they desire. Either he can go directly to the spiritual world, or if he likes, he can transfer himself to the higher planetary system. This is yoga practice. Anywhere he likes, he can go. It appears that Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja knew perfectly well. Similarly, we see from many other kings' life. Or this yoga practice was done by any gentleman. Therefore they were so sober, steady and determined. Everyone was a yogi. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is described, rājarṣi. Imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ. Ṛṣi. Ṛṣi, saintly persons, they know how to practice yoga. So formerly the kings were as good as ṛṣis. They were simply sitting on the throne as a matter of responsibility to the citizens. They were not political opportunists. No. Nowadays people are political opportunists. As soon as they get some opportunity, they capture the power. Formerly... Just like Bhīṣmadeva. Actually, he would have been the king. But he was not opportunist. To serve his father he gave up everything. This is called rājarṣi.

So vacāṁsi. If you can control your mind, then you can control your words. There are kāya, mana, vākya. Three things are... We have got this body, and we have got our mind, and we have got to talk. Talking is very important. You can talk nonsense all day and night, and you can talk about Kṛṣṇa and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and the same thing, vibration. So if you talk nonsense, then you can go to hell. And if you talk about Kṛṣṇa and the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, chant, then you go back to home, back to Godhead. Just see how much this talking is important. Simply by talking. Vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. So it is a matter of control. This is con... Yoga means indriya-saṁyama, controlling the senses. That is called yoga, real purpose of yoga. Because our senses are just like venomous serpents. So many people, they fall down on account of these senses. They become victims of the senses.

So yoga practice means the controlling the senses. This is the real purpose of yoga. There is certain mechanical process, that is called yoga practice. Therefore yoga practice is meant for a person who is too much in bodily concept of life. Otherwise, one who is convinced that "I am not this body," then where is the necessity of exercising the body? But it is meant for a person who is too much absorbed in bodily concept of life. For him, this yogic practice is recommended, that by mechanical practice of the different parts of the body, the air within the body, one can control the senses. And unless the senses are controlled... The whole thing is sense. Therefore consciousness, it depends on the senses, purifying the senses. Spirit soul is eternal, so his senses are eternal. You cannot stop the activities of his senses. That is not possible. Just like others. They think that "If we stop... " Just like Viśvāmitra Muni. He was a great yogi. He stopped the senses. He wanted to stop. He closed the eyes, "I'll not see a beautiful woman." But he failed as soon as he heard the tinkling sound of the bangles of the apsarā, Menakā.

So our senses are so strong. If you stop this sense, the other sense is prepared to kill you. Because they are called enemies, they are manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. We are struggling for existence with the mind and the senses. Otherwise it is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā, "These living entities, they are My part and parcel." That means "They are as good as I am." Why they are rotting in this material world? Because on account of the mind and the senses. So yoga practice you have to control first of all the mind, and then you have to control the senses. That is perfection of yoga. So Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, a great devotee, he controlled his mind, senses, in this way. The first thing is to... Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ [SB 9.4.18]. This yoga practice... Bhakti-yoga means this, not to try artificially to control the mind the senses. That will be failure. In most cases they are failure. In some cases they are perfect or successful, but in most cases they are failure, especially in this age, when people have no training, no..., simply extravagant, doing everywhere what he likes, no brahmacārī system. Nothing is taught. Formerly (in) the Vedic civilization, the boys should be sent to Gurukula for practicing brahmacarya. There is no such question now. So the so-called practice of yoga is simply useless waste of time. They cannot do anything. It is not possible.

Therefore bhakti-yoga system is to engage the senses and the mind in Kṛṣṇa's service. If your mind is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, then there is very little scope for the mind being diverted from it. It diverts, but if you practice, then Kṛṣṇa will help you.

śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

[SB 1.2.17]



Kṛṣṇa is within yourself, and if you are sincerely trying to purify yourself, your mind, body, words, these three...



So the beginning is to hear about Kṛṣṇa. Anything about Kṛṣṇa. But first thing we want to hear... If we want to know Kṛṣṇa, naturally we are inclined, "What is Kṛṣṇa? What is Kṛṣṇa?" Just like our Kṛṣṇa book is now selling. Because the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is there, so people are, I mean to say, eager to know, "What this Kṛṣṇa is?" Naturally they want to purchase some Kṛṣṇa books. Actually, that is the first business. Just like we are speaking about, "In God We Trust," this slogan of the American people or American government. So naturally, people should be inquisitive to know actually what is God, scientifically. We say, "In God We Trust," but we do not know what is God. Then where is the question of trust? Suppose if you, if somebody, friends, say that "You can trust the Bank of America." But if he does not know what is Bank of America, then how he can trust? How he can deposit his money? So that is the difficulty. This is simply slogan. Otherwise, everyone should have been inquisitive, "What this government has made this slogan, 'In God We Trust'?" What is God? Nobody knows. Then where is the question of trust? Therefore it has become everything humbug.

But if you are serious to know about God, there is science, there is teacher, everything is there. God Himself is there within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. So actually, if you are serious to know God, so God is within himself. He can understand, "Now this living entity is serious to know about Me." So He will help you, immediately. That is stated in Bhagavad-gītā,

teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te

[Bg. 10.10]



Teṣām, "such persons," satata-yuktānām, "always very much anxious to know about God..." So God can understand. God is omnipotent. He can understand that "This living entity is now serious. He wants to hear about God." So this inquisitiveness is very good. My Guru Mahārāja accepted me as a disciple because he saw in the beginning I was very inquisitive to hear him. So in the beginning, when many gentleman... I was one of them, was introduced to my Guru Mahārāja, that "They are to be initiated. They want to be initiated, to become your disciple." So when my turn came, he immediately said, "Yes, I will accept this boy as disciple because he is very inquisitive to hear." That was my recommendation. And actually, I was very inquisitive. I could not follow what Guru Mahārāja was speaking, but still, I was asking others, that "When Guru Mahārāja will speak? I will hear." I could not follow. He was speaking in a very high philosophical term. So at that time I had no capacity to under... Still, I wanted to hear him, I understand or not understand.



So this is very good qualification. So those who are coming here to listen about God, they are very fortunate. Kṛṣṇa will help them. Śravaṇam. The beginning of bhakti-yoga is started from the practice of śravaṇam, aural reception, ear. Therefore the mantra is given through the ear, initiation mantra. Then kīrtanam.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]



There are nine different processes. The most important process is hearing. And as soon as you want to hear, that means you have to concentrate your mind. So naturally, the mind becomes, I mean to say, locked. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. But if we sleep, that is another thing, that "Let the lectures go on. Let me have some rest." That is another thing. But if you hear, if you are anxious to hear, then mind has to be engaged. Without attention, you cannot hear. If your mind is something doing, you are thinking of marketing something, or sometimes..., so you can hear, make a show of hearing, but you are not hearing. Therefore mind is the first thing. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane [SB 9.4.18]. If you engage your mind in hearing, then you can describe the things in the Vaikuṇṭha, in the spiritual world. Vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānu...



So we have to practice. This is bhakti-yoga. First of all we have to engage the mind. Mind. And as soon as you engage the mind in hearing about Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa will help you in cleansing the mind. That is the opinion given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]. Because everything... We cannot understand about God, or we cannot see God, or we do not know what is God, because there are so many dirty things on the mind. Otherwise, as soon as the mind is clear, devoid of all dirty things, you can see. You can understand what is God; you can see God every moment. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilo... [Bs. 5.38]. So there is no difficulty. God is here, Kṛṣṇa. But one's mind is not clear. He cannot see God. He sees a statue of stone. He sees a statue of stone. And whose mind is clear, like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as soon as He sees Jagannātha, immediately fainted. Here is Kṛṣṇa. Actually, that is the fact. Here is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is omnipresent. That is God's qualification: omnipresent, He is present everywhere. So why not present in the temple? He is present here. But we have no eyes to see. Because our mind is not clean.

So we cannot use the senses to see God. That is the defect. Therefore premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. By the bhakti process, by devotional service, you cleanse your mind, you cleanse your senses. As soon as your mind is cleansed, then senses are also clean. That is helped by Kṛṣṇa Himself, as He says in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ. As soon as Kṛṣṇa sees that you are eager to hear about Him... Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. By the first hearing you may not understand about Kṛṣṇa, but if you simply hear with little attention, although you do not understand, still, you will be pious. Because the dirty things means covered with impious activities. So if you hear about Kṛṣṇa, then gradually you will become pious, simply by hearing. Simply... Just like if there is injection, anti-some disease, vaccine. You understand or not understand, it will act. Suppose if you take poison, if you do not understand what is poison, it will act. Similarly, kṛṣṇa-kathā is so powerful that if you simply hear, even if you do not understand, then you will become pious. And by becoming pious... Because without becoming pious, nobody can understand Kṛṣṇa. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, yeṣām anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām: "Those who are twenty-four hours engaged in pious activities..."

Therefore we engage our students in the bhakti-yoga practice, twenty-four hours routine work, because it is pious activities. So he will be purified. He will be purified. We have got so many times offering ārati, offering prasādam, cleansing the temple, dressing the Deity, talking about him, twenty-four hours must be. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31]. Kīrtanīyaḥ or sevanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ, twenty-four hours. In this way we become purified. Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā... [Cc. Antya 20.12]. As soon as your mind is cleansed of all dirty things, then you become fit for going back to home, back to Godhead.

So any yoga practice... But other yoga practice-haṭha-yoga practice, dhyāna-yoga practice, karma-yoga practice, jñāna-yoga practice-these are very difficult in this age. But if you take to bhakti-yoga practice... It is recommended, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam. Kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt. In this age, Kali-yuga, this hari-kīrtana is bhakti-yoga. Kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ [SB 12.3.52]. In different ages, because the people are different, so different methods are prescribed in the śāstra. In the Satya-yuga the meditation method was possible. In other yuga it is not possible. In Tretā-yuga, by sacrificing big, big yajña, performing yajña; in Dvāpara-yuga by temple worship; and kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt, and in this Kali-yuga, simply by hari-kīrtana, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, you can get the same result. Therefore our process is kīrtana always. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. Ādi 17.31].

So by bhakti-yoga practice you become perfect in all yogic practices and ultimately you realize God very easily and directly, and that will help you to go back to home, back to Godhead. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā,

janma karma me divyaṁ

yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti kaunteya

[Bg. 4.9]



Anyone who understands Kṛṣṇa in truth... Janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ. Tattvataḥ means in truth, not superficially. If you understand Kṛṣṇa in truth, as He is... And He is speaking Himself about Himself. There is no difficulty. If you simply accept Kṛṣṇa, what He says, if you follow, then you become perfect and you become fit for going back to home, back to Godhead.



Thank you very much. (end)



731220SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.42

-

Los Angeles, December 20, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Thus annihilating the gross body of five elements into the three qualitative modes of material nature, he merged them in one nescience and then absorbed that nescience in the self, Brahman, which is inexhaustible in all circumstances." [SB 1.15.42]



Prabhupāda: Tritve hutvā ca pañcatvaṁ tac caikatve ajuhon muniḥ. Everything is coming from that one. The theory of conservation of energy, that is imperfection. All energy are conserved in that Supreme Personality of Godhead. They have got little idea of this, wherefrom the energies are coming, but not perfectly. The modern scientists, they can simply think of "conservation of energy." But where is that conservation? That they do not know. That is the missing point.



Here it is explained how from that original reservoir of all energy, things are coming. That is the lesson in Vedānta-sūtra, janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] "Everything is coming from one source." Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante. These are Vedic mantras. That is Brahman. Brahman means inexhaustible, avyaya. There is no exhaustion. Pūrṇam. As we learn, pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idam [Īśopaniṣad, Invocation], everything complete. Complete, we have no idea of complete. We think complete also limited. Complete satisfaction. Suppose you have got a bank balance, a million dollars. You think, "It is now complete. I am fully satisfied." But he hasn't got the complete idea. The bank balance may be one million dollar today, but if I spend it, it will be gradually reduced, and one day it will be zero. So that is not complete. Complete means you go on spending as much as you like; still, it remains complete. That is complete.

There is a small story. Perhaps I have narrated this story sometimes ago, that in a school... Formerly there was no charge for school. Now everything has become business. Formerly a brāhmaṇa, he'll start a school. Brāhmaṇa is paṭhana pāṭhana. His business is to become learned himself and to distribute his knowledge, education, to everyone free. This is brāhmaṇa. The brāhmaṇa, and the opposite word is kṛpaṇa. Kṛpaṇa means miser. A miser, he has got money, but he does not spend. He keeps it only. And brāhmaṇa means he has got knowledge and he distributes for others' benefit. That is brāhmaṇa. Therefore we are making every one of our disciples brāhmaṇa, not that he should simply know himself what is God. No. He must distribute the knowledge also. Go from town to town, village to village, and try to convince these rascals what is God. They simply write, "In God We Trust," but they do not know what is God or how to trust, nothing. Now let them know it scientifically. Here is the movement, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. What is this movement? To know God. Of course, we cannot know God perfectly. God is so unlimited. Still, as far as possible, we can know, as God speaks Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā.

So this is meant for the brāhmaṇa. Therefore we offer second initiation, sacred thread, that one should become brāhmaṇa, not a kṛpaṇa, miser, no. One should be thoroughly learned what is God and teach others how to trust Him. That is brāhmaṇa. Simply slogan, "We Trust In God," and all rascals and fools, that is not good. Now we should take up this point, that "You write, 'In God We trust.' What is God? Do you know what is God?" Ask the President Nixon rascal. He will not be able to. Then who will know? If the president does not know, how the people will know? Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhaḥ lokas tad anuvartate [Bg. 3.21]. Śreṣṭha, the chief man, the leader Just like I am leading this society, so what I shall do, naturally it will be followed: "Prabhupāda does it." So that is applicable everywhere. So if the president knows what is God, how to trust Him... Why shall I trust unless I know you properly? It is natural. If somebody says, "Trust this man," so my next question, "I must first of all know this man; then I shall trust." Similarly, if you do not know what is God, what is the meaning of your trust? It is all childish, slogan. Therefore the condition is so deteriorated. Everywhere, not only here, they have no knowledge of God. We can challenge anyone, any so-called scientist, philosopher, politician, big, big men. They know only wine, women, meat-eating. That's all. This much their knowledge. But who knows God? Nobody. Ultimately, the rascal says, "I am God." Failing to know God, he become himself God.

So here is very nicely explained, how from that one... Prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that "This prakṛti," means nature, "will be wound up, again come to Me within." Just like the spider. The spider makes a cobweb. From the saliva from him, he can work-he knows how to work on it-and again he can wound it up. That is practical example. Similarly, the material nature... Here is the point of creation. The energy is conserved. Energy is never lost, avyaya. But this prakṛti, this material nature, is not eternal. It is temporary. The same example, the spider. The spider, suppose it is eternal, but the cobweb made by the spider, that is not eternal. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19]. It is created and again wound up. Similarly, the point of creation comes from God. God is not created. They ask this question generally, that "Everything is created. Then God must be created." That idea comes because we have no other idea than the creation, maintenance and again annihilation. We have no other idea. In this material world, we have no other idea. We see this body is created by father and mother. Then it remains for a time, it grows, and then it become old. Then it vanishes. Ṣaḍ-vikāra, six kinds of changes. Janma-sthiti-pariṇāma...

In this way everything in this material world, nothing is permanent. But the soul within the body, that permanent. That is the conservation of energy. That they do not know. Where the energy is reserved and wherefrom the energy is manifested, again wound up... A living entity... As God and we living entities, we have got the same quality... As God is the reservation, conversation of all energy, material energy, similarly, I, you, we being small particle of God's fraction... Just like spark, spark of fire, big fire, and the small spark. That small spark has all the qualities of fire. All the chemicals composition of fire is there in the small spark, but in very, very small quantity. A drop of seawater has got the all chemical composition of the ocean. That is equality. Qualitatively. And quantitatively, where is the comparison between the drop of ocean water and the ocean? There is no comparison. That is difference. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy is perfect. Acintya-bhedābheda, inconceivably, simultaneously one and different. We are one with one, but these rascals who have no thorough knowledge, they simply take this oneness, "I am one with God." That is rascaldom. There are two things: one and different simultaneously. Qualitatively one, quantitatively different.

So as this body is created by my energy, my subtle energy and my gross energy... It is also... The whole energy... I am also emanation from God. The total energy is God. I am fragment, fragment energy, but still, I have got the same function. Just like I am put into the womb of the mother through the semina of the father. Now, according to my energy, I have placed into a suitable condition. If I have worked for becoming dog, then through the semina of the dog I am put into the womb of a dog mother. And if I have worked as a god, then through the semina of the father, I am put into the womb of a mother. So in this way, my conservation of energy worked there, the supply is there, and I form the body. This body is formed... This is creation. So as my body is formed, similarly, this whole universal body is formed. That is creation. They do not understand. They are so rascal that they do not understand that creation is a fact, and the original creator is God. So in the scriptures, "God created this world," that is fact, but unfortunately, they do not know how it is created. Lack of knowledge. So that is explained here, tritve hutvā ca pañcatvam, how things are developing. From the spirit soul there is total material energy. Energy is coming. The conservation of energy is the spirit soul. Where is the difficulty to understand? That is permanent, avyaya.

So therefore there are two kinds of energy from the Supreme Soul, God. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā,

bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

[Bg. 7.4]



Aṣṭadhā. Aṣṭadhā means eight. So tritve, three, and pañcatvam, five, that means eight, the eight kinds of material energy. Earth, water, fire, air, sky-these are gross. The gross, amongst the gross also, the finer material energy, the sky, we cannot see. This is also gross. Then mind. Everyone knows I am thinking, I have got mind. You know, I know. But where is the mind? Have you seen? Somebody suggests mind is in the brain, somebody suggests in the stomach, somebody... Suggesting. But there is mind. Everyone knows. Then next finer, the sky. We can perceive the sky is there by sound. As soon as... (makes tapping sound) This is due to sky, this sound. That is the symptom there is sky. But similarly, although the sky you cannot see, you can understand that... Similarly, mind is there. You can understand by thinking, feeling, willing, mind is there. But you do not see the mind. Oh, why you are so much proud, "Can you show me"? You cannot see your mind, you cannot see the sky, and you want to see God with your these eyes. Just see how foolish they are! You cannot see even a gross thing and subtle things, and the finer, finer, finer than all subtle things... Mind, then intelligence. Simply not mind. When we think, feel or will, there is intelligence behind that, and if the intelligence is not good, simply you will think of nonsense.



So behind the mind, there is intelligence. And behind the intelligence, there is soul. So if you cannot see the mind and the finer gross material sky, you cannot see intelligence, how you will see the soul? Therefore you cannot understand your this gross situation. You cannot. Acintya. Acintya. It is beyond your... Anything which is beyond your conception, you don't try to speculate. That is simply waste of time. "Then how shall I know?" You know from the authority. The same example: you cannot speculate who is your father. Know from your mother who is your father. Very simple thing. But if you speculate, "Who is my father? Who is my father? Who is my father?" that is not possible. Ciraṁ vicinvan. If you go on speculating, without taking care of the mother, without asking from your mother, if you simply want to know by your research scholarship, "Who is my father?" you will never know it. Acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet.

Therefore things which are beyond your speculation, don't try to argue. Don't be foolish. Don't be rascal. How you can? Because it is beyond your conception. There is no question of it. By argument, by speculation, by logic, you cannot understand what is soul, what is God. That is not possible. Acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet. Don't waste your time. So similarly, you do not know what is God by speculation. That is not possible. And religion means the science of God. Religion means the science of God. So how religion, you can understand that this is proper religion? Because you do not know God, neither it is possible to speculate on God, then how I shall accept religion? Just try to understand. Religion means the science of God. It is not a sentiment; it is science. So if you want to know that science... Therefore Vedic injunction is, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12] "In order to know that science knowledge, you must approach guru." That is practical. Even for material science, you go to school, college, to learn from the authority. How you can learn about God, about soul, without approaching a proper person who knows it?

So that is the way. That is the way. You cannot speculate. Athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi jānāti tattvam [SB 10.14.29]. Tattvam, that truth, one can understand, how has received the mercy of God. Therefore we sing "Guru, guru is the mercy of God." God is so merciful that He is within yourself. He is trying to teach you, and, internally, and externally he appears as guru, to teach you. Mercy. So therefore guru is considered as good as Kṛṣṇa. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. In all the śāstras, the guru is respected as Kṛṣṇa is respected. Sākṣād-dharitvena. Haritva. Hari means Lord. Samasta, in all the scriptures, guru is accepted as Kṛṣṇa. But he never says that I, he is Kṛṣṇa; neither he is Kṛṣṇa. Then what is his position? Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya: he is the most confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa. He never says that "I am Kṛṣṇa, I am God." That is not guru. Guru must place... He knows perfectly well that he is serving Kṛṣṇa. His business is to serve Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa wants all these fallen souls to be delivered because they are Kṛṣṇa's part and parcel. Just like a rich man, if his son goes out of home, he is suffering. His father knows that rascal boy is suffering. He is very anxious to get him back. "Bring this rascal at home." That is father's concern, naturally. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is more eager to take you back. Therefore He comes. He comes. He has got his agent, the guru. He has got His instruction, the Bhagavad-gītā. The whole concern is that God is so anxious, Kṛṣṇa is anxious, to call back these rascals, back to home, back to Godhead. So sometimes He is so eager that He comes Himself. Just like I have sent some my agent to do something. I am seeing that it is being delayed, so I go there: "What you are doing? Why it is so delayed?" Like that. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says,

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



Dharmasya glāniḥ, discrepancy in the execution of religion principles.



So religion means, we have already explained, religion means the science of God. So the chance is there in the human form of body to understand the science of God. In the body of cats and dogs, it is not possible. Therefore this life should be fully utilized for understanding the science of God, and understanding... As Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja... Now he is closing the business. The business is that "I am creating this body." Just like a businessman opens a business house. Sometimes when the business is simply troublesome, he liquidates. Similarly, we should come into the understanding that our material business is always troublesome. Is it not troublesome? Practical, material business. Suppose in this life you have got all good facilities. You have got a skyscraper building, nice... Suppose you are Mr. Ford. He was a very rich man in your country. So where is Mr. Ford now? That they do not see. That they have no eyes. In Paris I saw some statue of Napoleon. There is written, "Napoleon is France; France is Napoleon." But I inquired that "Where is Mr. Napoleon? The France is there, but where is Napoleon?" Just see. This is called ignorance, māyā. When Napoleon was very victorious, he might think that "I am making my France very strong, very powerful," but that's all right. But you are not powerful. You have to go away. By one kick of nature, go away. That they do not see. This is called ignorance. Bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate [Bg. 8.19].

So what is the meaning of this business? Suppose you have got... That Mr. Ford, Henry Ford, he did a very... Now everything is left. He could not take even a single cent with him when he was dying. Everything was left. Now, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13], he has got another body. Nobody cares, nobody cares. Suppose Mr. Henry's children. They do not know. Not only they, everyone. Politicians, their statue is worshiped, but nobody knows where that Mr. Napoleon, Mr. Washington, Mr. Gandhi has gone. They do not know. They are worshiping the material statue. That's all. Ignorance. Bhūtejyā. It is called bhūtejyā. One of our big politician, Indian politician, some astrologer said that "He has become a dog in Scandinavia." But you cannot deny. You cannot deny. If you believe... First of all you have to believe that the soul transmigrates. That's a fact. That we are doing every day, every minute... Simply it requires little brain. Dhīra. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. Tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Dhīra means sober. What is the difficulty to understand? I was a child, you were a child. Just like these children, talking without any meaning. But they are children, they are excused. But the same child will become a young man, old man. The body has changed. Just like I was also child, you were also child. In childhood we have done so many nonsense things. But in this body I am not doing anything. I have to consider.

So that means the body is different. According to the body... The rascal says that the animals have no soul. Why? Then the child has no soul? What is the difference between the child's behavior and an animal's behavior? Anyone who has got a dog in the family, the dog is also one of the children. He also behaves... The children also behave like the dog. And the children do not find any difference, that a dog is different, he is different. Simple. So if the dog has no soul and if the behavior are the same, as of the dog of the child, so does it mean the child has no soul? How foolish they are. Just see. And they say the animal has no soul. Why? You can say, "The intelligence is not developed." As the child's intelligence is not developed, it will develop with the chance of the body, similarly, the dog also will have developed sense when he will change his dog's body to human body. That is called evolution. He will get the chance. Nature will give the chance.

So after getting the chance, if we do not utilize the chance as human being, then I remain a dog. This is the philosophy. Therefore these books are meant for sober human being, not for the so-called human being: he is a dog, but he has got two hands and two legs. That's all. Not like that. Puruṣaḥ paśuḥ. Śva-viḍ-varāha-uṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ. Now you are fighting against your president that he must resign because he is just like animal. The charge is. But he is animal undoubtedly. But who has selected the animal? Other animals. You are also animal. Otherwise how you can select one animal? Therefore in the Bhāgavata it is said, śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ [SB 2.3.19]. Paśu. Anyone who is not in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is he is praised, those who are praising, they are also animals. Not to become Kṛṣṇa conscious is animalism. That is animalism.

So anyone who has not developed his consciousness to understand God... Kṛṣṇa consciousness means to understand God and then trust Him. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Actually, your currency notes advertising our movement. But they do not know scientifically. Now this movement is scientifically started. The Americans should take advantage of it and try to understand the simple slogan, "In God We Trust."

Thank you very much. (end)



731222SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.44

-

Los Angeles, December 22, 1973



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



udīcīṁ praviveśāśāṁ

gata-pūrvāṁ mahātmabhiḥ

hṛdi brahma paraṁ dhyāyan

nāvarteta yato gataḥ

[SB 1.15.44]



Translation: "He then started towards the north, treading the path accepted by his forefathers and great men, to devote himself completely to the thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he lived in that way wherever he went."



Prabhupāda: Udīcīṁ praviveśa. So one who goes to the northern side, it is to be understood he never comes back. Northern side means the Arctic zone, covered with snow. So this was known in Bhāgavata days. Not only in Bhāgavata days, some, about a thousand years ago also, there is Kālidāsa's book Kumāra-sambhava. Kumāra-sambhava, "The Birth of Kārttikeya." So in the book the beginning is asty uttarasyaṁ diśi himālayo nāma nagadhirājaḥ. Uttarasyaṁ diśi, in the northern side, there is mountain which is covered with snow, Himalaya. Hima means ice, hima. Asty uttarasyaṁ diśi himālayo nāma nagadhirājaḥ: "In the northern side, there is a hill or a mountain which is always covered by snow." Although at the present moment, Himalaya, there is one mountain that is also called Himalaya, Mount Everest, but I think this Arctic zone was referred. Because it is said that "touching both sides, water." Asty uttarasyaṁ diśi himālayo nāma nagadhirājaḥ, toya-nidhi avagāhya. Toya-nidhi. Toya-nidhi means oceans, both sides ocean, the Pacific Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean. Avagāhya, touching. So the Arctic zone was referred in many books, Vedic literature. It is not that it was unknown. Everything was known. The modern historians, they say like that. They say the Bhāgavata was written about 1,500 years ago. No. Five thousand years ago. They bring everything within the Christian era. And before that, there was no history, according to them. But that is not the fact.



Anyway, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira went to the northern side. Gata-pūrvāṁ mahātmabhiḥ. His forefathers, they were also mahātmās. Formerly the kings were not, I mean to say, licentious drunkards. They were all ṛṣi, as good as great saintly persons, rājarṣi. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā was taught to the saintly kings. The modern people, they say that "Why not this movement amongst the poorer-class men?" They do not know who is poor. Anyone who is poor in spiritual understanding, he is poor. By material opulence, one does not become rich. He is animal. By material opulence, one may be polished animal, but he is animal. One who is spiritually advanced, he is actually in knowledge. Because basic principle is spirit. Without spiritual knowledge, anything, any so-called knowledge, advancement of knowledge, is simply mistake, mistake. Just like if you, in calculating one mathematical sum, if you commit mistake anywhere, the whole thing is spoiled. Whole thing is spoiled. You go on. You are making progress. But real mistake was there. It will never carry. The balance, it will not come into being.

So the real mistake they are committing: dehātma-buddhi, this body as self. That is the basic mistake of all education. Yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke [SB 10.84.13]. Anyone who has accepted this body as self, yasya ātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke... This is a bag of three elements: kapha, pitta, vāyu. And on this basis, sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu... Sva-dhīḥ. Sva-dhīḥ means thinking, "my own men." Kalatrādiṣu. Kalatra means wife, and through wife, children, then other relationship. Sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ. And the land in which one is born, that is worshipable. Nowadays nationalism. Nationalism means the land. In so many ways the whole basic principle of education is wrong. Therefore such persons who are making so-called progress on the basic principle of mistake, so parābhavas tāvat, they are simply being defeated, because the basic principle is wrong. Parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam. Ātma-tattvam, spirit, spiritual knowledge, one who hasn't got, so whatever they are doing in the name of progress, they are all being defeated. That's all. It will never be successful. They will never be happy. There will be no peace and prosperity in the world, because the basic principle is wrong.

So here it is said, mahātmā, gata-pūrvāṁ mahātmabhiḥ. We have to follow great personalities for advancement of knowledge. Actually we do. We accept authority, go to school, college, to learn something from the teacher, professor. But unfortunately, the teachers, professors, they are all rascals. Therefore we do not get proper education. Wrongly directed. They are changing. Changing is not knowledge. That is not knowledge. Just yesterday we were talking some theosophist. He is changing his view. Formerly it was right; now it is wrong. That is not knowledge. Knowledge means what you accept as right, it must be accepted perpetually right. That is knowledge. That is knowledge. Just like our principle. Kṛṣṇa says that "I am the Supreme," five thousand years ago. So Arjuna who heard from Kṛṣṇa, he also said, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. He accepted. I am speaking of five thousand years. Otherwise perpetually. Imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]. Long, long ago, before speaking to Arjuna, this Bhagavad-gītā was spoken to the sun-god, forty millions of years ago. The same principle. In the Bhagavad-gītā: "I am speaking to you the same principle." Not that "Forty millions of years have passed, so things have changed." No. Nothing has changed. The sun forty millions of years ago used to rise from the eastern side. Forty or trillions of years. Still it is rising from the east. Can you make any new thing, "Let the sun rise from the west?" No. That is not possible.

So knowledge means without any mistake. Anything without any mistake, that is perpetually right. And anything based on mistaken idea, that will change. You have to correct the mistake. The so-called modern scientists, they are simply correcting their mistake. Therefore they have no real knowledge. Nobody can have real knowledge, because we are imperfect. Our senses are imperfect. That is our defect in the conditioned life. We have got four defects: we commit mistake, we become illusioned, our senses are imperfect, and we cheat. Because our knowledge is imperfect, still, we take the position of teacher; therefore we are cheater-not teacher, but cheater. So the teacher society nowadays is the cheater society. And this modern world is a society of the cheater and the cheated. That's all. Somebody is cheating and somebody is being cheated. This is going on.

So how can we not be cheated? That is mahātmabhiḥ. You have to follow the previous great ācāryas, mahātmabhiḥ. Just like Kṛṣṇa is accepted. Kṛṣṇa said He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Arjuna accepted, "Yes, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma [Bg. 10.12]," after hearing from Him. Paraṁ brahma. And then, after Arjuna, disciplic succession. Lord Caitanya accepted. All the ācāryas, Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, accepted Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality. Śāstra says, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam [SB 1.3.28]. So we have to follow these mahājana. Otherwise we cannot get the right knowledge. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. We have to follow great authorities. So who are authorities? They are mentioned in the śāstras:

svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

[SB 6.3.20]



Everything is there, śāstra. So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja followed the principles as it was done by the previous mahātmabhiḥ, great personalities, not only in his family but also otherwise. Because knowledge is... Right knowledge is not different. "Two plus two equal four," it is right in Europe, in America, in Asia, in white, in black, everywhere. It is truth, "Two plus two..." You cannot make "Two plus two equal to five." That is not possible. That is truth.



So hṛdi brahma paraṁ dhyāyan. This is the principle. If you want to stop repetition of birth and death... This is our real problem, but people are so poor in knowledge, they do not know what is the problem. They are tackling some temporary problem: "There is no petrol, there is no this, there is no that." Well, even petrol is there, but what of yourself? Are you going to live here forever? That is not problem. I am making arrangement for my sense gratification very nicely-skyscraper building, and very nice car, very nice bank balance, everything. That's all right. But you are going to live permanently? What is the answer, my dear scientist? No answer. Just see. You construct a house with a hope that you shall live here, but if you are informed, "Oh, you are going to die tomorrow," will you take that responsibility, constructing, spending millions of dollars? "Oh, I am going to die?" That is natural. That is natural. So before making nice arrangement for our living condition, first of all make this condition sure that you are going to live actually, you will live comfortably. Is that guaranteed? No, that is not guaranteed. At any moment you will be kicked out. Any moment. So that is real problem. First of all make yourself assured that you will not be kicked out. Just like even we enter an apartment, we make so many agreement with the landlord, this condition, that condition. What is the idea? That I may not be kicked out, I may not be kicked out tomorrow. The landlord may say, "Get out." This is the agreement you make. So what is the agreement for your living condition?

Therefore real problem is that, that we are coming, we are accepting one type of body, either in the human society or animal society or tree society or dog society, accepting some body, karmaṇā daiva, according to our karma. There (are) so many varieties of life. Why so many varieties of...? What is the explanation? Just like there are so many varieties of apartment. So what does this mean? You enter some apartment according to the payment you can provide. Therefore there are so many varieties of apartment. It is a commonsense affair. Otherwise all apartments would have been the same, of the same size, same quality, same... No. There are different tenants, they pay differently; therefore there are different kinds of apartment. Similarly, this is also apartment. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. The spirit soul is within this apartment body. So according to karma, according to payment, one has got American body, one has got African body, one has got Indian body, one has got this body, that body, dog's body, cat's body, tree's body. This is karma. This is karma. This is our real problem. And this human life is especially meant for solving this problem, not the problem of petrol. But they have forgotten this. They are so rascals, the real problem they have forgotten.

Therefore here it is said, dhyāyan na āvarteta yato gataḥ. We are trying to go to the moon planet. But is it sure that you will not die there? "No, no, before going there I shall die. That is happy. Still we shall go." This is their proposal. Either you go to the moon planet or sun planet or any Venus planet, this planet, anywhere within this material world... Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. There are so many planets. The topmost planet is Brahmaloka, Brahma planet, where Lord Brahmā lives. And you know the duration of life of Brahmā. You cannot calculate his one twelve-hours day. Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. This is the Brahmā's twelve hours. That is Brahmaloka. You cannot calculate what is the duration of life there. But even if you go there, the problem, death will be there. The problem death will go. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. The problem which is here... Just like the birth-death problem is within the ant society, birth-death problem is there within the animal society, birth-death problem is there in the human society, similarly, birth-death problem is in the moon society or sun society or Brahmaloka society, anywhere in this material world. That is real problem.

But what is my position? My position is that there is no death, no birth. Na jāyate na mriyate vā kadācit. In the Bhagavad-gītā, teaching, Kṛṣṇa is teaching that "Soul never takes birth, neither dies." Then what is this death? This is not death. This is changing of body. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. Even if you take it is annihilation, yes, but the soul remains. Nityaḥ śāśvato 'yaṁ na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]. People have no brain that "What is my problem? I am eternal. I have no business to accept so-called birth and death and disease and old age, but I am put under this condition. I have to die. I have to take birth. I have to become old. I have to accept disease." This is our real problem. But they have no information. They neglect this, because they cannot make any solution. They think, "It is usual. We have to suffer." Just like an animal. An animal is going, is taken to the slaughterhouse. He knows that "I have no means. I have to suffer," I mean to say, "be slaughtered." He has no means.

But for human society, this kind of ignorance is not good, to submit to the laws of nature against my principles. I do not die. The laws of nature is forcing me to die. I do not wish to be old man. The laws of nature forcing me to become old man. So this can be avoided. And for avoiding this problem, this human form of life is there. But they do not care. They are thinking, "advancing." What advancing? Advancing means this body... Now you have got nice, beautiful American body, but by your work, if you are going to accept next life dog's life, then what is the benefit of your activities? Because there is no guarantee that you will again get the American body. Even if you get the American body again, but there is no guarantee that you will be allowed to live. If you get the American body of a cow, you will be slaughtered, even though you are American. So this is ignorance. Therefore Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja has accepted mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186], to follow the footprints of great personality. That is advancement. Otherwise degradation, degradation.

Now the real solution is... Here it is stated, dhyāyan na āvarteta yato gataḥ. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā also, yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. Tad dhāma paramaṁ mama. Dhāma means place. Kṛṣṇa is the proprietor. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram [Bg. 5.29]. He is the proprietor of all planets. So every place belongs to Him. Sarva-loka-maheśvaram. But He has a supreme place, tad dhāma paramaṁ mama, where, if you go, you will never return. Yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]. That is Kṛṣṇa-loka, Goloka Vṛndāvana. If you go there, then you do not come back again. There are many confirmation in the Bhagavad-gītā. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya: [Bg. 4.9] "My dear Kaunteya, Arjuna," janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ, "if anyone knows what I am, what I am, Kṛṣṇa, My birth, or janma..." Kṛṣṇa's janma, ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā. He has no birth, but still, He appears like taken birth. You can understand very easily. Just like every morning the sun is rising. It is not that a new sun is coming. The same sun of yesterday. It is not that it was finished yesterday. The sun was existing there in the sky, but on different position of this planet, I saw the sun is now set. Similarly, we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. If we have no birth and death, how Kṛṣṇa has birth and death? That is not the...

Therefore it is said, ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san. Although He has no birth and death, still, He appears just like He has taken birth from Devakī's womb. It is just like the sun is rising from the eastern side. It does not mean that the eastern side has given birth to the sun. No. Sun is very big than the eastern side. But it appears like that. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. Because there are many theologists. They say, "Why God shall take birth?" That is their argument. So our answer is, "Why God shall not take birth? If He is omnipotent, so why you are minimizing His power that He cannot take birth? He must take birth if He likes." And īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānām hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. Īśvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is staying within the heart of everyone. So within the heart for everyone, if He can come out, so what is the difficulty for Him, from within the womb of somebody He can come? What is the difference between heart and womb? And Kṛṣṇa entered within the womb of Mahārāja Parīkṣit's mother to save Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So Kṛṣṇa can do anything. Therefore Kuntī said that antar bahiḥ: "Kṛṣṇa is within and without. Still, we cannot see." Kṛṣṇa is within and without, both ways, but we cannot see either within or without. This is called māyā. This is called māyā.

So this is the problem. But that is not the problem for Kṛṣṇa. But that is problem for us. Because we are very minute spark of Kṛṣṇa, as the spark has the chance of being extinguished out of the fire, similarly, being separated from Kṛṣṇa, being entangled in this material energy, we have forgotten. Our spiritual quality, burning quality, just like fire, that is now extinguished. It is not exactly extinguished: almost extinguished. We have forgotten. But it can be again brought into the original position by fanning. Just like there is small fire in the charcoal. You fan it, and it will gradually become a big fire. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is fanning that spiritual spark to come into full consciousness. Go on fanning like that. That is the rules and regulation, attending this class, hearing this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā. Twenty-four hours be engaged. That is real business. Dhyāyan, always, constantly, hṛdi brahma paraṁ dhyāyan. Dhyāyan means medi... This is meditation. And who is Parabrahman? Kṛṣṇa. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12].

So this is the process. You simply think of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours, dhyāyan. That is the process. We are engaged in the Deity worship of Kṛṣṇa. We are engaged in chanting Kṛṣṇa's name. We are engaged in Kṛṣṇa's business or Kṛṣṇa's propaganda. In this way, if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four..., if you, I mean to say, make your life with that spirit, Kṛṣṇa... This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness, twenty-four hours. Satataṁ smartavyo viṣṇuḥ. The process if only thinking of Kṛṣṇa in different engagements. The process, real process, is to think of Kṛṣṇa. Then hṛdi, "within the heart," hṛdi brahma paraṁ dhyāyan nāvarteta yato gataḥ, then you will be transferred to the Kṛṣṇa-loka. Because you are thinking of Kṛṣṇa always. So tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]. After giving up this body, you will not have any more material body. Yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]. You will reach immediately. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punaḥ, mām eti, immediately. As there are different forces, material forces, then subtler than the matter, mind, mind's force, similarly, there is spiritual force. Mind force, you know. You are sitting here. Immediately, within a second, you can go thousands of miles away, immediately. That is mind's force. And the spiritual force is still more greater than the mind's force. So tyaktvā deham, as soon as you give up this body, immediately, within a second, you reach Kṛṣṇa-loka. That is perfection. That perfection is suggested here. Paraṁ brahma dhyāyan, paraṁ brahma dhyāyan nāvarteta. The real... You don't come back again to accept material body. You are spiritual spark. Again you are with the supreme spirit, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha.

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]



Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. Eternal, sat, cit. Cit means full of knowledge, and ānanda, bliss. That is required.



So why should we waste our time otherwise for solving these so-called problems? So-called problem, they will come. Just like now it is winter season. This is also problem. Just little cover it. Then it will... Again there will be summer season; this covering will not be required, not be required. So manage somehow if there is little problem, but don't forget your real problem. That is life. That is life. "Because now it is very chilly, so I shall not take bath." No. You have to do your duty, even it is very cold, severe cold, you have to do duty. "Because it is very hot, warm, we shall not cook, we shall not go to the kitchen." No. You have to go. Similarly, real problem is how to solve this birth, death, old age and disease. And that can be done by Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In all circumstances, we have to pull on our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. That business do not forget. Then you are missing the point. Satatam, always, yudhyasva mām anusmara [Bg. 8.7]. That is the instruction. This world is full of struggle. That's a fact, everyone knows. But just like Arjuna was advised that yudhyasva, "You fight; at the same time, remember Me." Yudhyasva mām anusmara [Bg. 8.7]. Similarly, in different fields of activities you have to fight. This is a world of fighting. But do not forget Kṛṣṇa. Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



731223SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.45

-

Los Angeles, December 23, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "The younger brothers of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira observed that the age of Kali had already arrived throughout the world and that the citizens of the kingdom were already affected by irreligious practice. Therefore they decided to follow in the footsteps of their elder brother." [SB 1.15.45]



Prabhupāda: This kalinā... We are reading kalinādharmeṇa. Kalinā adharma. The two are mixed together becomes one, a sandhi. Kalinādharmeṇa. So kali. Kali means quarrel, unnecessarily quarrel. Kali... Kalinā, "by the age of Kali." This is the age of Kali. There are four ages-Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, Kali-degrading, gradual degrading. This nature's way is to degrade. That is the nature's way, time factor. Just like you construct a very nice house today, good looking, fresh, but by ages it will become old. Your body, my body, in youthhood it is very beautiful, and in due course of time it will be ugly like me. So this is the work of the time. Similarly, nature's way, there are four ages: Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, Kali-yuga. Seasonal changes.



So in Satya-yuga, the religious principles are followed strictly, cent percent. That is called Satya-yuga. And Tretā-yuga, twenty-five percent reduced. That means seventy-five percent religious principles and twenty-five percent irreligious. And the Dvāpara-yuga, fifty-fifty: fifty percent religious and fifty percent irreligious. And the Kali-yuga, seventy-five percent irreligious and twenty-five percent religious, gradually reducing to nil-no more religion. Then finished. Then there will be devastation. Again Satya-yuga will begin. This is the way of change of Satya-yuga-Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara, Kali. The duration of Satya-yuga is about eighteen hundred thousand of years. Eighteen hundred thousands of years. Hundred thousand. Eighteen hundred. Similarly, Tretā-yuga, about twelve hundred thousands of years. Similarly, Dvāpara-yuga, eight hundred thousands of years. And Kali-yuga four hundred thousands of years. This is the beginning of Kali-yuga. Out of four hundred thousands of years, we have passed only 5,000 years. Not only 400,000, 432,000's of years. There is regular calculation in the Vedic śāstra. So out of that, we have passed 5,000 years. That Kali-yuga has begun just after the Battle of Kurukṣetra. So we have passed only 5,000 years of this Kali-yuga. There are still balance, 427,000's of years, still balance.

So the Kali's friends... Just like a man is known by his company. So Kali-yuga is the age of irreligion. Therefore, quarrel and fighting. Quarrel and fighting, communal fighting. Unnecessarily they will form a community, a group, all rascals, another group, another group of rascals, and they will fight unnecessarily. Just like this nationalism. This is simply group of rascals. That's all. Why rascal? Because irreligious, therefore rascal. So "Big, big, men, big, big scientist, big, big... Still, they are rascal?' Yes. Still, they are rascal. Why? Because irreligious. They do not know what is God. Therefore they are rascal. This is the only test. "Whether you know God?" "No, sir." "Then you are rascal." That's all. No more test. One test is sufficient: "Whether you know God?" Because this human life is meant for knowing God. This temple is meant for human being, not for the cats and dogs. So if you (do not) know God, then you are a rascal. You are exactly like the cats and dogs. That's all. This is the verdict. Now you can fight. "Why you are calling me cats and dogs?" But this is the... We are talking, following Kṛṣṇa, the great authority. But what Kṛṣṇa says, that is right. If you scrutinize by your logic, argument, philosophy, science, you will find that Kṛṣṇa is perfectly right. Therefore we accept Kṛṣṇa.

Unless Kṛṣṇa is perfectly right, why should we accept Kṛṣṇa? If He is ordinary rascal, then why, what is the use of reading His book, Bhagavad-gītā? No. All the ācāryas, all the saintly scholars, they have accepted. Therefore we have accepted. Because He is beyond all, I mean to say, faults. What is the difference between ordinary man and a liberated man? Liberated means not under the conditions of material nature. He is called liberated. Liberated means who is not conditioned by the laws of nature. He is called liberated. So Kṛṣṇa is the liberated Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore He has no defects. And those who are... Just like we are..., we are not liberated. Therefore we have got four defects. The four defects are that we commit mistake. Anyone, big, big man, he must commit mistake, because he is not liberated. He is under the laws of material nature. Who is here in this meeting who can say that "I have never committed any mistake"? Is there anybody? However learned scholar you may be, commit mistake is inherent. Similarly, to become illusioned. Illusioned means to accept something which you are not or which is not fact. That is called illusion. Just like sometimes we see that the sun is on the western side, but reflection is on the glass, and the glass is reflecting some light. So we are thinking that sun has come to the other side. We have got this experience. Sun is this side, reflecting the sun shining, and on the glass or on mirror, and the same reflection is this side. So we are thinking that "Sun is this side. The sunlight is coming..." That is called illusion. This is example of illusion, which is not fact. But it is appearing. False thing appearing as truth, that is called māyā. This is the explanation of māyā. Māyā. Mā means "not," yā means "this." Māyā, what you are experiencing, that is not. That is called māyā. So a conditioned soul... A child will think that... Although the fact is sun is this side, by seeing the reflection a child may say, "The sun is this side." So that is called illusion.

So we are all illusioned because we accept this body as self. "What you are?" "Oh, I am American." "Why American?" "Because this is American body." But I am not this body. So... But we accept. It is going on. This illusion is going on. Mistake is going on. And in spite of becoming illusioned and mistaken, I am posing myself as great scholar, philosopher, scientist. Therefore cheater. But I do not know the things because I am already illusioned and I commit mistake. And still, I am proving that "I am theologician," "I am scientist," "I am philosopher." Then change again. I say today something and tomorrow something else, because I am mistaken, illusioned. I must go on speaking like that, nonsense, today something, tomorrow something. And this is going on (as) advancement. What is this advancement? If you do not know something as real, you say something today, and tomorrow you say something, the same mistake, again, day after tomorrow, you say something, where is your knowledge? There is no knowledge, but still, he is posing to be man of knowledge. He is getting Nobel Prize. This is called cheating. And people are, those who are cheated, they are accepting this cheating knowledge. Therefore the whole human society is full of cheaters and cheated. Full of.

So bhrama, pramāda, vipralipsā(?) and karaṇāpāṭava. Then if somebody says that "Why you are speaking that these men are cheaters and cheated and illusioned and in māyā?" Now, because the senses are imperfect. Because you are gathering knowledge by the senses. There are five senses, acquire knowledge, and the five senses act according to that knowledge. And these sense objects. There are sense objects. Just like you have got eyes, you have to see something objective, rūpa, form. The knowledge acquired by the eyes is to understand the form. Similarly, the knowledge acquired by the ears is to acquire knowledge from the sound. Because physical means the sound, light, form. These things are physical things. So we have got senses to acquire knowledge. So five knowledge-acquiring senses, five working senses, and five sense objects, and I am there. This is called sixteen elements. And then five material elements, earth, water, fire, air, and three subtle elements, eight. So in this way the whole world, this universe, cosmic manifestation, is a composition of these eight elements, er, twenty-four elements. And beyond these twenty-four elements, I am the soul, and beyond myself, there is the Supersoul. This is knowledge. This is knowledge.

So without this knowledge, nobody is perfect, and without being perfect, if we hear from somebody who is not perfect, it is simply waste of time. And that is the symptoms of Kali-yuga. Therefore it is said, kalinā adharma-mitreṇa. And the adharma-mitra, this is the composition of ignorance. Now, the friends... Which friend helps me to keep me in this perpetual ignorance? These are illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling, these four friends. You associate with these four friends, you will be very easily advancing under the influence of Kali-yuga. This is the fact. Kalinādharmeṇa. So formerly the kings, the government men... King means the supreme executive head of government. They could understand that "These things are now coming." Dṛṣṭvā, "seeing practically." Because as soon as people are addicted to these four principles-illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling-when everyone can see, that means Kali-yuga. Dṛṣṭvā.

So how they saw? They saw the practical. They know how to see. Just like in the chemical laboratory, they see the characteristic of a certain thing analyzed, and they say, "Yes, it is perfect. It is not perfect. Because these things are wanting, so it is not pure. It is adulterated." Chemical examina... And if these characteristics are there... In every chemical book, every chemical has got some characteristic. Just like potassium cyanide. The chemical examiners have not experienced what is the taste. Because as soon as you taste, you finish. Potassium cyanide. You know this. So therefore in the chemical there is not mention, "the taste of the potassium cyanide." Nobody has still tasted. So there is a Hindi word in India, delhika lāḍu yakaya abhipataya ya lakaya abhipataya...(?) There is a delhika lāḍu. You make lāḍu. So delhika lāḍu. It is very slang language. Delhika lāḍu yakaya abhipastya. Delhika lāḍu is so made that one who has tasted it, he laments, and who has not tasted, he laments. Both of them. So this potassium cyanide is like that, a chemical. The chemists, because they do not know what is the taste, so they say that "We do not know. Analysis is imperfect." And those who have tasted, they cannot say. They are finished. (laughter) So this is the position.

So this delhika lāḍu is referred to, Delhi prostitute. Delhika lāḍu. So we do not wish to discuss these things, but so many things. Not only prostitute, even sex life, it is like that. Anyone who has tasted, he also laments, and who has not tasted, he also laments. This is the position. This is the position. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Maithunādi. Maithunādi means sexual intercourse. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tucchaṁ kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha-duḥkham. It is a pleasure just like itching sensation. It is all described. Yan maithunādi... A gṛhamedhi... Gṛhamedhi means a so-called householder. There are two words: gṛhamedhi and gṛhastha. Gṛhastha means... That is called āśrama, gṛhastha-āśrama, to live with wife and children, but the business is how to developed Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is gṛhastha-āśrama, as we recommend. And where there is no such attempt how to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness, simply living like cats and dogs... They have also sex life. They also produce children. They also eat. They also work. Such kind of life, household life, working day and night simply for sense pleasure, and at night they have got sense pleasure... That is also described in the Bhāgavata: divā cārthehayā rājan. At night either sleep or enjoy sex life, and in daytime, simply work hard, "Where to get money?" And as you get money, spend it for maintaining your family. Nidrayā hriyate naktam. Nidrā means sleeping. Hriyate, that night is passed. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ [SB 2.1.3]. Or one who has got facility to enjoy sex, so night is passed. One who has no... Everyone has practically, but... Two things: sleep or sex. And then, at daytime, cārthehayā. Artha. Artha means money. Īhayā means trying for to get it. Divā cārthehayā rājan. All right, they are getting money. Then? Then kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā, spending for kuṭumba, for the dependents. That's all. So finished. Then where is the time for Kṛṣṇa consciousness? That is called gṛhamedhi. But gṛhastha means they will see whether every moment is utilized for Kṛṣṇa. That is gṛha...

So human civilization means gṛhastha, not gṛhamedhi. If you become gṛhastha, then you are nice. Then you are advancing towards self-realization. That is required. Because the cats and dogs cannot become gṛhastha. That is not possible. If you say... If you have got a dog, you get another female dog, "My dear dog, you get your wife, live peacefully, chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." "No, sir, it is not possible because I am dog. Because I am dog, therefore I cannot be satisfied. I must find out another illicit sex and create trouble," then phat! He engages. Then fight. That is Kali-yuga. Unnecessarily create, by illicit sex life, enemy, and then become killed and finish your life. That is called gṛhamedhi. You require wife. That's all right. Take wife. There is no scarcity of wife. Live peacefully. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. "No, I have got my wife; I want another. I want another." Like dogs. Yes. So the dog civilization cannot help us. This will not help us. Human life is meant for something else. Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujām [SB 5.5.1]. Everything is discussed in Bhāgavata. Therefore we request the whole human society to read these valuable books, valuable. Oh, they are missing the opportunity. Let them read these books. Then life will be successful.

So this human life is not meant for like dogs and cats and hogs. That is said in the Bhāgavatam. You will find in the Fifth Canto, Fifth Chapter, Ṛṣabhadeva. Every word is so valuable. Just like here in these verses, sarve tam anunirjagmur bhrātaraḥ. How ideal brothers they were. "My elder brother is going, retiring, going to the Himalayan side," all the brothers followed. When the elder brother was king, they acted. They did not fight, that "We are five brothers. Why you shall become king? I shall become king." No, there was a fight. One of them, the elder brother, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, was enthroned, and the other brothers, they acted as commanders of the soldiers. One brother is going one side of the earth to fight, to subdue the rascals. There was fight to subdue the rascals, not for ambition. Because he was emperor, so anyone who is doing wrong irreligiously, go there and fight. That was fight. That is called dharma-yuddha. Just like you can maintain police force, military force. What for? Whenever there is outlaws, go and punish them. That should be the system. That should be... Military force is required, violence is required, when there is irreligion. Then must be, they must be made religious. And because such government was there... That we have discussed. During Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira's time, everything was peaceful, adayovyadha(?)... Even people did not suffer from excessive heat, excessive cold. This is also another punishment. Just like disease is punishment, similarly, excessive heat and excessive cold is also punishment. That is not very good. But Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja's time was such, they did not feel. People did not feel. It is nature's punishment. Just like I was proposing to go to, what is that place? Florida, Florida,

Devotee: Miami.



Prabhupāda: Miami. So Karandhara said that there also the temperature has reduced. It has come to 50 or something like that, 40. The temperature is high there.



So nature can change at any time, at any time. You are not controller of nature. You are under the control of nature. That we forget. This is our illusion. We are under the control of material nature fully, cent percent, and still, we are declaring independence. What kind of independence you have got? Any kind of independence can be finished by one kick of nature. And still, you declare independent. You cannot be independent. When you go above the control of the material nature, then you can say independent. But they do not know that. And nature is controlled by God. That also they do not know. Nature... Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Just like police force. Police force is under the control of the government, and you are under the control of police force. Everyone knows it. So how you can get out of the police force? When you are not criminal. That's all. Similarly, nature is like police force, this material nature. As soon as you become irreligious, making friendship with Kali and his friends, then you will be punished. Nature will... There will be severe cold, there will be this blast, that blast, and no production, and famine, pestilence, so many things. Nature can disturb you, natural. That is called adhidaivika, which is beyond your control. Adhidaivika. If the Pacific Ocean within a second overflows your Los Angeles town, what you can do? What your scientists can do? "Nothing, sir." But it can be done, at any moment. What is the difficulty? One big wave. Skyscraper building, all skyscrapers will be finished. So that is called nature's disturbance.

So there are other disturbances also. This is called natural disturbance. Then other disturbance is... Your body is the source of so many disturbances. Even you don't feel nature's disturbances, then your body friend, which you have taken so friendly, that "My body is everything. Exercise, keep this body very perfect to eat, eat meat and drink." But this body will give you trouble. The mind will give you trouble. This is called adhyātmika. Everything is analyzed. Adhyātmika and adhibhautika. You do not create any enemy, but your neighbor will be enemy, unnecessarily. Your friend will be enemy. Your brother will be enemy. Your son will be enemy. There are so many instance. This is called adhibhautika. Just like your, somebody's dog. Unnecessarily... We have seen. You are passing the road, and this dog is so faithful, he become your enemy. "Gow! Gow! Gow! Why you are passing here? Why you are passing?" You see? The mosquito will be enemy. The bugs will be enemy. The insects will be enemy. You go on killing. Go on killing with spray.

So, so many enemies, so much troubles is being created. Who has created? The nature. You haven't go to create, but nature will create to give you disturbances. This is your position. And you are thinking, "We are very happy. We are very happy in this material life." Just...How mūḍha, nonsense rascals. So in the beginning I said, "All these rascals." So are they not rascals? They are harassed in so many ways; still, they are thinking, "We are making advance and we are happy." Just see. So are the whole situation is not full of rascals? They do not know. They are accepting unhappiness as happiness. This is called māyā. This is called māyā. Māyā-mohita-jīva. And you cannot get out of this illusion and mistakes unless you surrender to Kṛṣṇa.

daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te

[Bg. 7.14]



This is the medicine. This is the only counteraction. You cannot...



Suppose you are being harassed by the police. You are put into the prisonhouse. And in so many ways you are being harassed by the criminal department. How you can get out? You simply file a petition, "Sir I am now experienced. I will never commit this criminal act. Kindly excuse me and get me released." That is the only way. Similarly, you can be very proud that "I don't care for God. There is no God. I am God. You are God." You can go on talking nonsense like that, but the māyā will give you so much trouble. But if you are sane man, then you will admit that "This was a wrong thing. Please excuse me." And then it will be possible. But that is not possible. Especially in this age, in Kali-yuga, the age is very strong and deteriorated that in spite of our daily class, daily instruction, the Kali is so strong that capturing, "Please come under my control and be killed. Please come under my... Be killed." "Yes, I will go." This is going on.

So Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja and his brothers, they say, "Now the Kali yuga has begun." Dṛṣṭvā and spṛṣṭāḥ prajāḥ, "All the citizens and all the land. Now... We have done our duty. Now let us retire. The next king, Mahārāja..." He's their grandchild, Mahārāja Parīkṣit. "He will do his duty." So it is the duty of the king to see, to give protection from this onslaught of nature, to make the life successful. That is the duty of the king. That is the duty of the father. That is the duty of the spiritual master. That is the duty of friends and relatives. Then one should cooperate, one should give protection. Just like these children are there. If the father, mother and the teacher, they do not give these children protection, then what is their future hope?

So unnecessarily, so-called education will not help. Let them become Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is the duty of the government. Just like we are not speaking on the slogan, "In God We Trust." Is that that slogan, "In God We Trust"? So this is a slogan, but it is the duty of the government, that "We are using this slogan, but actually what we are doing about people's education that they may know what is God and then trust?" But everyone is godless. And still, as a matter of fashion, we are writing, "In God We Trust." This is another cheating. Nobody trusts in God, and they write, "In God We Trust." And unless I write... Of course I do not wish to say very harsh word, that unless I cheat you that way, how a man will accept one piece of paper as one thousand dollars? (laughter) You see? It is a grand cheating, that "I am giving one thousand dollars to you." But if I value, it is not even one farthing. This is called māyā. It is not, but I accept. I accept. If people become enlightened, "No, we are not going to accept this piece of paper as one thousand dollars. We must have gold," so many things will be solved immediately. So many things. But because we agree to be cheated, the cheaters are cheating and things are going on wrong. This is called Kali-yuga.

Thank you very much. (end)



731224SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.46

-

Los Angeles, December 24, 1973



Pradyumna:



te sādhu-kṛta-sarvārthā

jñātvātyantikam ātmanaḥ

manasā dhārayām āsur

vaikuṇṭha-caraṇāmbujam

[SB 1.15.46]



Translation: "They all had performed all the principles of religion and as a result rightly decided that the lotus feet of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa are the supreme goal of all. Therefore they meditated upon His feet without interruption."



Prabhupāda: Te sādhu-kṛta-sarvārthā. Artha means interest. Everyone has some interest. The animals have got also interest. The man has got some interest. The big politician, he has also interest. Everyone has got interest. But nobody knows what is real interest. That is missing. Everyone has created his interest and he is working in that way. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Real interest is, for the human being, to know what is God, what is my relationship with Him, and how I shall achieve the highest perfection of life. That is real interest.



Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Svārtha. Svārtha or artha. Svārtha means own interest, and artha means general interest. The general interest is, for the human being, dharma artha kāma mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90]. Because human life is not dog's life, cat's life, so there must be dharma, religion. And religion means no dog. That is first interest. This is first interest. Otherwise how shall I distinguish my life with the cats and dogs life? They are also eating, sleeping, mating and dying. And if I also, like the cats and dogs, eat, sleep and have sex life and die, then where is the difference? The difference is religion. The dog society, cat society, there cannot be any religion, but in the human society, there is necessity of religion. Otherwise it is cats' and dogs' society. So they do not understand it. They are avoiding religion. Nowadays the so-called advanced civilization, they are avoiding religion. That means they are coming to the platform of cats and dogs. And actually, they have come. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga...

Yesterday we were discussing about this Kali-yuga. The most fallen age. People are most degraded. So there is, by calculation, that seventy-five percent irreligion and twenty-five percent religion in comparison to other ages. But this twenty-five percent religious life also will reduce. Before explaining this verse, I shall give you reference to some of the symptoms of this age. This is also explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Twelfth Canto, Third Chapter. (aside:) Where is that? Give me that book. We have not yet published, so I am reading reference. Anyonyato rājabhiś ca kṣayaṁ yāsyanti pīḍitāḥ. It is described in the Second Chapter, Twelfth Canto, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So,

tataś cānu-dinaṁ dharmaḥ

satyaṁ śaucaṁ kṣamā dayā

kālena balinā rājan

naṅkṣyaty āyur balaṁ smṛtiḥ



This description of the Kali-yuga is given in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is called śāstra. This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was written five thousand years ago when the Kali-yuga was to begin. Now, what will happen in future, everything is given there. Śāstra means... That is...Therefore we accept śāstra. Tri-kāla-jña. The śāstrakāra, or the compiler of the śāstra, must be liberated person so that he can describe past, present and future. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam you will find so many things which was told to be happening in future. Just like in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there is mention of Lord Buddha's appearance. Similarly, there is mention of Lord Kalki's appearance. There is mention of Lord Caitanya's appearance, although it was written five thousand years ago. Tri-kāla-jña. Know, they know what is past, present and future.



So about the Kali-yuga, discussing, the Śukadeva Gosvāmī is describing the chief symptoms of this age. The first symptom he says, tataś ca anu-dinam. With the process of this age, Kali-yuga, dharma, religious principles; satyam, truthfulness; śaucam, cleanliness; kṣamā, forgiveness; dayā, mercifulness; āyuḥ, duration of life; balam, bodily strength; smṛtiḥ, memory... Just count how many. Dharmaḥ, satyam, śaucam, kṣamā, dayā, āyuḥ, balam, smṛti-eight. These things will gradually reduce to nil, almost nil. Now as I told you, the Kali-yuga... In other yugas... Just like Satya-yuga, the duration of Satya-yuga was eighteen hundred thousands of years. And the human being was living in that age for one hundred thousands of years. One hundred thousands of years. The next age, the duration of that age, twelve hundred thousands of years, and the people used to live for one thousand years, not over ten thousand years. Ten times reduced. The next age, Dvāpara-yuga, again ten times reduced. Still, they used to live for one thousand years, and the duration of the age was eight hundred thousands of years. Now, the next age, this Kali-yuga, the limit is one hundred years. We can live utmost up to one hundred years. We are not living one hundred years, but still, the limit is one hundred years. So just see. Now, from one hundred years... Now in India the average age is about thirty-five years. In your country they say seventy years? So it is reducing. And it will so reduce that if a man lives for twenty to thirty years, he will be considered grand old man, in this age, Kali-yuga. So āyuḥ, duration of life, will reduce.

Memory, smṛti, that will also reduce. We see nowadays, people are not very..., of sharp memory. They forget. Daily work they forget. Doing something daily; still, he is forgetting. The loss of memory. Similarly, āyuḥ, bodily strength. Everyone can understand. Your forefathers, your father or grandfather, as they were bodily strong, you are not so, I am not so. So bodily strength will reduce. Memory will reduce. Duration of life will reduce. Then dharma... There is no question. It is almost reduced. Nobody is interested in religion. The churches, temples are being closed, locked up. This was a church. Where we are sitting, this was a church, and it was sold, because nobody was coming. Similarly, we are purchasing in Australia a very big church. They are selling. In London I have seen many hundred of churches. Nobody is going there. Not only churches. In India also, except a few important temples, ordinary, small temples they are being closed. They have become habitation of the dogs. So dharma, religiosity, is reduced. And truthfulness. And kṣamā, forgiveness. That is also reduced. We are very sorry that one thing has happened. He was excused, but again he was shot dead. Just see. No forgiveness. Vengeance. Formerly, if somebody has done something wrong, the other party... Just like Arjuna, you see. Even in the battlefield, he was so much tortured by the other party. Still, he was, "Kṛṣṇa let them go. I don't want to kill them." Forgiveness. So even for a small interest, they will kill. This is going on. So satyam, śaucam, kṣamā, dayā, mercifulness. Even if you see in your front somebody is being killed, you will not take interest. No mercifulness. It is happening already.

So satyam, śaucam, kṣamā, dayā, āyuḥ, duration of life, bodily strength and memory. These eight kinds of things will reduce, reduce, reduce. When you will see these symptoms, you will find, "Now the age of Kali is making his progress very nicely." This is progress. Then another symptom is vittam eva kalau nṝṇāṁ janmācāra-guṇodayaḥ. Formerly, according to spiritual understanding, one man's position was calculated. Just like brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa was honored because he knew Brahman. He was aware of the supreme spirit. So now in Kali-yuga, actually there is no brāhmaṇa. That will be also described, how a brāhmaṇa is. So janma ācāra, birthright. Birthright was there, but according to the behavior. If a man is born in a brāhmaṇa family or kṣatriya family or vai..., he must behave like that. That was the king's duty, to see that "This man is not falsely representing himself." Just like in England there is lord family. So to maintain their aristocracy, the family had to deposit some money with the government so that they may not deteriorate in their aristocratic behavior. Still, it is going on. But now things are finished.

So aristocracy and respectability, these things were according to culture, according to education. But nowadays, what is that? Vittam eva kalau nṝṇām. If you get money somehow or other, then everything is there. You may be a third-class, fourth-class, tenth-class man, but if you get money some way or other, then you are very respectable. There is no question of your culture or aristocracy or education or knowledge. There is no, nothing. This is Kali-yuga. And then, dharma-nyāya-vyavasthāyāṁ kāraṇaṁ balam eva hi. And if you have got some influence, strength, then in your favor everything will be decided. You are the most irreligious person, but if you can bribe the priestly order, he will certify, "Yes, you are religious." So money, not actual qualification.

So if you discuss these things... Long affairs, shortly. Then again it says, dāmpatye abhirucir hetur māyaiva vyāvahārike. Dāmpatye. Dāmpatye, husband and wife relation, will depend on abhiruciḥ. Abhiruciḥ means liking. A girl likes boy, and a boy likes girl. "That's all right. Now let the marriage take place." They do not see what will be future of this girl and the boy. Never. Therefore everyone is unhappy. Six months after marriage, divorce. Because the marriage took place on superficial liking, no deep understanding... So things are taking place like that. Formerly marriage, at least in India, at least up to our time, the marriage was taking place not on the liking of the boy and the girl. No. It was decided by the parents. So... Just like I was also married man. I was married when I was a student, and I did not know what will be the... But the parents arranged. What to speak of me, I will give you another very brilliant example, that you have heard the name of Dr. Rajendra Prasad. He was the first president of Indian... He has written his biography. He was married at the age of eight years. Formerly, in India the marriage was taking place like that. I know. My father-in-law was married when he was eleven years. And my mother-in-law was seven years. You see? So actually, the point is that the marriage was taking by the calculation, "Whether this couple will be happy in their life?" In this way marriage was taking place. Not that a grown-up girl, grown-up boy, mixes together, and he likes, she likes. Then again he leaves or she... This kind of marriage was not sanctioned.

But in this Kali-yuga it is said that dāmpatye abhiruciḥ. That's all. Abhiruciḥ. Boys and girls are intermingling freely, and if she likes, that's all right. But no future calculation. This is Kali-yuga. No future calculation, whether in future marriage is sanctified life, the man and the woman live peacefully, make spiritual culture, each one will help the other so that they will live very happily and become advancement in spiritual life and then go back to... That is the system. But nowadays, in Kali-yuga, it will be simply liking. Liking means next moment disliking. That is a fact. You see. Liking has no value. As soon as you based on liking, then you expect next moment disliking. That's all.

And strītve puṁstve ca hi ratir vipratve sūtram eva hi. You know, the brāhmaṇas, they are offered sacred thread. So people will consider, "Now I have got sacred thread. I have become brāhmaṇa. I may act like the caṇḍāla. It doesn't matter." That is going on. We introduced this brahminical culture, but things are deteriorated. I am very sorry, that taking brahminical initiation, he is acting as a caṇḍāla, angry caṇḍāla. You see? So this is Kali-yuga. He does not understand that as brāhmaṇa he has got so responsibility. But because he has got the two-cent-worth sacred thread, he thinks now he has become brāhmaṇa. Vipratve. And strītve puṁstve ca hi ratir eva hi. And husband and wife, they will remain together because it was liking. And as soon as there will be sex difficulty, there will be disliking immediately.

Liṅgam eva āśrama-khyātau. Liṅgam eva. A dress simply. Taking white dress, a gṛhastha, he may do like anything. He is gṛhastha. No. There are so many duties. Taking a saffron cloth, he is sannyāsī. These are the... If we explain, it will take more, but these are the symptoms. Avṛttyā nyāya-daurbalyaṁ pāṇḍitye cāpalaṁ vacaḥ. If you have no money, then you will never get justice in the court. This is Kali-yuga. Nowadays the high-court judges, they are taking bribe, to give you a favorable judgment. You can purchase judgment. So if you have no money, then don't go to court. To push good money after bad money. No. No. Avṛttyā nyāya-daurbalyaṁ pāṇḍitye cāpalaṁ vacaḥ. If a man talks expertly, it doesn't matter what he talks. Nobody requires to understand him. Then he is paṇḍita. He is (speaks gibberish:) "Haperkulasvena bagavad dagvendikali gundulas, by the lacticism of wife...," like, if you go on speaking, nobody will understand. (laughter) Nobody will understand, and people, "Oh, see how learned he is." (laughter) Actually it is happening. There are so many rascals. They are writing book, and "Oh, such and such, oh..." "What you have understand?" "Oh, it is inexplicable. Inexplicable." That is going on.

Anāḍhyataivāsādhutve sādhutve dambha eva tu, svīkāra eva codvāhe snānam eva prasādhanam [SB 12.2.5]. Anāḍhyatā. If you are poor man, then you are dishonest. People will understand that "This man is actually not honest because he does not know how to earn money by hook or crook." Svīkāra eva codvāhe. "And marriage will take place by agreement." And that is very much experienced in your country. In our country also. Now government has appointed marriage magistrate. So any boy and girl like, simply go to him. Maybe there is some fee: "Yes, we agree to marry," and certifies, "They are married." No. Not like that. Formerly as the father and mother used to select and see the future. Svīkāra eva codvāhe. Svīkāra. Svīkāra means agreement.

Snānam eva prasādhanam. Snānam eva prasādhanam. Cosmetic. Simply if one can take little shower bath, then everything is finished. Actually, snāna means sandhyā. You have to take bath nicely. Then you have to put tilaka and candana. Then perform your gāyatrī-mantra. This is called snāna. Tri-sandhyā-snāna. Now they are simply taking somehow or other bath, and finished. No more. But Kali-yuga, this will be snānam eva. And then dūre vāry-ayanaṁ tīrthaṁ lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. Just see how future tell. At the present moment, Kali-yuga, a man will think himself, he has become very beautiful by keeping long hair. You have got very good experience in your country, long hairs. Just see how future. Who knew that people would be interested for keeping long hair? But that is stated in the Bhāgavata. Keśa-dhāraṇam. Keśa means hair, and dhāraṇam means keeping. Dūre vāry-ayanaṁ tīrtham. And pilgrimage, it must be far away. Just like in Calcutta there is Ganges. So nobody cares for Calcutta Ganges. But they go to Hardwar. The same Ganges. The Ganges is coming from Hardwar down to the Bay of Bengal, but people will like to go to Hardwar, taking so much hardship, to take bath there, because that becomes tīrtha. In every religion they have got tīrtha. The Muslims, they have got mosque. What is that? Mecca, Medina. The Christians, they have got, where? Jerusalem. Similarly, the Hindus. Then they must travel very long. That will be tīrtha. But actually tīrtha means tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni. Where there is saintly person, that is tīrtha. Not to go ten thousand miles and simply take a dip in the water and come back.

Then udaraṁ-bharatā svārthaḥ satyatve dhārṣṭyam eva hi, dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇaṁ yaśo 'rthe dharma-sevanam. Udaraṁ-bharatā. The interest. I was speaking of interest. Now, in Kali-yuga, the interest will be if you can eat some day very sumptuously, then your all interest is fulfilled. That's all. Means people will be so hungry, so nothing to eat; therefore if they can eat some day very sumptuously, that will be fulfillment of all interests. And satyatve dhārṣṭyam eva hi. And one who will simply play jugglery of words, he will be considered as very truthful. Another, dākṣyaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇam. One shall be considered very expert if he can maintain his family-wife and children. That means this will be difficult. It has already become difficult. To maintain wife and a few children, that is also a great burden at the present moment. Therefore nobody wants to marry. Evaṁ prajābhir duṣṭābhir ākīrṇe kṣiti-maṇḍale. In this way, when all the people will be infected by the poison of Kali-yuga, brahma-viṭ-kṣatra-śūdrāṇāṁ yo balī bhavitā nṛpaḥ.

So it doesn't matter whether he is a brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya or vaiśya or śūdra or caṇḍāla. One who is powerful in getting votes, he will occupy the presidential post or the royal post. Just see. Formerly the system was that not the brāhmaṇa, er, vaiśya, or śūdra can occupy the royal throne. Only the kṣatriyas. Now, in the Kali-yuga, there is no such thing, who is a kṣatriya, who is a brāhmaṇa, who is a... Anyone, hook and crook you get your votes, democracy, and occupy... And whatever you may be... You may be rascal number one, but you will be posted on the supreme exalted presidential post. Then

prajā hi lubdhai rājanyair

nirghṛṇair dasyu-dharmabhiḥ

ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā

yāsyanti giri-kānanam



Now, these classes of men, who goes to the government post by votes, mostly they are, their qualification is lubdhai rājanya, greedy government men. Nirghṛṇair dasyu-dhar... Their business is plundering. Their business is plundering you. We actually see that they are, every year they are exacting heavy tax, and whatever money is received, they divide amongst themselves, and the citizens' condition remain the same. In every government we can see like that. Prajā dasyu-dharmabhiḥ. In this way, gradually, all people will be so much harassed, ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā, that they will like to give up their family. Ācchinna. Dāra. Dāra means wife, and draviṇā means money. Ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā yāsyanti giri-kānanam. They will in the forest. Then these symptoms are also there.



So in this way there are so many symptoms. It will take long time to describe. This is Kali-yuga. But there is remedy. There is remedy. Kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan. The faults of this age, just like ocean. Just like in the ocean, you cannot... Pacific Ocean... If you are put into the Pacific Ocean, you do not know how your life will be saved. It is very difficult. Even if you are very expert swimmer, so it is not possible that you can cross the Pacific Ocean. That is not possible. Similarly, the Kali-yuga, as it is stated in the Bhāgavata, that infected with so many anomalies that there is no way out. But there is one medicine only: kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. That is also described, that "If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra," kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya, "especially the name kṛṣṇasya, mukta-saṅgaḥ, you will be relieved from the infection of this Kali yuga."

The five Pāṇḍavas, te sādhu, they have been described as sādhu, very honest, saintly, sādhu. Kṛta-sarvārthāḥ. They have executed all their duties. The human being has got duty. There are so many duties. Devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇām [SB 11.5.41]. Devarṣi. We have got duties. We are ṛṇī. Ṛṇī means indebted. Whom we are indebted? As soon as you take your birth on this planet, you are indebted to so many persons. What are they? Now, first, deva. Deva means the demigods or God. Actually God. God has got many assistant demigods. So you are indebted. Just like you are getting the sunshine. Just like we are getting this electricity. Now, the bill will be presented. If you don't pay, then next day your electricity will be cut off. So by nature's or God's arrangement, there is sunshine. Therefore you have to perform yajña. If you don't perform yajña, then there will be no sunshine. Therefore, in the Western countries, there is very difficult to get sunshine. This is the natural sequence.

So we are indebted to the sun god. We are indebted to the Indra, who is supplying water. Just like you have got electricity department, water department, this department, so many departments, similarly, so big kingdom of God is going on. There are also different departments. But rascals, they do not know, "Why I am getting?" Just like a child does not know how this electricity is coming. He thinks it is coming automatically. Why automatically? Is it coming automatically? You have to pay for it. There is powerhouse. There is connection. So many things. But he does not know. Similarly, all the rascals, they will say, "Oh, sunshine is by nature, automatically. Moonshine, automatically. This is automatically." What do you mean by "automatically"? What thing happens automatically unless there is arrangement? And because there is so nice, good arrangement, it is to be understood there is good government. And as soon as you accept this, you must have to accept necessity of God, without which, arrangement cannot be done.

So we are debted to God. So just like, if you don't pay taxes to the government, the government does not become poor, but your supply will be stopped. You will suffer. Similarly, if you don't accept there is supreme government, the supreme governor... The governor is quite sufficient. God is completely munificent or rich. He will not suffer, but you will suffer. Therefore it is said, te sādhu kṛta-sarvārthāḥ. Just like if you remain cleansed, paying all your taxes, then you are very honest citizen. Similarly, if you become obedient to God and His government, then you are sādhu. Otherwise you are dishonest. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ [Bg. 9.30]. Api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk. One who is very much obedient to the laws of God, he is sādhu. Not that by changing dress one become sādhu.

So te sādhu kṛta-sarvārthāḥ. They have executed all duties. Kṛta-sarvārthāḥ. Jñātvā ātyantikam ātmanaḥ. We are hankering after happiness, temporary, but we do not know what is ultimate happiness. So they knew what is the ultimate happiness. Ātyantikam. Sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad atīndriya-grāhyam [Bg. 6.21]. Bhagavad-gītā. Ātyantikam. The ultimate happiness is not perceived by these gross material senses. The ultimate happiness is appreciated, understood, by transcendental senses. The same senses... Means now the senses are covered by material infection. So when you purify this material infection, then your senses become pure. And in that pure senses, you can enjoy real happiness. Therefore here it is said, ātyantikam ātmanaḥ manasā dhārayām āsuḥ. So they knew what is the ātyantikaṁ dhār..., Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha-caraṇāmbujam. Vaikuṇṭha. Vaikuṇṭha means vigata-kuṇṭha. Kuṇṭha means anxiety. And God's another name is Vaikuṇṭha. If you take shelter of the lotus feet of God, Kṛṣṇa, then you become without anxieties. This is the only. Everyone is full of anxiety. Even a bird, even a beast, even a small ant, what to speak of our position. The material world is such, we must be full of anxieties. That is explained also. Asad-grahāt. Because we have accepted something flickering as shelter. If you accept something which is not permanent, which is tiltering... In a boat suppose which is tiltering, at any moment you will be drowned.

So you cannot be free from anxiety. But if you accept a strong, very big ship, you are assured that "I will not be drowned." Similarly, we are accepting this shelter, that shelter, that shelter, that shelter, avoiding the shelter of God. Therefore we are full of anxiety. If you want to become free from anxiety, then here is the prescription, vaikuṇṭha-caraṇāmbujam, take shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

Thank you very much. (end)



731225SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.47-48

-

Los Angeles, December 25, 1973



Pradyumna: "Thus by pure consciousness due to constant devotional remembrance, they attained the spiritual sky, which is ruled by the Supreme Nārāyaṇa, Lord Kṛṣṇa. This is attained only by those who meditate upon the one Supreme Lord without deviation. This abode of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, known as Goloka Vṛndāvana, cannot be attained by persons who are absorbed in the material conception of life. But the Pāṇḍavas, being completely washed of all material contamination, attained that abode in their very same bodies." [SB 1.15.47-48]



Prabhupāda: Tad-dhyāna udriktayā. Dhyāna means meditation. So the Pāṇḍavas, always they were thinking of Kṛṣṇa. While they were eating, they were sitting, they were sleeping, they were talking, they were fighting-Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. When Arjuna was fighting, so there was also Kṛṣṇa. When they were dealing in politics with Duryodhana, there was Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is his friend, always talking with him, staying with him, sleeping with him, eating with him.



So anyone can do that. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. If in our ordinary life we deal with Kṛṣṇa as Arjuna did and the Pāṇḍavas did, so where is the difficulty for us? There is no difficulty. Simply we have to practice it. And that practice is bhaktyā. This is only possible through devotional service. Kṛṣṇa was so near to the Pāṇḍavas on account of their devotion. Nārada Muni eulogized the Pāṇḍavas that "Jñānīs and yogis, they cannot reach even, but by your devotion, He is living with you as friend. Not only as friend, but sometimes as your order-carrier." Pāṇḍavas sometimes, during their negotiation with Duryodhana, sometimes asked Kṛṣṇa, "Kṛṣṇa, You take this letter and deliver to Duryodhana." Agreed, "Yes, I will go." So ordinary peon. Then ordinary chariot driver, Pārtha-sārathi.

So this is possible. If you become devotee of Kṛṣṇa, then you can live with Kṛṣṇa, even in this life. Even in this life. Because Kṛṣṇa is omnipotent, if you are really devotee of Kṛṣṇa, He will talk with you, He will dance with you, He will eat with you, everything. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. Again this bhakti. By bhakti, prema, love. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva [Bs. 5.38]. Santaḥ, saintly persons. This word, Sanskrit word, santaḥ, is also I think Latin. "Saint," santaḥ. Santaḥ means saintly persons. So santaḥ, those who are saintly persons, those who have developed love of Kṛṣṇa, they can see Kṛṣṇa every moment. Santaḥ sadaiva. Sadaiva means "every moment." They do not see anything except Kṛṣṇa. That is saintly person. Rascals inquire, "Have you seen God?" "Not seen God, sir. He is seeing every moment." There is no question of seeing God once. No. Sadaiva. Santaḥ sadaiva.

How one can see sadaiva? Kṛṣṇa is already there. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]. The location is given here in the Bhagavad-gītā, that you can see God, not you have to go far away from your place. Wherever you are, you can see, because God is within your heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe [Bg. 18.61]. Sarva-bhūtānām. Not only for human being, but also animals, beasts, trees, plants, aquatics, insects-everyone, beginning from Brahmā down to the ant. God is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham [Bs. 5.35]. God is within this universe, within your heart, even within your atom. So where is the difficulty? Simply you have to make your eyes to see Him. That's all. That is premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena [Bs. 5.38]. Love. It is not very difficult to understand. If you love somebody, then you can see him always. When you are in office, you are seeing. When you are eating, you are seeing. You are seeing... If you are actually love. So if it is possible materially, how much greatly it is possible spiritually and perfectly? It is possible. Simply by this method, bhaktyā viśuddha-dhiṣaṇāḥ pare.

Viśuddha. Viśuddha means purified. Our consciousness is not purified at the present moment, but if we purify it... That purification also is possible by becoming in touch with Kṛṣṇa always. And this touch is very easily made possible. Śṛṇvatām. This is the chance, śṛṇvatām. Śṛṇvatām means by hearing, by aural reception. Simply those who are coming here, even they do not know anything about it, but God has given this ear, and let him hear about Kṛṣṇa. We are therefore discussing so many... We have written so many books simply about Kṛṣṇa. Not all books published-we have published about twenty books-but we have to finish it. It cannot be finished, but at least, to some extent it will be finished by sixty books. And what is that subject matter? Kṛṣṇa. That's all. People cannot imagine that about God, sixty books can be written. There is no, I mean to say, system of religion where you can find... Not only... Sixty is the minimum. Sixty books of four hundred pages can be written simply on God. So there is possible... If we divert our attention to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we can chant Kṛṣṇa-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya [SB 12.3.51]. We can read about Kṛṣṇa whole life, such big literature. Whole life. If you read twenty-four hours daily-that you cannot-still, you have to devote your whole life to finish this literature.

So we have got enough material to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. My Guru Mahārāja was questioned by one big politician. He came to see him. So my Guru Mahārāja... He was asking, "What are your activities?" So at that time he was publishing one paper. I think it is still published in Māyāpura. It is called... What is called, Dainik? Daily news, it was a daily newspaper, small. Navadvīpa Prakash, like that. Nadiya Prakash. Nadiya Prakash. So daily. So this politician inquired from Guru Mahārāja, "You are publishing a daily paper about God consciousness?" "Yes." "No, what you are writing?" He was surprised. The politicians think that newspaper can be filled up with rubbish political news only. That's all. They cannot think that newspaper can be filled up by news from spiritual world. Yes. They have no idea. They have no idea there is spiritual world. So my Guru Mahārāja explained that "Why you are thinking of only one small newspaper? You do not know what is spiritual world. This material world is one-fourth portion of the whole creation of the Lord. And the three-fourths' portion is the spiritual world. And in this one fourth portion there are innumerable universes. And in one of the universes... This is one of the universe. And in each universe there are millions of planets. And this planet, earthly planets, is only a small planet in that universe. And on this earthly planet, there are so many cities. And in each city, there are so many newspapers. And each newspaper has got so many editions. This is the position of the material world. Now, think over the spiritual world. It is... The spiritual world is three fourths, three times bigger than this material... And there are so many planets, so many universes, and so many activities. So we can produce not one newspaper daily, but every minute a newspaper. We can produce. Unfortunately, there is no customer. You see? This is the difficulty. For material news, there are so many customers, but when we put something, spiritual news, no customer. This is the difficulty. Otherwise... You are thinking of one newspaper daily. We could issue every second a newspaper about spiritual news." So this sixty books is not sufficient. It is simply an introduction to the spiritual activities of the spiritual world. People have no interest. They do not know. We are simply trying to introduce it.

So this can be understood by viśuddha-dhiṣaṇāḥ, purified meditation. That requires practice, how to purify. Viśuddha-dhiṣaṇāḥ tasmin nārāyaṇa-pade. And it can be achieved by persons, ekānta-matayo gatim. A person who has decided, "Now, in this life, I must go back to home, back to Godhead," for him, it is possible. This decision. So that is called... In Bhagavad-gītā it is described,

vyavasāyātmikā buddhir

ekeha kuru-nandana

bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca

buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām

[Bg. 2.41]



One how has decided that "This life, it is not ordinary life like the cats and dogs. It is human life. I have got advanced intelligence. And it is possible in this life to back to home, back to Godhead, athāto brahma jijñāsā, simply by cultivating spiritual knowledge. So why shall I waste my time like cats and dogs?" This determination required. "The cats and dogs are busy in eating, sleeping, sex life, and one day it dies. So why shall I waste my time in that way? I have got good intelligence. Kṛṣṇa has provided me better standard of life. I can lie in nice room, not like the cats and dogs on the street. Kṛṣṇa has provided for me so nice foodstuff which I can offer to Kṛṣṇa, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam [Bg. 9.26], so nice fruits, grains, milk. So let us utilize these things given by Kṛṣṇa."



Kṛṣṇa has given different foodstuff for different animals and human beings. Kṛṣṇa has given stool for the pigs and so nice foodstuff, fruits and grains and milk, for the human being. Not that every food is for everyone. No. What is called? "One man's food, another man's poison." So the stool is also a kind of food. Everything is a kind of food. Even the stone is also food. You know? The pigeons, they eat the stones particles. They can digest. For them, the hardest peas are supplied. So they can digest. Pāyarā-maṭara. It is called in India, pāyarā-maṭara. Pāyarā means pigeon. Pigeon's peas. They require such thing. Just like the gorilla. The gorilla animal, where they live in the African jungles... We have read book. There are trees, the fruits of that tree are so hard, harder than the iron bullet. You can hammer on the bullet; it may bend. But that fruit will not bend. So those fruits are taken by the gorillas, and they chew it just like you chew peanuts or something like that, yes. (laughter)

So Kṛṣṇa has given different foodstuff for different animals. So for human being who is determined to go back to home, back to Godhead, they have got their food. For them, no meat-eating. For them, fine kacuri, rasagullā, puri, for them. As you are... I think Dr. Benard Shaw, he wrote one book, You Are What You Eat. If you eat stool, then you are stool. Because after all, this body will be stool. Because after death, the result is either the body becomes stool or ash or earth. Those who are burying on the ground, in due course the body will turn into earth. That's all. And those who are burning, like in India, Hindus do, this will turn into ash. And those who are throwing for being eaten by the animals and birds... Just like Parsees do in India... They throw, and vultures come, and they eat it, within a second. So after eating, it will be stool of the vulture. That's all. So this beautiful body will be resulted in three things: either stool, earth or ash. And we are taking so much care-for stool, earth, and ashes. And the occupier of the body? Forgotten. And we are advanced scientists. This is our position.

Therefore it is said, viśuddha-dhiṣaṇāḥ pare. Those who are purified in their thinking process... Those who are thinking, "I am this body," they are third-class rascals. The present world is simply full with third-class rascals. Because everyone is thinking, "I am American," "I am American," "I am Indian," "I am white," "I am black," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Christian." So "I am this body." That's all. But they cannot. They cannot. Therefore it is said, virajena ātmanaiva. Virajena. Virajena means one who has become completely washed, cleansed, viraja. Raja. Raja means this material world, and vi means vigata, without. Virajenaiva. And it is very difficult to come to this position. Therefore it is said, avāpur duravāpām. It is very difficult to come to this stage of life, but the Pāṇḍavas, avāpuḥ, they got it. And for whom it is very difficult? That is also: asadbhiḥ. Asadbhir viṣayātmabhiḥ.

Who is asat? Asat means that does not exist, or that will not exist. There are two things: one thing will exist permanently, and one thing will not exist. It may exist for few minutes, or few hours or years. So this material world is asat, because it will not exist. Just like your this material body, it will not exist. Everyone knows. Everyone knows that it is born at a certain date, it will continue for certain years, it will produce some by-products, it will change into different forms, and then it will become old and then dwindle and one day finish. This is called ṣaḍ-vikāra, six kinds of changes. It is not progress. If one is progressing in his age, it is not progress. It means he is going to death. Suppose I am seventy-eight years old. So I have... Seventy-eight years I have already died. Only, say two or five years, or something like remaining balance. So people say "advanced age." No. Advanced in death, not advanced in age. So this is asat. It will not stay. It has begun to die from the very moment of his birth. If you ask a newly born child how old it is, the mother says, "It is one month old." So one month means he has already died one month. And balance months and years he has to die. Simply he has to wait for that death. So this kind of duration of life is called asat. And this kind of existence, the material existence, it also asat. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore sings, sat-saṅga chāḍi' kainu asate vilāsa, te-kāraṇe lāgila ye karma-bandha-phāṅsa. "I gave up sat-saṅga, oṁ tat sat, spiritual society. I associated myself with the material society. Therefore I am now entangled by karma by karma, one after another, one after another."

So spiritual realization is difficult for persons, asadbhiḥ. Why it is difficult? Viṣayātmabhiḥ. Because they are simply attracted by the four principles of material life: eating, sleeping, sex life and, one day, death. They cannot. One must be above this interest. One must be very sane man, that "These kinds of interests are there in the animals. So if I am also interested in only these things, then where is the difference between this dog and me?" Something more.

That information is given in the Bhagavad-gītā. Avināśi tu tad viddhi yena sarvam idaṁ tatam. Yena sarvam idam. This body is perishable, asat. But there is another sat, means permanent thing. What is that? Avināśi tu tad viddhi. You try to understand that thing, which is eternal. What is that? Yena sarvam idaṁ tatam, that which is spreading all over your body. You pinch your body. You feel pain. Why? Because there is consciousness. The consciousness is permanent. And as soon as the consciousness is gone, you chopped up your hand, no response. So take... It is a very nice statement. Tat, that consciousness, is avināśi, is eternal. Where is the difficulty?

So those who are not interested to understand this consciousness and the origin of consciousness, they are asat. They cannot understand what is spiritual life. Therefore the beginning of spiritual life... In the Bhagavad-gītā, it is said that dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. In this body, in this asat, this temporary body, there is the proprietor of the body. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe. The proprietor of the body. So that is to be understood. So how it can be understood? Vidhūta-kalmaṣāḥ. Those who are washed off of the sinful act... Therefore we prescribe that "Don't be associated with sinful activities." What is that? Illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. One who is washed off of these, vidhūta-kalmaṣā sthānam, that sthānam, that place, is virajena ātmanaiva vidhūta-kalmaṣāḥ... Those who are washed of... Otherwise it is not possible. If you think that "I shall do this and do that," then do this, not that. That is finished. You go on doing this life after life, and remain in this material world. That is the point.

Thank you very much. (end)



731226SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.49

-

Los Angeles, December 26, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Vidura, while on pilgrimage, left his body at Prabhāsa. Because he was absorbed in thought of Lord Kṛṣṇa, he was received by the denizens of Pitṛloka, where he returned to his original post." [SB 1.15.49]



Prabhupāda: This Vidura was Yamarāja. So he was cursed by one muni to go down and take birth in śūdra family. Yamarāja was very exalted post, but still... Yamarāja means the superintendent of death. There is Pitṛloka, Yamaloka, different planets. And where each planet is situated, how many miles, yojana... The Sanskrit is called yojana. Yojana means eight miles. So how many yojana is one planet situated from another planet, that is all described in the Bhāgavata, Fifth Canto.



So there is a Pitṛloka, Yamaloka. Just like the moon planet, we are trying to go there, but there are different lokas, planets, and you can go, not by the sputnik, by force. No. You'll have to qualify yourself. Just like to come to your country, to take the permanent visa, I had to qualify in so many ways, the immigration department, not by force. Even in this planet, you cannot enter any country without being permitted. How you can enter other planets? Simply by force? No, that is not possible. You have to qualify yourself. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25]. A person can go to the planets of the demigods, devān. There are many demigods: Indra, Candra, Varuṇa, Vāyu. Brahmaloka, Prajāpatiloka, Siddhaloka-they are in the higher planetary systems. This is... We are now situated in the middle, Bhūrloka. It is called Bhūrloka. Above this, there is Bhuvarloka. Above that, Svarloka, Janaloka, Maharloka, Satyaloka, like that, ūrdhvaloka. They are higher planetary... Then middle. And then lower planetary system. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ. If you develop sattva-guṇa, the quality of goodness, then according to your degree of goodness, you get promoted to the higher planets. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. If you are in the passion modes, then you stay here in this middle planetary system. And jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ. Those who are in the most abominable condition of life, adho gacchanti, they go down. Not only the down planetary system, but even to the animal kingdom, the beasts, birds, trees, plants, aquatics. You have to go.

After all, you have to change this body. Change... This is... Bhagavad-gītā says, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. As we are changing this body from childhood, from babyhood to childhood, childhood to boyhood, boyhood to youthhood... This is practical. You are not the same body as you had your body in the womb of your mother. That body is gone. Now daily changing; every moment we are changing body. Advancing age means I am changing body, you are changing body. So it is very easy to understood that we are changing our body. But I know, you know, every one of us, that "I had such and such body." You remember that you had a child's body. You were playing like that. When you see another child, you say, "Oh, I was also a child like him, and I was doing like this." But where is that body? That is gone. Now you have got another body. This example is given in the Bhagavad-gītā. So as you are changing body, tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13], similarly, after giving up this body, you have to accept another body. This is the logic, and any sane man can understand.

So we have become so rascal that we do not believe in the transmigration of the soul. Actually, I am...Presently I can understand that "I had such and such body; now I have transmigrated to this body." How I have done, that is not known to you or me. That is called acintya. Perceptive. Just like the child is changing body, and you saw one child on the lap of his mother. So after few years, you come. You cannot recognize the same child who has grown up: "Oh." The mother says that "This is such and such." "Oh, you have become so grown up." So things are taken imperceptibly. That is going on by the subtle laws of nature. It is a great science, but there is no discussion of this science in any university of the whole world. And they are advancement of knowledge. They are claiming advancement of knowledge. What knowledge you have got? You do not know what you are, and you are advancement in knowledge.

Therefore Sanātana Gosvāmī, who was prime minister of Nawab Hussein Shah, when he approached Caitanya Mahāprabhu, his first proposition was that, grāmya-vyavahāre paṇḍita, tāi satya māni: "My dear Sir, Caitanya Mahāprabhu, some neighboring people, they call me, I am a very learned scholar." Grāmya-vyavahāre. "In ordinary behavior, they call me, I am very learned scholar. But I do not know what I am, I am such a scholar." This is the submission. This is called submission. Everyone is puffed up, that "I know. I know everything. So there is no need of going to a guru." This is the method to approach a guru, spiritual master: surrender, that "I know so many rubbish things which are useless. Now kindly teach me." This is called submission. Just like Arjuna said, śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ prapannam [Bg. 2.7]. When there was argument between Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa, and when the matter was not solved, then Arjuna submitted to Kṛṣṇa, "My dear Kṛṣṇa, now we are talking as friends. No more friendly talking. I accept You as my spiritual master. Kindly teach me what is my duty." That is Bhagavad-gītā.

So one has to learn. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva abhigacchet [MU 1.2.12]. This is the Vedic injunction, that what is the value of life? How it is changing? How we are transmigrating from one body to another? What I am? I am this body or beyond, something? These things are to be inquired. That is human life. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. This inquiry should be made. So in this Kali-yuga, without any knowledge, without any inquiry, without any guru, without any book, everyone is God. That's all. This is going on, fool's paradise. So this will not help. Here, about the Vidura... He also...

viduro 'pi parityajya

prabhāse deham ātmanaḥ

kṛṣṇāveśena tac-cittaḥ

pitṛbhiḥ sva-kṣayaṁ yayau



He... I was talking about Vidura. Vidura was Yamarāja. So a saintly person was brought before Yamarāja for punishment. So when the saintly person inquired from Yamarāja, that "I am... I don't remember that I have committed in my life any sin. Why I have been brought here for judgment?" So Yamarāja said that "You do not remember. In your childhood you pricked one ant with a needle through the rectum, and she died. Therefore you have to be punished." Just see. In childhood, in ignorance, because he committed some sin, he has to be punished. And we are willingly, against the principle of religion that "Thou shalt not kill," we have opened so many thousands of slaughterhouse, giving a nonsense theory the the animal has no soul. Just see the fun. And this is going on. And we want to be in peace. Therefore your Senate house has issued some injunction order, that on the 30th of April, 1974, there will be a mass prayer. Who will explain it? Just explain. What is that?



Karandhara: Well, one senator made a resolution that on April 30th there would be a national observance of prayer because of the state of the nation's moral decay.



Prabhupāda: Oh. So you might have seen that. It is good that at least the managers of the state, they are coming to their sense, but this sentiment will not help. One must be serious. The sinful activities, as we have forwarded or manifested, that no illicit sex, no meat-eating, no intoxication, no gambling. But I think they will not agree to this the state. And what prayer will do? No. God is not so foolish that you go on doing all nonsense, and simply by prayer you become out of it, punishment. No. That is not possible. Therefore I am speaking of the Viduras.



So that saintly person accepted to be punished by Yamarāja, but he also cursed him, that "Because in my innocence I committed some sin, you are punishing me in this way, so I also curse you that next life you will have to become a śūdra. Because you have no intelligence of a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya." So Vidura became a śūdra. Śūdra means he was born by a king, he was begotten by king, but his mother was śūdra, maidservant. That was the system, that when a king is married, the father of the princess also gives so many girls to go with the princess, as maidservant. And sometimes the maidservants also gave birth. So they are called dāsī-putra. Such son could not claim to the throne, but were provided, dāsī-putra. So Vidura's history was like that. He was a dāsī-putra, brother, a step-brother, not exactly step-brother, but brother, of Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra. But he was a very saintly person, because formerly, in the previous life, he was Yamarāja. So he was not ordinary man. So he cultivated spiritual consciousness. Now, after leaving this body, he returned again, pitṛbhiḥ sva-kṣayaṁ yayau. He again returned to his original post. Temporary, he got the life of a śūdra; again he returned back by his pious activities. Similarly, there are many narrations in the Purāṇas. Sometimes Indra, the king of heaven, he was also cursed by Bṛhaspati to become a hog in this planet.

So there are many incidences by cursing, by accident. Even by accident, you have to accept a body which you do not desire. So that is, just like Bharata Mahārāja. Bharata Mahārāja, he was the king of this planet, and at the age of twenty-four years, very young age, young wife, young children, kingdom of the whole planet, he left everything. He went to the forest for cultivating spiritual advancement. But one day he saw that a deer was drinking water in front. In the meantime there was a roaring of a lion, and the deer was pregnant. She gave birth to a calf and she fled away. So Bharata Mahārāja saw the little calf is dying. He picked up and kept and it became..., it began to growing. So he had some little affection, just like we have got affection for cubs of dog and others. So one day, that little calf did not return in the evening, and he went to search out on the hill, and accidentally he fell down, and next life he became a deer. Yes.

This is the science. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you will find. "At the time of death, as you are thinking, you will be carried to such body." This is the example. Just like this Bharata Mahārāja, such an exalted person, he had to become a deer. But because he was spiritually advanced, although he became a deer, he was living with the saintly persons. Where saintly persons were sitting, he was sitting down there. He was eating the flowers and leaves which the saintly persons left after worship. In this way, he had to wait for one life, and the next life, he became a son of a nice brāhmaṇa. So because he was remembering this different birth, he became very grave and silent. He was not talking with anyone. So it is very dangerous to contaminate. So he was known as Jaḍa Bharata. This story you will find the the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

So just try to understand that death is there. You have to die. You may declare yourself, "I am very dependent. I don't care for God or anyone," but God will not excuse you. You have to die. You will see God in the form of death. Just like Hiraṇyakaśipu, he is seeing. Prahlāda says, "My dear father, why don't you accept God?" "Who is God? I don't care for your God. You rascal boy, you are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." So God... The atheist may declare like that, "There is no God," but he will see God as death. That is compulsory. There is no excuse. So at the time of death, the mentality which you have created by practice, sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitāḥ [Bg. 8.6], will act. This Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is simply educating people so that at the time of death one can remember Kṛṣṇa. That's all. This simple... And if he is fortunate enough to do this, immediately he is transferred to the Kṛṣṇaloka. Immediately, within a second. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9].

So why we should waste our time thinking so many nonsense things? Why not think of Kṛṣṇa, how beautiful He is, standing here with Rādhārāṇī? If we come here and take this impression, and simply think of Him, our life is perfect. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. What is the difficulty and what is the loss? If you gain such big profit simply by thinking of Kṛṣṇa, why should you lose this opportunity, this human form of life? A cat cannot be educated. A dog cannot be educated. If I teach a dog, "My dear dog, please think of Kṛṣṇa," he is animal; it is not possible. But a human being, although at the present moment he is like a dog, but he can be trained to become a human being and think of Kṛṣṇa. That is possible. So we should take the opportunity. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. This life is gotten after many, many births. We do not know. We have forgotten. This is the opportunity. And here is the proof, śāstra, that kṛṣṇāveśena tac-cittaḥ.

How Yamarāja, Vidura, returned to his place? Now, kṛṣṇāveśena tac-cittaḥ. He was fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought. Not only Kṛṣṇa, you can go to Kṛṣṇaloka or any loka you desire. The yogis, they also can do that. Yoga practice. But that is not possible in this age. The so-called yoga practice going on are simply bluff. Real yoga practice means one becomes so perfect that he will not die natural death. He will die when he likes. He will not be forced to die. When he thinks, "Now I am fully prepared. Now I shall leave this planet. I shall go to such and such planet, such and such loka," he will be immediately transferred. That is yoga practice. So that practice is not possible. Therefore still in India you will find many yogis are there. They come to Kumbha-melā-that will be held in the month of February-from distant places. And you will see, just like young men, but some of them are three hundred years old, four hundred years old. Still. How they are preparing themself? They think, a yogi thinks that "Now I am not prepared. There may be mistake. I am not prepared to enter such and such planet." So that concession is given there by the yogic practice. Just like you appear for an examination. Unless you are fully prepared, you are certain that "I must pass," you do not appear. Similarly, the yogis, unless one thinks that "I am fully competent to enter such and such planet," he does not give up this body.

But that practice may be successful for one or two persons. Generally, it is not successful. But this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, bhakti-yoga system, is so easy and perfect that if you simply think of Kṛṣṇa, and if you become perfect as to think of Kṛṣṇa at the time of death, then immediately you are transferred to the Kṛṣṇaloka. Or any loka you like. Not only Kṛṣṇaloka, any loka. If you desire to go to heavenly planet, to Brahmā planet, to Satyaloka, Maharloka, Janaloka... Many thousands and millions of planets are there. Or even if you want to go beyond this material world, to the Vaikuṇṭha planet, Kṛṣṇa planet, Goloka planet, you can go there. This is the science. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]. People... Just like they are very much anxious to go to the moon planet. And what is this nonsense moon planet? It is also a material planet. Actually if you go moon planet, you can live for ten thousands of years. That is the statement in the śāstra. But after ten thousand of years you have to die. So if you go to any planet, within this material world, the four material, I mean to say, problems, namely birth, death, old age, and disease, will follow you. You may live in one planet. Just like we are allowed to live on this planet utmost hundred years, not more than that. Or the ant is allowed to live for six hours. Or another fly is allowed one moment. There are different varieties of... Or Brahmā is allowed to live for millions of years. So according to the different types of body, we are allowed to live under certain duration of life. But nobody can be immortal here. That is not possible. That is possible when you transfer yourself to the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. That is possible. So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching, educating people in such a way not only he goes to the spiritual world, but he goes to the highest planet of the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa is there. Where Kṛṣṇa is there.

So viduro 'pi parityajya prabhāse deham ātmanaḥ. Deha, parityajya deham. So we give up this body. I am not lost; I am transferred to another body. We give up this body. Just like I give up one kind of dress; I take another kind of dress. Vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya [Bg. 2.22]. These are all stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. As we change our dress, similarly, we change our body. And this way, transmigration is going on. So this human life should be engaged in such knowledge and cultivation of knowledge, that after leaving this body, we are not going to accept another material body, but we be transferred directly to the spiritual world, and we are situated in one the spiritual planets, as I desire. There are many millions of spiritual planets also. So far we are concerned, we are concentrating our mind to be transferred to the spiritual world, in the highest topmost planet there, Kṛṣṇa-loka, Goloka.

cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]



This is the description of the Goloka Vṛndāvana planet in the Brahma-saṁhitā. The first description is, "That planet is made of cintāmaṇi gems." Cintāmaṇi gem means... If you get by chance imitation cintāmaṇi gem, you can turn iron into gold. That is cintāmaṇi gem. So these things are there. One may believe or not believe, but we believe because we believe in the śāstra. So we have no botheration.



So there is Goloka Vṛndāvana planet, Kṛṣṇaloka, and Vaikuṇṭhaloka. There are... As there are different grades of lokas, planets... Here also, in this material world, there is one planet which is called Siddhaloka. Siddhaloka means there the inhabitants (are) automatically perfect in all yogic practice. Yogic practice means... If you become perfect in yogic practice, you can fly in the air without any instrument. Aṇimā laghimā prāpti īśitā vaśitā. There are eight kinds of siddhi. You are sitting here. If you want such and such thing from London, you can get immediately. This is called siddhi, prāpti. You can become the smaller than the smallest. You can be packed up in a box. We have seen it. And you'll come out. In Bose's circus, Calcutta, in our childhood, we saw this yogic practice. A man was tied up, hands and legs, put into a bag. The bag was sealed up, again put into a box. The box was locked and sealed. And the man again came out. We have seen. So yogic practice is such... Yes. Prāpti siddhi aṇimā. You can become the smaller... There was a saintly person in Benares, Trailanga Baba. So he was practiced to sit naked in the public road. So government objected that "You cannot sit naked here." So he did not speak. So he was arrested and taken to the custody and put into the jail. He again came out. He again came out.

So these are yogic, I mean to say, perfection. Anything you like... The most perfect yogi can create even one planet. They become so powerful. But still, that is all material power. That is not spiritual power. The real spiritual power is that you give up this body, you give up this material world, go to the spiritual world, go back to home, back to Godhead. That is your perfection, and that is very easily obtained by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness attitude.

Thank you very much. (end)



731227SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.50

-

Los Angeles, December 27, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Draupadī also saw that her husbands, without caring for her, were leaving home. She knew well about Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead. Both she and Subhadrā became absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa and attained the same results as their husbands." [SB 1.15.50]



Prabhupāda: So draupadī-patīnām. Patīnām is plural number. So she had five husbands, all the brothers. We should not imitate that. This is possible by Draupadī, not by others. So although she had five husbands, the Pāṇḍavas-Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva-but at the time of retirement, they did not care what will happen to their wife. The same husbands, when they saw that their wife was insulted in the assembly of the Kurus... Draupadī was insulted because they lost Draupadī in gambling. Just see. Gambling is so dangerous. The bet was the wife. The Pāṇḍavas and the Kurus were playing on chess. And they lost their kingdom, they lost their wife, then they were ordered to be banished for twelve years and one year incognito. The condition was, "Now the betting is that if you lose the game, then you will be banished for twelve years in the forest. And one year you have to remain incognito. Nobody will know where you are. If you are," I mean to say, "picked up, if somebody knows you, recognizes you, 'Here are the Pāṇḍavas,' then again twelve year." This is the previous condition of the Battle of Kurukṣetra. The whole idea was to reject the five Pāṇḍavas and enthrone Duryodhana and his brothers. That was the diplomacy.



So when they were living incognito... Nobody could know where the Pāṇḍavas were at, they attempted to gain Draupadī in the dress of brāhmaṇas. Draupadī's father made a bet, that "This is the condition of my daughter being given to a boy." The condition was that on a ceiling a fish was hanging, and the boy who will be victorious in piercing the eyes of the fish by arrow... Not directly looking, but there was a waterpot, the reflection. He has to fix up his point by seeing the reflection down, and then he has to pierce the eye. Then Draupadī will accept. All the noted princes in those times, they kept such bet. Even Kṛṣṇa had to marry Satyabhāmā... Satyabhāmā's father also made a bet the, he kept five very strong bulls. So condition was that "Any boy who will be able to control these bulls, then I will offer my daughter to him." So all the princes who came to control the bulls, they got their hands and legs fractured by the pushing of the bull. Nobody could... Then Kṛṣṇa came. And Kṛṣṇa controlled the five bulls, expanding Himself into five strong boy, and He was offered Satyabhāmā.

So in kṣatriya marriage it was not so easy. The boy had to show how much powerful he is. Then the girl would be offered. Not only that; there will be killing. The opposite party may be killed. When there is fight, there is killing. And by killing, the blood is smeared over here. That is the red sign. That is the red sign, now used with vermillion. Not by killing. Yes, it has become... It is made easier. (laughter) Formerly the red sign was not so easy. There must be blood. That is kṣatriya. Kṣatriya means the fighting race, fighting caste, king, royal. They must be very chivalrous fighting, not timid. A kṣatriya cannot be timid. Brāhmaṇas kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdra, they are trained differently. Brāhmaṇa-for understanding Vedic knowledge and guide the other three subdivisions, namely kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, not śūdras. Śūdras were not supposed to understand Vedic knowledge. Especially brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas.

So the kṣatriyas were very chivalrous. In every action there is fight. And this gambling was allowed for the kṣatriyas. If the opposite party challenges, "I want to play with you gambling," "Yes." The kṣatriya cannot deny. If somebody, opposite party comes, "I want to fight with you," "Yes, come on." Just like Jarāsandha. Jarāsandha was requested by Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna and Bhīma that "We have come to you to fight with you. Any one of us, you can select, and that is our request." Jarāsandha, he immediately accepted, "Yes." So he rejected Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. He said, "Kṛṣṇa is a coward. I do not wish to fight. And Arjuna, Arjuna is less strong then me, so I don't wish to fight with him. Now, the only combatant is Bhīma. So I shall fight with him." So during daytime they would fight, all day. And after daytime they are friends. All these three gentlemen, Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna and Bhīma, were guests of Jarāsandha. From evening, they will eat together, talk together, laugh together, and then in the morning they will fight. This is kṣatriya spirit.

So this Draupadī was achieved by Arjuna by piercing the eye of the fish. So when they came home in great jubilation, Arjuna said, "Mother..." No, Yudhiṣṭhira said, "Mother, we have got a great boon today." So mother was affectionate. She said, "All right, my dear boys. Just equally share amongst your brothers." So she was only woman. So by the order of Kuntī, although Arjuna achieved the hand of Draupadī, by the order of mother, she was divided amongst the five brothers. Therefore patīnām. Patīnām. And when she was insulted, because she was lost in the gambling... Bet was that "This time if you lose, then your Draupadī should be lost." So she was lost in that way.

So Karṇa was refused to take part in the sporting, piercing the eyes of the fish, because Draupadī actually knew that "Arjuna is my real husband. So if Karṇa takes part in this sporting..." Karṇa was powerful. He would gain. But she did not like Karṇa. Therefore at that time she said that "This sporting is meant for the kṣatriyas, not for the śūdras." Karṇa was known at that time as śūdra. You will find all these stories in the Mahābhārata. Karṇa was also Yudhiṣṭhira's brother, born of Kuntī before her marriage. So Kuntī did not disclose that Karṇa was her son, but he was raised by a śūdra. People knew that he was a śūdra. So Karṇa had a grudge against Draupadī. Therefore he planned to place her in the gambling game. And when the Pāṇḍavas were lost, now he wanted to retaliate the insult given by Draupadī during her svayaṁvara. So he advised... He was friendly to Duryodhana and brothers. "Now this lady is lost. Now we can deal with her as we like. She is our property." So she was lost. "So I want to see her naked in this assembly." So vastra-haraṇa. You know. But Kṛṣṇa saved her. So Draupadī knows very well Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is said tadājñāya draupadī ca.

And another side is that when... At the time of retirement, there is no more responsibility. Here is it said, patīnām anapekṣatām. They are retiring from home without any consideration, "What will happen to our wife Draupadī?" No. "Now everyone should take care of himself. We are also going alone." This is retirement. Anapekṣatām, without waiting for anyone, alone, simply depending on Kṛṣṇa. This is called renounced order of life. So this is the process of retirement, not that to make arrangement in the family that "I am now retiring. You send me some money, and I shall maintain myself." No. No dependence. Simply dependent on Kṛṣṇa. Therefore it is said, ekānta-matir āpa. Ekānta. Actually, Kṛṣṇa saves us. Why we should depend on others? Kṛṣṇa saves. Kṛṣṇa says that "Anyone who is completely dependent upon Me," yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham [Bg. 9.22], "I personally bring whatever his necessity is." That is the promise of Kṛṣṇa in the Bhagavad-gītā. So renounced order means no more dependence on father, mother, husband, daughter. No. Completely dependent on Kṛṣṇa. Ekānta. That is perfection. One who is fully convinced that "Kṛṣṇa is with me..." Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]-"I will not have to search out Kṛṣṇa anywhere. He is within me, within my heart." There are so many instances.

So cirāṇi kiṁ pathi na santi diśanti bhikṣām. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he was wandering all over the world alone, naked, even no cloth. Simply while walking on the street early in the morning, he would stand anywhere, because in those days, every house, they had cows, and the time for milking is early in the morning. We are also milking cows in London, in our Letchmore Heath, early in the morning. That is the time. Here also the same system?

Devotee: Oh, yes.



Prabhupāda: So any house he would stand before, and those who were milking, they would give him a glass of milk. That's all, finished, for the whole day. That was Śukadeva Gosvāmī's practice. So in this way one has to depend... In the renounced order of life, one has to depend completely on God. That's all. That is renounced order.



So here all the five husbands, how much responsible they were. Because their one wife was insulted, they declared the war, Battle of Kurukṣetra, and killed the whole family. Similarly, Lord Rāmacandra, His wife was kidnapped, Sītā, by Rāvaṇa. So Lord Rāmacandra is God. He would create many millions of Sītās. But no. For that one Sītā, war was declared against Rāvaṇa, and the whole family dynasty, with kingdom, everything was finished. So this is the duty of the husband, that... Not like the modern days' husband: marries for three months. One, the sixth month, they were no more husband. Separate. Not like that. Husband means who takes charge of the girl for life, and wife means the girl who has the resolution to serve the husband throughout life. That is husband and wife. And when the wife is in danger, the husband's duty is to give protection, at any cost. That is husband-wife relationship.

But when one is going to retire, that is another thing. Because life is divided into four parts: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. So woman has got three positions. They require protection. Women is never allowed to become renounced order of life. No. They are supposed to be under the care of somebody. So early age under the care of father, young age under the care of husband, and old age under the care of grown-up children, sons. This is woman's position. They remain always under the care of. So Draupadī was being taken care of their husband, but when the husbands were going for renounced order of life, anapekṣatām, without caring, she could understand, "Now I will be uncared for. No more... My husbands are no more in duty bound to give me protection." She could understand. Tadājñāya. She could understand. And there is no such obligation. That is the sanction of the śāstra.

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

[SB 11.5.41]



We have got so many duties. So long we are not fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa... It is not that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to give shelter to some irresponsible man who does not carry the responsibilities of family life or brahmacārī life. But that is now forgotten. Everything is topsy-turvied. So Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says that kṛṣṇa-bhakti, Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, may be offered even to the caṇḍāla. Caṇḍāla means the lowest of the human society, the dog-eaters. Caṇḍāla. This is the, mean, the benefit of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement can be accepted by anyone, and it can be bestowed to anyone, without any discrimination, without any discrimination. And that is happening. We have no discrimination that "This movement is meant for such-and-such class of men or such-and-such nation or such-and-such country." No. It is meant for everyone. And anyone who takes to the shelter of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he is happy.



This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means... That is also explained here. Ekānta-matir āpa: simply to concentrate one's mind on Kṛṣṇa. Vāsudeve bhagavati hy ekānta-matir āpa tam.

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

[SB 1.2.7]



This is the benefit of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. Vāsudeve bhagavati. Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ. One who takes shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa by bhakti-yoga process... Vāsudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ... [SB 1.2.7]. When applied... Janayaty āśu vairāgyam. Because in the human form of life, two things are required. That is perfection: jñānaṁ vairāgyam. Jñānam means knowledge, and vairāgyam means detachment. When one has full knowledge, then he becomes detached from this material world. We are suffering in this material world because we have got attachment. And the attachment is by nature's law, man's attachment for woman, woman's attachment for man. This is attachment. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etam [SB 5.5.8]. The central point is sex, and that is the attachment. Puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam. The whole world, this material world, is moving. What is the central point? Sex attachment. So one has to become free from this attachment. That is called vairāgya. Vairāgya.



So if one can give up this attachment from very beginning of life, that is brahmacārī. A brahmacārī is trained that "Don't be attached. You will save so much time and save your life." That is brahmacārī life. Because this attachment is the continuation of our material life. We have got different attachment, different varieties of attachment. The central point is sex. Therefore school, college means that to train the students how to become detached. That is the school, college. That is brahmacārī system. A brahmacārī should live under the guidance of the spiritual master as menial servant, and whatever he collects, he would give to the spiritual master. If the spiritual master says, "Now you can eat," then he will eat; otherwise he will starve. He will not take the things of spiritual master by his own hand. First of all... No. This is the austerity of brahmacārī. And no meeting with young girls. Even the wife of the spiritual master is young, the brahmacārī is not allowed to go there. There are so many. These are described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsa.

But these things are not now possible. Everything is topsy-turvied. There is no regular training of the human being. They are being trained up like cats' and dogs' life. Cats and dogs, they don't require training. Because what is the modern civilization? Eating, sleeping, sex life, and dying. It does not require any education. Just like these children. When I distribute these cookies, it does not require... Immediately spreads the hand and immediately in the mouth. (laughter) So for eating, there is no necessity of training. Everyone knows. Similarly, sleeping also, everyone knows. And similarly sex intercourse everyone knows. And dying there is no question. (laughter) So where is the education? Where is the necessity of education for these things? Rascals. You are enhancing advancement of knowledge how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex life, and how to die. Where is the necessity of education for these things? There is no necessity. Anyone-animals, man, birds, beasts, insects-they know all these thing. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca. It does not require any education. If there is education for this purpose, that is for restraining. Just like in human society. There is education for sex life, marriage. What is that marriage? Marriage means restricting sex life to one. That is education. If you are not restricted in that way, then you are animal. That is education. But... Because sex life does not require any college education, but if there is education in sex life, not to increase the propensity of sex life, but to reduce it... To reduce it.

So these four things, primary necessities of the living entity, eating, sleeping, mating, it does not require any education. If there is education... People may say, "Why there is description how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex life?" It is for decreasing. Just like... In your country it is different. At least in our country it was... Just like drinking. Drinking, you can manufacture wine, liquor at home. Anyone can do it. It is not very difficult. In India, the lower class of men, the sāṅotālas, so they make... They simply moist some rice overnight and boil it, and then ferment it for few days. Then it becomes nice wine. So it is not very difficult. Everyone can manufacture. But why the government restricts, "You cannot manufacture at home. You must purchase from the licensed shop"? The meaning is to restrict. Otherwise everyone will do that.

So when there is śāstra sanctioning for this eating, sleeping, mating, that means to restrict. Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttes tu mahā-phalā. This inclination is natural, but when there is regulative principle, that means to restrict. Because the whole human society is supposed to be advanced in the art of detachment, jñāna-vairāgyam. That is perfection. First of all knowledge, perfect knowledge, that "I am not this body. I am simply wasting my time taking care of this body, but I am different from the body." That is natural. Suppose you are sitting in some place. If you know that place does not belong to you, then why should you take so much care? You are sitting there for some business. Finish, and go. Similarly, if one is in knowledge, full knowledge, that "I am not this body," that is called jñāna. Then why he should be bothering so much for this body which is going to be, as I explained yesterday, either ash, or stool or earth? This is the last stage of this body.

So the real thing is the soul. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]. So we should take care. Just like we can take care of this hat and coat by soaping it, but we must take care of myself, the body which is putting on this hat and coat. Similarly, this material body is hat and coat. Real is the spirit soul. So what is the necessity of the spirit soul? The necessity of spirit soul, because it is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, he is hankering to unite with Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. That is Kṛṣṇa conscious... The soul is hankering after uniting with the supreme soul. That is natural. You study your body. Why do you love your body? Or why do you love your son's body? So long the spirit soul is there. As soon as the spirit soul is off, you do not care for the son's body or daughter's body or your wife's body. Then who is the lovable object? The soul. It is very natural to understand. Why don't you love a dead body? Because the soul is not there. The soul is the object of your love, not this body. And why you take care of the soul? Because it is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate object of love. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But they do not know.

So these Pāṇḍavas were trained up very nicely. Therefore vāsudeve bhagavati hy ekānta-matir āpa tam. They knew that "Ultimately, Kṛṣṇa is everything." Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ: [Bg. 7.19] "Anyone who understands that ultimately Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, is everything," sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ, "such person is very rare, mahātmā, great soul." So all these Pāṇḍavas were great soul, and they ultimately... Retirement means no more material affairs. We are active on the platform of this bodily consciousness. That is also required for some time, not for all the time. The aim is to work for the soul. But because now we are covered by this material body, so we have to utilize the best use of a bad bargain. It is a bargain, that we have got this material body. But because... Just like you take care of your car because you, the spirit soul, will utilize it for going here and there. Without a man being interested going by car, nobody takes care. Similarly, this is also a car given by nature.

īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

[Bg. 18.61]



This is a yantra, machine.



So in this way we have to understand the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Then everyone will be happy, not only in this life, next life also. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)



731228SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.15.51

-

Los Angeles, December 28, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "The subject of the departure of the sons of Paṇḍu for the ultimate goal of life, back to Godhead, is fully auspicious and is perfectly pure. Therefore anyone who hears this narration with devotional faith certainly gains the devotional service of the Lord, the highest perfection of life." [SB 1.15.51]



Prabhupāda: Yaḥ śraddhayaitad bhagavat-priyāṇām. Bhagavat-priyāṇām. There is a common word in English, "If you love me, love my dog." That is very important. So bhagavat-priyāṇām, one who is very dear to Kṛṣṇa, if you love such person, then Kṛṣṇa is more pleased. Kṛṣṇa is more pleased. Bhagavat-priyāṇām.



There is a version in the Purāṇas, Devī Purāṇa. Pārvatī was asking questions to Lord Śiva, and Lord Śiva was replying. This is the process at home. The wife is supposed to inquire from the husband about spiritual advancement of life, and the husband must be competent to reply all the questions of wife. That will keep relation very nice. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam [SB 7.5.23]. That is bhakti. So Pārvatī was asking... Because according to Vedas, there are so many demigods. Viṣṇu is sometimes taken, but Viṣṇu is not... Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Maheśvara. They are the principal deities. So the inquiry was "Which worship is the best? Viṣṇu, or Lord Śiva, or Brahmā or Candra?" There are so many demigods. Sometimes they are misunderstood that all of them are Gods. No. They are called demigods. God is one. That is... Originally, God is Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1].

So the inquiry was, "There are so many gods. So which worship is the best?" So Lord Śiva replied,

ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ

viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi

tadīyānāṁ samarcanam



Means "My dear wife, Devi..." Wife is addressed "Devi," not by name. The husband should address the wife, "Devi." They must be like devī. Devī means goddess. And the wife must address the husband as "lord." This is the system. So he replied, "Devi, ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣām. There are many kinds of recommendation. 'If you want this, you worship this God. If you want this, you worship...' " These are described in the Bhāgavatam. "So of all different types of worship, the worshiping of Lord Viṣṇu is the best," he said. Ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param. And again he said, tasmāt parataraṁ devi: "There is still better worship." What is called? What is that? Tadīyānāṁ samarcanam: "To worship the devotee of Viṣṇu, Vaiṣṇava." Tadīyānāṁ samarcanam. That is the best. First of all he said, viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param: "That is the supreme." Then again he said, tasmāt, "From that," tasmāt parataram, "still better," tadīyānāṁ samarcanam, "to worship the devotee of God." So this is very simple method. You cannot approach God. It is not very easy thing. But God's representative, God's devotee, on behalf of God, who is canvassing, tadīyānām-that worship is better. Tadīyānāṁ samarcanam.



Therefore here it is said that bhagavat-priyāṇām. These Pāṇḍavas... Why one should be interested in the Pāṇḍavas' activities, Arjuna's fight with his brothers? There are so many other people, they are fighting with their brother, with their enemies. Why we are not recommended to hear about that thing? Why the Battle of Kurukṣetra? Because Arjuna is there, tadīyānām. We are not interested in any battlefield stories. Why we should be interested? There are so many cats and dogs fighting. So we are not interested. But why we are interested in the Bhagavad-gītā, Battlefield of Kurukṣetra? Tadīyānāṁ samarcanam. Because there is Arjuna. He is fighting. So to worship God is very good, but to worship the devotee of God is still very good. This is the... That is also admitted in the Bhagavad-gītā, na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ [Bg. 18.69]. Kṛṣṇa says, yo māṁ mad-bhakteṣu. "Now, this Bhagavad-gītā... Anyone who is preaching this Bhagavad-gītā..." Na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ. Bhagavat-priyāṇām. Priya-kṛt. Priya means dear, very dear. So Kṛṣṇa said that na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu: [Bg. 18.69] "Anyone who is preaching the message of Bhagavad-gītā to the suffering people of the world," Kṛṣṇa says, na ca tasmāt priya-kṛt "nobody is dearer to Me than him."

So how to become very dear to God? Don't try to see God. Even if you see... You can find God everywhere if you have got eyes to see. But the real business is not to see. God wants to see you, what you are working for God. That He wants to see. To see God is not very difficult business. Anyone with eyes to see, he can see God. But to be seen by God, do something by which you can draw the attention of God and He can see you, "Oh, here is My devotee," that is wanted. Let God see you! Don't try to see God. That is foolishness. Let God see you. This is our philosophy. My Guru Mahārāja used to say that, that "Don't try to see God, but try to do something so that God can see you." This is the philosophy. And whom God will see? As soon as... Just like any business firm, any man who is working very sincerely, it comes to the notice of the master, "Oh, this man is doing very nice." That is wanted. That is wanted. So a devotee is not very much anxious to see God. God is there. Simply... And one who has become devotee, he always sees God. Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva [Bs. 5.38]. Sadaiva, twenty-four hours he sees. That is not very difficult job. But do something so that God will see you, "Oh, here is... Here is My devotee."

So He... Therefore here it is called, yaḥ śraddhayaitad bhagavat-priyāṇām. The Pāṇḍavas were so dear to Kṛṣṇa. So it is better to hear about the Pāṇḍavas than to hear about Kṛṣṇa. To hear about Kṛṣṇa, people may be very much inclined, but the śāstra says, "To hear about the devotees of Kṛṣṇa is still better." Therefore in the...You chant daily, yasya prasādāt. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktaḥ **. The spiritual master, it is said that "He is directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. Ukta, "said." Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ: ** "It is not only said, but it is accepted by sadbhiḥ, those who are actually advanced in spiritual life, sadbhiḥ." Why? Why the spiritual master should be accepted as directly as the Supreme God? Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. This priya, again, priyāṇām: "Because he is very, very dear to Kṛṣṇa." Not that because he is worshiped as Kṛṣṇa, therefore he thinks himself Kṛṣṇa and declares, "Now I am Kṛṣṇa." No. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. This priya. Priya is word. So therefore try to become priya of Kṛṣṇa. Do, act in such a way that Kṛṣṇa can understand that you are very dear to Him.

And the very simple thing is that ya idaṁ guhyaṁ mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati. This confidential service, preaching of Bhagavad-gītā... What is that? Bhagavad-gītā preaching essence: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. Simply go and preach. This very thing. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is Kṛṣṇa's desire. Preach to the world, "Just be Kṛṣṇa conscious." Man-manāḥ. "Just become Kṛṣṇa's devotee." Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī. "Just worship Kṛṣṇa." Mad-yājī mām... "Just offer your obeisances to Kṛṣṇa." Four words. Then you become a preacher. It is not very difficult to become a preacher and to become a spiritual master. How? Very simple thing. Go and speak what Kṛṣṇa says. That's all. You have nothing to manufacture, Dr. Frog. There is no need of manufacturing. We are very safe because we don't manufacture. We simply repeat, parrotlike, what Kṛṣṇa has said. That's all, finished. Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Let aside everything. Just become My devotee, surrendered soul." So we are preaching that. We don't make compromise. Therefore all people are against me. Because "This man simply says, 'Kṛṣṇa.' " But I cannot say anything more. That's all.

So to become priya, very dear to Kṛṣṇa, is very easy. That is siddhi, perfection. Labdhvā harau bhaktim upaiti siddhim. Perfection, highest perfection: to become dear to Kṛṣṇa. That's all. You become dear to Kṛṣṇa. That is your perfection, highest perfection, supreme perfection. So such easy thing, and such highest perfection. Why people should not accept this? And it is practical. It is... Just last night I was talking with Śrutakīrti that this church, nobody was coming. Therefore they were obliged to sell it off, and we purchased. So the church is the same, building is the same, and you are all Americans. But you did not come before, so that it was to be sold. Now everywhere it is packed up. Why? Because Kṛṣṇa is there. This is practical. This is practical. There is no question of enviousness. It is practical. In Boston one Christian priest said frankly that "These boys, girls, they are our boys, our girls. Either coming from Christian group or Jew's group, they are, after all, Americans. So they did not care for anything about God. Now they are mad after God. What is this?" This is practical. There is no question of competition. It is practical. Because they are trying. They are trying. Our only business is, "Just become dear to Kṛṣṇa." That's all. Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means "You are trying to be dear to so many things." Somebody is trying to be dear to his father, to his mother, or to his family, children, or country, community, society, nation. Everyone is trying to be dear. "I will do such and such thing for you. Please give me vote. Please make me president." They are trying. And after all, the president also is not dear, neither people is not dear. The real fact becomes disclosed after a few days when the, what is called, face covering, aḥ, mask, is over. That's all.

So this kind of trying to become dear is no use. It is simply waste of time. So if you try to become dear to Kṛṣṇa, that is siddhi. That is perfection. You are trying to become dear to so many objectives. At last, to become dear to a dog, ferocious dog. He does not say anything to the master. That means the master has become dear to him. So we are trying to become dear to somebody. That is our desire, dormant desire. But that is being misplaced. We do not know where to become dear. That we do not know. That is Kṛṣṇa. If you become dear to Kṛṣṇa, that is the highest perfection. That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Siddhi, this siddhi, perfection. Out of millions and millions of persons, one is interested to become perfect. Because this world is imperfect. So everyone is imperfect, all of us. So neither they do know what is perfection.

But here is described, here is perfection. What is that perfection? Yaḥ śraddhayā etad bhagavat-priyāṇāṁ pāṇḍoḥ sutānām iti samprayāṇaṁ śṛṇoti. Śṛṇoti. You simply hear about the Pāṇḍavas. Practically the whole Vedic literature, the Purāṇas, the Mahābhārata especially, those were narrations... The Vedic knowledge... Vedic knowledge, directly, it is very difficult to understand. Just like in the Vedānta-sūtra. The sūtra, the code words are there. Athāto brahma jijñāsā: "Now it is the time for inquiring about the Absolute Truth." This is sūtra, code word. But that is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: in narration. This is brahma-jijñāsā. The whole Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is brahma-jijñāsā. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. Only this code is being... Therefore Bhāgavata begins, janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ sva-rāṭ [SB 1.1.1]. Because Vedānta-sūtra says, "The Absolute Truth is that supreme source of everything." So Bhāgavata begins from that word, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], explaining, explaining.

So Purāṇa means supplementary to the Vedas, to explain the knowledge. That is Purāṇa. Mahābhārata. Mahābhārata is also explanation of the Vedic knowledge, but through history. Because Vyāsadeva found it that directly to understand Vedic knowledge will be difficult for three classes of men. Trayī na śruti-gocarā. Strī-śūdra-dvija-bandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā [SB 1.4.25]. Trayī. Trayī means Vedas, dealing with the three guṇas. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedāḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā, traiguṇya-viṣayā vedāḥ. Trayī. There are three subject matters in the Vedas. The first subject matter is to know God and what is my relationship with God. This is the first subject matter. Then second subject matter is that what is the ultimate goal of life, and the third subject matter is how to attain it. To know God, my relationship with God, and what is my ultimate goal of life, and how to attain it-these three subject matters are Vedic knowledge. That is everywhere. Another subject matter is... Trayī, means Veda is dealing with this material world. There is spiritual knowledge in glance.

Therefore Vyāsadeva, after compiling all Vedic literatures, so many Purāṇas, so many Upaniṣads, Vedānta philosophy and four Vedas, but he was not satisfied. He was not satisfied. So when Nārada Muni, his spiritual master, came, he inquired that "Why you are not satisfied?" So Vyāsadeva said, "My dear sir, yes, as you say, I have done so many activities. I have written so many books. But still, I don't feel any satisfaction. So I do not know why it is. You can direct me. You are my spiritual master." So he said that "You have done, you have labored so hard in writing so many books, but you have not glorified the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Simply ordinary dealings with man to man, how to deal, dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa [SB 4.8.41, Cc. Ādi 1.90], how to make people religious, how to develop economic position, how to satisfy senses, how to go to heavenly planet to enjoy more-these things you have described. But you have not described about yena ātmā samprasīdati, by which your ātmā, your soul will be satisfied. That you have done nothing." You have read in the First Canto, jugupsita-dharma. "You are diverting the attention of the people to the dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa, never to the bhakti. Then in future, if people are advised, 'Come to the bhakti platform, not on the platform of this dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa, cātur-varṇyam-they will not take it. So whatever you have done, it is not very good. Better simply try to explain about Bhagavān." That is Bhāgavata. That is Bhāgavatam.

Bhāgavatam means... Bhāgavata. Bhāgavata means the Supreme Lord, and Bhāgavatam means about Him, or about His devotees. That is bhāgavata. Because a devotee is called bhāgavata. This is book bhāgavata, and a devotee is person bhāgavata. So according (to) our Caitanya Mahāprabhu's cult, the Bhāgavata should be studied from the person bhāgavata, not from the professional reciters. No. Therefore Svarūpa Gosvāmī... One... Because when Caitanya Mahāprabhu was present at Jagannātha Purī, many people used to come, present so many literatures, so many commentaries, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu will not hear them unless it is passed by His secretary Svarūpa Dāmodara. First of all Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī will see whether it is written properly, according to siddhānta. Then he will allow. That was the business. So one brāhmaṇa came. So there was many discrepancies in his writing. So Svarūpa Dāmodara chastised him that "You do not know how to write. Why you have attempted this?" So he said, bhāgavata paḍā giyā bhāgavata sthāne(?): "If you want to know about Bhāgavata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, then you study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from a person bhāgavatam, whose life is Bhāgavatam. From such person, if you read, if you understand Bhāgavata, then you will benefit." It is not a scholarship. Because you know, "ungwang,"(?) that is not the qualification. Bhāgavata should be studied from the person whose life is Bhāgavata. This is the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's personal secretary.

So here it is said, yaḥ śraddhayā. And what is that śraddhā?

tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

[SB 1.2.12]



Bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā. You can realize. God realization is possible by a person who is faithful. Tac chraddadhānāḥ. And what is that faith? That faith is explained in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta: śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya [Cc. Madhya 22.62]. One who has been firmly convinced... What is that conviction? Kṛṣṇa says,



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

[Bg. 18.66]



One who has got firm faith in declaration, that "If I become devotee of Kṛṣṇa, if I fully surrender to Kṛṣṇa, then all perfection is there," this is called faith. This is called faith. Not flickering faith: "Let me adopt this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and when there is opportunity, let me go to some rascal who has appeared as Bhagavān." That kind of faith will not help. That will not help. Śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya. That is śraddhā [Cc. Madhya 22.62], firm faith. It cannot be changed at any cost, at any circumstance. That is called firm faith. If that firm faith is not obtained, then we are still on the imperfection platform. But when there is firm faith, śraddhā, śraddhayā...



Now, if anyone accepts that Pāṇḍava... These Pāṇḍavas, five brothers, son of Mahārāja Paṇḍu, they are very, very dear to Kṛṣṇa. And they are as good, or sometimes better than Kṛṣṇa. Because Lord Śiva, authority... There are twelve authorities. Lord Śiva is one of the authorities. Svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ. Śambhu [SB 6.3.20]. Śambhu is authority. He says that tasmāt parataraṁ devi tadīyānāṁ samarcanam: "Better worship... Kṛṣṇa worship, Viṣṇu worship is good, but still better worship is to worship the kṛṣṇa-bhaktas." Because he is very dear to Kṛṣṇa. Kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya. Why spiritual master is very dear to Kṛṣṇa? Because his only anxiety is how Kṛṣṇa will be known all over the world. That's all. He has no ambition, pounds, shilling, pence. He only wants to know, only wants to see that everyone is devotee of Kṛṣṇa and they are happy.

Thank you very much. (end)



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 1.16: Lectures





731229SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.1

-

Los Angeles, December 29, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: O learned brāhmaṇas, Mahārāja Parīkṣit then began to rule over the world as a great devotee of the Lord under the instructions of the best of the twice-born brāhmaṇas. He ruled by those great qualities which were foretold by expert astrologers at the time of his birth." [SB 1.16.1]



Prabhupāda: So there are many important words in this verse. The first is dvija-varya-śikṣayā, "trained by the best of the brāhmaṇas." Dvija. Dvija means twice-born: first birth by the father and mother, and second birth by the spiritual master. That is Vedic civilization, dvija-varya. One must take twice birth. Once birth, father and mother, that is done by the cats and dogs. Any birth, either you take birth as a cat or dog or human being or anything, there requires father and mother. So that birth is not sufficient. Therefore a Vaiṣṇava kavi says, janame janame saba pitā-mātā pāya, kṛṣṇa guru nahe mile bhaja hari ei.(?) In any birth you will get father and mother. It is natural. Without father, mother, how can you get a body? So therefore it is said, janame janame, in any birth. Either human being, or cats, dog, snake, or tree or insect, you will get father and mother. But in every birth you cannot get Kṛṣṇa and guru. That is not possible.



So this birth you can get. This human form of birth you can get. That is the special significance. Father, mother, you can get anywhere. It doesn't matter. But you cannot get Kṛṣṇa and guru. That you can get in this birth. Therefore twice-born. You must get another birth, through the initiation of the spiritual master, dīkṣā. Dīkṣā means initiation. Di means divya jñānam, and kṣa means kṣapayati. From the day of initiation, you simply get spiritual knowledge, transcendental knowledge. That is the special significance of human form of body. Therefore in the Vedic civilization, the classification is made: first-class, second-class, third-class, four-class men.

There are three guṇas. The material world is conducted by three guṇas, means the quality of goodness, the quality of passion, the quality of ignorance, and mixed. So first, second, third, and the mixed is called fourth. That is called varṇāśrama. Cātur-varṇyam. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. According to quality and karma. So the first, second, and third-class division, they are all dvijas, twice-born. Brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and vaiśya. Dvija means saṁskāra, reformation, to mold the character. That is called saṁskāra. Just like you can train even a tiger, even an animal, to dance according to your desire. That is practical. So you cannot train a human being to become a brāhmaṇa? With such intelligence? But there is no such training. They are simply training all cats and dogs. But the Vedic civilization takes this opportunity of human being, to make him perfect in his life. What is that perfection? That perfection is to understand God and become His devotee. That is perfection, not that to become very stout and strong, as strong as the tiger, or as cunning as the jackal. Not that. That is not training.

So according to division, the training was there. The first-class training is brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa means they must be truthful first. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā. They must be able to control the senses, control the mind. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā. Must be tolerant, titikṣā; ārjava, very simple; jñānam, full knowledge; vijñānam, practical application in life. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā. Śuciḥ, cleanliness. Brahma-karma svabhāva-jam. So they should be trained. A class of men should be trained for these qualities. They are called brāhmaṇa. Similarly, another class, second class, they should be trained up as kṣatriya, very powerful, never goes away from the challenge of fighting. Yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam. Not that the fighting is going on, and the so-called president is sitting in his parlor and smoking cigarette. No. Yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam: "Oh, everyone is fighting there? I must go in the front." He will fight. Otherwise how people will be encouraged? The chief man is in the background, and poor men, they are fighting? No. Yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam. That is kṣatriya.

So similarly, vaiśya. Vaiśya, they should be trained in three things, productive-kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]-kṛṣi, agriculture; go-rakṣya, cow protection. Go-rakṣya. That is essential, agricultural and cow protection. And vāṇijyam. Vāṇijyam means trade. If there is excess milk product, if there is excess grain product, then you can sell to others. Nowadays the trade is that you take as much milk as you can, and then kill the animal and sell the flesh to other countries. That is going on. No. Go-rakṣya. Go-rakṣya. Cow protection is very, very essential in human society because it gives the milk, the miracle food. You can prepare hundreds and thousands of preparation, all not only delicious, but brain-maintaining. You can get good brain. Therefore go-rakṣya, cow protection is especially recommended, not that animal protection. If you want to eat meat, you can eat many other animals. There are. But don't eat the cows. This is Vedic civilization. Kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.44]. Paricaryātmakaṁ kāryaṁ śūdra-karma svabhāva-jam. And those who are neither brāhmaṇa... They have no brain to become brāhmaṇa or to become kṣatriya or vaiśya, they are called śūdras. And śūdra's business is to serve the other upper three classes, laborer, worker classes, and satisfied with some service.

So here it is said that tataḥ parīkṣid dvija-varya-śikṣayā: "He was educated and trained up by the best class of the brāhmaṇas," not by the śūdras. Śūdra's training, what he can become? He can become a rascal, that's all. The training was entrusted to the first-class brāhmaṇa, who is himself trained up to speak truth, satyaṁ śamo damaḥ, to remain clean, to become very simple in habit, to become master of knowledge, and practical application. Such person should be the trainer, should be the teacher. Not a third-class rascal becomes a teacher and professor. He has no idea how to speak truth. He is speaking all lies, theories, and getting Nobel Prize. Such a śūdra is honored at the present moment. You see? Who has no knowledge. So many so-called philosophers and scientists, simply speaking lies and untruth. They have no knowledge. As soon as you challenge them, they will say, "Yes, we are trying. In future we shall do it." But if you are trying, then where is your knowledge? Why you are taking the post of a teacher? You are a cheater. You have no full knowledge, and still, you are putting some theory to mislead the people.

For example... Just like they are putting on this theory that matter, from matter, life has come. "All right, matter, life has come from matter. Just prove it. Take matter, whatever materials you want, take, and produce life." "That we shall see in future." Then why you are talking this nonsense? Science means observation and experiment. There must be experiment also. But without experiment, they are putting on this theory and getting Nobel Prize. Although it is not a fact. We know. We. We are followers of Vedic principles. We know that matter or life, everything comes from life, not from matter. We know it certain. How do you know? Kṛṣṇa says. Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: "Everything comes from Me." And Kṛṣṇa is the supreme life. So we have no difficulty, because we know, mattaḥ sarvaṁ prava... Sarvam means matter and life both, everything. There are two things: matter and life. There is no third thing. So Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: [Bg. 10.8] "I am the original source of everything." "Everything" means matter and... There are two things: matter and life. That is not very difficult to understand. So sarvam...

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



Iti matvā. When one understands this, that Kṛṣṇa is the source of both matter and life... So the devotees are not rascals. They are in full knowledge. Iti matvā. "When they are confident that Kṛṣṇa is the source of everything," iti matvā bhajante mām, "oḥ, they become My devotee." Iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhāḥ. Budha means highly elevated in knowledge, budha. Just like Lord Buddha, elevated knowledge. So budhāḥ.



So how this knowledge can be gotten unless one is trained by dvija-varya-śikṣayā, first-class learned brāhmaṇas? One has to learn from him, not from the rascals, fools, cats and dogs, No. That is not learning. Dvija-varya-śikṣayā. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, his first qualification is... Not only Parīkṣit Mahārāja, but all the kings during the monarchy. Monarchy does not mean because he is the son of king, therefore he should be king. No. He should be fully trained up by the dvija-varya, by the best class of brāhmaṇas. That is monarchy. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja... Tataḥ... Tataḥ means "thereafter." After his fathers-means pañca-pāṇḍava, his father and uncles-retired and left kingdom, entrusting everything to the grandchild... Because their sons all died in the Battle of Kurukṣetra. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, only he was saved because he was a posthumous child. After the death of his father in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, he was in the womb of his mother. He took birth. And these grandfathers took care of him. This is Parīkṣit Mahārāja's life. He did not see his father from birth. So these grandfathers... So grandfathers, they retired and entrusted the whole kingdom, was entrusted to the grand-child, Mahārāja Parīkṣit. So he was trained up by the first-class brāhmaṇas. Tataḥ parīkṣid dvija-varya-śikṣayā mahīṁ mahā-bhāgavataḥ śaśāsa ha.

Mahīm. Mahīm means this earthly planet. Up to Mahārāja Parīkṣit, five thousand years ago, the whole world was being ruled over by one king, one emperor. There were no so many nations or no so many presidents or... No. Simply one king. Mahīm, this world. Mahīm means the earthly planet. This is the history. From Mahā-bhāgavata, er, Mahābhārata we understand that, that the whole world was under one flag, these Pāṇḍavas. Now United Nations means three thousand flags, three thousand nations. So that is not democracy, or that is not good ruling. The best ruling is monarchy, and monarch means he must be a perfectly trained-up person by the best brāhmaṇas. That is perfect government. Not that this democracy, some rascals and fools they are voting another rascal and fool, and by hook and crook he comes to the post. He does not like to give it up, and makes things very miserable. This kind of government... Now your Senate is proposing, "Let us pray to God how we can get good government." They are coming down to again. But why not train? Now you are going to pray to God, "Please give us good government." Why don't you elect a person mahā-bhāgavata?

Mahā-bhāgavata. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that "People, you become devotees, bhāgavata, and you select one mahā-bhāgavata to be your ruler. Then you will be happy. Not only bhāgavata. Not of your caliber, but still further." There are bhāgavata... There are three kinds of devotees. Three kinds of devotees means neophyte, middle class and mahā-bhāgavata. Mahā-bhāgavata. Mahā-bhāgavata means one who can see God in everything and everything in God. That is mahā-bhāgavata. That is explained in Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed ātmā: "He does not see anything except God, everything in God and God in everything." That is the qualification of mahā-bhāgavata. So just see how elevated Mahārāja Parīkṣit, that he was mahā-bhāgavata. In another place, he has written... I forget that word. That is also mahā-bhāgavata.

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was not an ordinary person. He was mahā-bhāgavata. Mahīṁ mahā-bhāgavataḥ śaśāsa, ruled over, a great devotee. It does not mean a great devotee is simply engaged in chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. No. A great devotee may be the chief of the executive function of the state. He can become. That is required. Not that only mahā-bhāgavata required in church or temples. No. Mahā-bhāgavata required also as the head of the chief executive function. That is also required. Otherwise how people will be happy? Every field, there must be mahā-bhāgavata. So my Guru Mahārāja used to say that when we shall see that the high-court judges are devotees of Kṛṣṇa, then our preaching will be somewhat forward. So that is the aim of Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that everyone, at least those who are ruling, those who are on the executive function, they must be all mahā-bhāgavata. Under them everything should be ruled. Then people will be happy. Because they will never do anything unjustly. Their only desire is... Mahā-bhāgavata is how to give relief to the suffering humanity. That is mahā-bhāgavata. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was mahā-bhāgavata, and therefore he was entrusted to rule over, not an ordinary man.

Yathā hi sūtyām abhijāta-kovidāḥ. Here is another important word. So yathā, as he was foretold, sūtyā. Sūtyā means in the maternity condition, maternity home or maternity room, sūtyā. Still, the system is current in India that when a lady is going to give birth to a child, she is offered a separate room where the child will take birth and all taken care. Nowadays they are sending in the hospital. That is another thing. But the system is when the delivery is imminent, then one room is selected. That is called sūtikā-ghara, or sūtikā room. That is referred here, sūtyā, means, sūtyā, as soon as the child is born, sūtyā, in that maternity room, immediately, abhijāta-kovidāḥ... Abhijāta-kovidāḥ means... Kovidāḥ means expert learned scholars, and abhijāta, they will immediately make horoscope and tell about this newly born child, what is going to happen in his life in future. That is called astrologer. It is called jāta-karma, reformation.

There are ten kinds of reformation. The first reformation is garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra means when the father is going to give birth to a child, it is not a secret affair. It is open affair. "Now this is the good, auspicious day, and today the father will implant the seed of the son in the womb of the mother." There is great function. That is called garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. And there are witnesses, all the brāhmaṇas, that "This day, such and such time, this king or this person has begotten this child." Just like when the child is born, it is recorded in the government book, similarly, when one is going to give birth to a child, that is also recorded. That is called garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. Not that like cats and dogs in secrecy we have sexual intercourse, and if there is pregnancy, give some contraceptive pill or kill the child. Oh, how rascal and animals have been introduced in the human society. Just see. Here the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra, a child has to be born. How it will be nice? When the mentality of the father and mother is completely Kṛṣṇa consciousness, so that when there will be sexual intercourse, the mentality of the child will be Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra.

So as before giving birth there is a reformation ceremony, similarly, immediately child is born, there is another reformation ceremony that is called jāta-karma. Jāta-karma means immediately learned scholar, brāhmaṇas, astrologer, will come and they will make the horoscope of the child. So here it is said, yathā hi sūtyām abhijāta-kovidāḥ samādiśan. As they foretold, that "This child will be hero like this, he will be like this, like this..." That are described in the Bhāgavatam. And it was also said at that time that "This child will die, being cursed by a brāhmaṇa." That was also foretold. It is still, such kind of astrology there in India. They will speak what you were in your last birth and what you are now, and what you will be in your next birth. That is astrology. So still there are Bhṛgu-saṁhitā. Anyone go, and you simply give them your exact time of birth, then they will make immediately horoscope, immediately. Still there is. As I told you that in my horoscope it was declared that after seventieth year, I shall go to foreign countries and I shall establish many temples. In my horoscope that is. Now I see it is coming practically. You see? So that is horoscope.

So these abhijāta-kovidāḥ, expert astrologers, whatever they predicted, everything was performed by Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Samādiśan vipra mahad-guṇas tathā. So all the high qualities... Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in his childhood play, he was worshiping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deity. Childhood play. Just like our children, some of them they are worshiping Jagannātha. This is required. From the very childhood. Our Prahlāda Mahārāja therefore says, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha, durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma [SB 7.6.1]. Just like I began that this human form of life is the only opportunity to become free from this material entanglement, to become perfect. So it is the duty of the father, it is the duty of the guru, it is the duty of the king, government, to give all opportunities, that "No more birth. This is the last birth. Now you go back to home, back to Godhead." That is government. No more again coming as cats and dogs and trees. And if we do not do that, then again we enter into the cycle of birth and death. This is the risk.

So this civilization is so risky that people are not being given the real right that human being has the right to understand God and to make his relationship reestablished and go to home, back to Godhead, back to home. That is the real facility to the people. The program should be made like that, that the human life may not be missed. That is government. Therefore a mahā-bhāgavata, a great devotee, advanced devotee, should be on the head of the executive function. That is the idea of Vedic civilization.

Thank you very much. (end)



731230SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.2

-

Los Angeles, December 30, 1973





Prabhupāda: Utpādayat, "married"? This is wrong.



Pradyumna: Should be "produced."



Prabhupāda: "Begotten." It should be "begotten." Who has corrected?



Pradyumna: Translation: "King Parīkṣit married the daughter of King Uttara and begot four sons, headed by Mahārāja Janamejaya." [SB 1.16.2]



Prabhupāda: Sa uttarasya tanayām. Mahārāja Parīkṣit, his mother's name was Uttarā, Uttarā. Means King Virāṭa, he had two issues, one son, one daughter. The son's name was Uttara and the daughter's name was Uttarā. This Uttarā was taught dancing by Arjuna. When Arjuna was staying at Mahārāja Virāṭa's house as an ordinary dancing master, they did not know that he is Arjuna. Because the promise was for one year, they should remain incognito. If they are detected, then again for twelve years they will be banished.



So Arjuna, Bhīma and others, they took different types of services in the house, palace, of Mahārāja Virāṭa. So he was appointed as a dancing master, teacher, to the daughter Uttarā. Just see. Arjuna was a great warrior, and he was expert dancing master also. So when it was disclosed that "These servants, they are the Pāṇḍavas. They remained here as ordinary servant," so Mahārāja Virāṭa was very much pleased, that "Such exalted persons are living in my house incognito." So he offered Uttarā to Arjuna, that "You marry my daughter. You have taught her dancing." So Arjuna said, "How can I marry her? I am teacher, and she is my disciple. She is my daughter. How can I marry her?" Then Arjuna said that "If you want to keep this daughter in our family, I have got a grown-up son, sixteen years old." That means Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadrā, this Subhadrā, Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, Subhadrā. So Subhadrā was married to Arjuna, and the son was Abhimanyu. So Uttarā was married to Abhimanyu. And the son was Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Abhimanyu was just married and the war was declared.

So Abhimanyu had to go to fight, so he went in fight in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra on behalf of his father. But he never returned. He died there. So Uttarā was pregnant and Mahārāja Parīkṣit was within the womb. But the opposite party, they killed. Last killing was five sons of Pāṇḍavas. They were sleeping, and Aśvatthāmā, just to satisfy Duryodhana, he killed these sons while they were sleeping, most abominable, and brought the heads to Duryodhana: "Now I have finished the Kuru..." So Duryodhana could understand that "They are not the heads of the Pāṇḍavas, but their sons." So out of disappointment that "Our whole family is now finished," he died.

So only Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in the womb of his mother, and that was also attempted to be killed by brahmāstra. Brahmāstra is almost similar to the atomic weapon. And the brahmāstra, the specific function of brahmāstra is that when this weapon is released, it will kill the particular men wherever he is; it will go there and kill him. It doesn't matter whether he is in front or in somewhere. The weapon is so powerful that simply by mantra, you release it, and it will kill your enemy, wherever he is. So one brahmāstra was released to kill this child, baby within the womb, embryo, to kill. And at that time Uttarā felt that her pregnancy is going to be, what is called, discharged. So immediately she approached Kṛṣṇa, that "I am feeling like that, miscarrying. Please save me." So at that time Kṛṣṇa entered the womb of Uttarā and saved the child from the brahmāstra. So Mahārāja Parīkṣit is such a devotee that he was protected from the embryo by Kṛṣṇa. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī addressed, mahā-paurika(?): "You are great personality." So this Mahārāja Parīkṣit was again cursed by a brāhmaṇa. He could retaliate that, but he did not do so, just to offer respect to the brāhmaṇas. He considered himself offender. That is last stage. And because he was cursed by a brāhmaṇa at the last stage of his life, seven days, he heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Therefore we have got this book. This is the story.

So here Mahārāja Parīkṣit, son of Uttarā, but he married his maternal uncle's daughter. That was permissible. Still it is permissible. This kind of marriage is considered very aristocratic, to marry the daughter of maternal uncle. So Arjuna also married the daughter of maternal uncle. Kuntī is the sister of Vasudeva, Kṛṣṇa's father, and Subhadrā is the daughter of Vasudeva. So he also married. Except in Southern India, this process is now no longer existing. In Bengal and other provinces of India, they do not marry the first cousin. So that is the marriage system. But in southern India, still, to marry the daughter of maternal uncle is considered as very aristocratic. So this system was current five thousand years ago also. So Mahārāja Parīkṣit married his uncle's daughter, uttarasya tanayām. Tanayā means daughter. Uttarasya tanayām upayema. And her name was Irāvatī, Irāvatī.

So in that, in the womb of Irāvatī, Mahārāja Parīkṣit begotten four sons. The first one's name is Janamejaya. Ādi. Ādi means "beginning with." He begotten four sons, beginning with Janamejaya. The history of Janamejaya is also very nice. (aside:) You can read the Janamejaya paragraph.

Pradyumna: "Janamejaya: One of the rājarṣi kings and the famous son of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. His mother's name is Irāvatī, or according to some, Mādravatī. Mahārāja Janamejaya begot two sons of the names Jñātānīka and Śaṅkukarṇa. He celebrated several sacrifices in the Kurukṣetra pilgrimage. And he had three younger brothers, named Śrutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhīmasena II. He invaded Takṣalā, or Ajanta, and he decided to avenge the unlawful curse upon his great father, Mahārāja Parīkṣit."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was cursed by a brāhmaṇa boy, not even twelve years old. When he heard that his father was insulted... One muni, he was in meditation, and Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in the forest, hunting. So he was very much thirsty. So in those days in the forest there were many hermitage. Saintly persons, sages used to live. So he entered one of them and asked for water. But the muni was great meditation. He could not hear him, receive the king. So he felt insulted, that "I asked water. This man is silent." So there was a dead snake; so out of anger he took the dead snakes and round, round wrapped him and went away.



So this news was spread, and his son was playing, and as soon as he heard that "My father has been insulted in this way," he became very angry and cursed him immediately, that "This snake or a snake would bite this king and he will die out of snake bite." So... And then again he came to his father. He was crying. The father... At that time the meditation of the father was broken. "Why, my son, you are crying?" "You have been insulted by Mahārāja Parīkṣit. I have cursed him like this." "Oh," he became aston... "Oh, what you have done, wrong thing? You have cursed Mahārāja Parīkṣit? Oh. The greatest blame will be on the brāhmaṇa society. The Kali-yuga will begin, begins deterioration of the brāhmaṇa community. You are the first." So one thing is that even a child born of a brāhmaṇa was so powerful that because he cursed Mahārāja Parīkṣit to die out of snake bite, it could not be withdrawn. He died. Just see how much brahminical power was that time. Even a child. What to speak of grown-up.

So in those days, as in the first verse we learn, dvija-varya-śikṣayā. The... Actually, the brāhmaṇas, they were controlling the state, but not directly, not sitting on the throne, but giving the kings good advice according to śāstra, that "You rule over like this. This is the process." And the kings would abide by... Although the monarchy was there, but they were not irresponsible. First of all, the king was trained and educated perfectly. Therefore it is called dvija-varya-śikṣayā. Yesterday I explained, dvija, the twice-born brāhmaṇa. And again it is added with another word, varya. Varya means the first class, not third class. First-class man, dvija-varya-śikṣayā, they used to teach. They used to advise. And if the king was worthless, sometimes they would kill the king. And next son, his son would take possession.

That was done in the case of Mahārāja Veṇa. Mahārāja Veṇa, he was upstart. He was born of a low-class mother, so he become so upstart that in his boyhood he was playing with friends, and if there was some quarrel, he would kill such friend. So his father became so disgusted, tried to reform him in so many ways, but he could not be reformed. The father, Mahārāja Aṅga, he left the kingdom all of a sudden, being disgusted. Then the brāhmaṇas asked the king that "You are not ruling very nicely. You have stopped all religious functions. This is not good for the people, neither for you." They first of all tried to pacify him by nice instruction. But the king said, "You brāhmaṇas, you do not know me very well. I am God" and this and that. Then he was killed by the brāhmaṇas. You know that Jāmadagnya, Paraśurāma, when he saw that the kings were not responsible, he killed the whole kṣatriya family for twenty-one times. So that was the government. If the brāhmaṇas would see that the kṣatriyas, the kings were not ruling properly according to the Vedic principle, sometimes they would kill the king.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit was also killed, but not for his fault. There was, of course, little fault, that he took a... That is Kṛṣṇa's arrangement. He was to go, leave this world, so that Bhāgavata may be spoken, and people would derive benefit out of it. Otherwise Mahārāja Parīkṣit could retaliate. He was so powerful devotee. But he did not. So go on reading.

Pradyumna: "He performed a great sacrifice called sarpa-yajña..."



Prabhupāda: This sarpa-yajña... Because his father, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, died of a snakebite, so he performed a yajña, that "All the snakes within this universe must die now." That was his determination. So he was performing such yajña that all the snakes, they were coming and falling on the fire. On the fire. So there was such powerful mantras that one could do that. These things are now forgotten. Nobody knows. Nobody can believe. But it was possible by the brāhmaṇas, by chanting the Vedic mantra, they could do anything they like. That was the yajña performance. Go on.



Pradyumna: "...to kill the race of serpents including the takṣaka, which had bitten his father to death. On request from many influential demigods and sages, he had to change his decision to kill the race of snakes."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Although he was determined to kill, so he was requested by many demigods, saintly persons, "Just for one snake's fault... That was also destination, destined. You cannot kill all the species of snake." Then it was stopped. Then?



Pradyumna: "But despite stopping the sacrifice, he satisfied everyone concerned in the sacrifice by rewarding them properly, and stopping further procedure of the sacrifice. In the ceremony, Mahāmuni Vyāsadeva also was present, and he personally narrated the history of the Battle of Kurukṣetra before the king. Later on, by the order of Vyāsadeva, his disciple Vaiśampāyana narrated before the king the subject matter of Mahābhārata. He was much affected by his great father's untimely death and was very anxious to see him again, and he expressed his desire before the great sage Vyāsadeva. And Vyāsadeva also fulfilled his desire. His father was present before him and he worshiped both his father and Vyāsadeva with great respect and pomp. Being fully satisfied, he made charities most munificently to the brāhmaṇas present in the sacrifice."



Prabhupāda: You can read another verse.



Pradyumna: (leads chanting)



ājahārāśva-medhāṁs trīn

gaṅgāyāṁ bhūri-dakṣiṇān

śāradvataṁ guruṁ kṛtvā

devā yatrākṣi-gocarāḥ



Prabhupāda: That's all right. Now chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)





731231SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.3

-

Los Angeles, December 31, 1973



Pradyumna: Translation: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit, after having selected Kṛpācārya for guidance as his spiritual master, performed three horse sacrifices on the banks of the Ganges. These were executed with sufficient rewards for the attendants. And at these sacrifices, even the common man could see demigods." [SB 1.16.3]



Prabhupāda: Now, people say that "Why we do not see the demigods?" So the answer should be, "Where is your sacrifice, horse sacrifice?" The demigods, they are not so cheap. Just like the king or the president. Does he come anywhere, who is a cheap common man? No. Where the kings or the demigods or a great sage like Nārada Muni will come, that place also must be worth coming there.



So there were interplanetary system. Just like Arjuna went to the heavenly planet, similarly, in such sacrifices, if it was arranged by great kings like Mahārāja Parīkṣit and others, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, then the demigods, invited, they would come. Not only they would come, but all common men could see. Therefore it is said here, yatrākṣi-gocarāḥ, devā yatrākṣi-gocarāḥ. We are much proud of seeing everything, but we should wait for being qualified to see. Not that whimsically I want to see, "O God, please come before me. I want to see." God... God is there just suitable for your seeing power. God is very kind. Here He is present in the temple. And you go on seeing. Then you will realize that He is God.

So God or demigod, everyone can be akṣi-gocarāḥ, within the purview of your vision, provided you are qualified. This is the process. These rascals say, "Can you show me God?" But what power you have got to see? First of all gain that qualification. Then you will see. God is everywhere. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayān... Even He is within the atom. Therefore one who is not competent to see God, he is advised to see God in different way in the Bhagavad-gītā. Just like Kṛṣṇa says, raso 'ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śaśi-sūryayoḥ: [Bg. 7.8] "My dear Kaunteya, Arjuna, I am the taste of the water." So you try to see God there in the taste of water. At the present moment, we have got many senses. You want to see God with the eyes. So begin with your tongue. This is also another sense. Just like if there is nice foodstuff, if I say, "Let me see how it is," "Let me see" means... You are already seeing. What do you want? "No, I want to touch in the tongue." That is "Let me see." Not by the eyes. If there is good sweetmeat, halavā, then "Let me see" means "Let me taste." So first of all taste God. It is within your reach of the sensual perception, but try to practice. Then sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. Then you will realize. God will reveal to..., Himself. When you become submitted, devoted to God, by tasting the prasādam, you will see God personally. He will talk with you. That is possible.

So at the present moment, we want to see God, but we do not acknowledge that we are not qualified. How we can see? If I cannot see even an ordinary president... By my whims I want to see the president or the such and such big officer. You cannot see unless you are qualified. So how you can see God? That is not possible. You have to qualify yourself. Then you will see God. Akṣi-gocaraḥ. Akṣi-gocaraḥ means, just we are seeing-you are seeing me, I am seeing you-similarly, you will see the demigods or God, provided you are qualified.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit was so exalted king that by his invitation, the demigods would come and public could see. That was possible. That is stated here. He was so, I mean to say, exalted king, he could invite. And the kings also were invited. Just like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira went. That was interplanetary exchange. That is now not... You cannot go by the sputniks to the heavenly planet. The moon planet is also one of the heavenly planet. Or the other planets. They are all heavenly planets. Ūrdhvam. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. When you are competent, fit, for going there, then you can go there. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ, bhūtejyā yānti.. [Bg. 9.25]. You can go, but you must be qualified, pitṛ-vratāḥ, deva-vratāḥ. Similarly, you can go to Kṛṣṇa also if you are kṛṣṇa-vratāḥ. Mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām. What to speak of going to other planets, if one is qualified, if one is pure devotee, Kṛṣṇa says, "He also comes to Me." So this exchange of going and coming is not difficult, provided a person is qualified. Not a cat and dog can go. That is not possible.

So another important point is... Ājahārāśva-medhāṁs trīn, three times. The aśvamedha-yajña is so expensive that the king of heaven, Indra, he executed the aśvamedha-yajña seven times. So Mahārāja Pṛthu was also going to complete seven times. So there was some, I mean to say, competition. The Indra would not allow him to complete seven times. Otherwise he would become equal with him. So amongst the kings, not only in this planet, but in other planets also, the aśvamedha-yajña was performed by very, very powerful rich kings, not ordinary kings. It is very expensive job. Because it is stated, bhūri-dakṣiṇān, and vast amount of money required for distribution in charity. Then you can perform aśvamedha-yajña. Similarly, there is gomedha-yajña. Aśvamedha-yajña was to send the horse with flag, that "Such and such king is the emperor of the whole world." So if some king in some state, he does not agree that "He is emperor," he will capture the horse, "I don't agree, I don't accept." Then there will be fight, "You have to accept." In this way there will be sacrifice.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit was the emperor of the whole world, whole this planet. So he performed three times. Now, that means three times he challenged, "If there is any dispute, any objection of my becoming emperor?" This is aśvamedha-yajña. "If you have got any objection, then I will make you obliged to accept me. Otherwise, if you accept, that's all right. You remain in your state. Give me tax." This is the... So this is very expensive job. Formerly one king performed this aśvamedha-yajña, and bhūri-dakṣiṇān. He gave in dakṣiṇa... Dakṣiṇa means in charity. Just like you give dakṣiṇa to your spiritual master for initiation, similarly, here also, it is said, śāradvataṁ guruṁ kṛtvā. Everything must be executed under the guidance of a guru, not whimsically, "Oh, I have got my own idea, I have got my own God. I can do whatever I like." This is simply waste of time. Yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ [Bg. 16.23]. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that "Anyone who does not follow the instruction of the śāstra, how things should be done," śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ, "does things whimsically," na sukhaṁ sāvāpnoti, "he will never get happiness." Yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ, na sukhaṁ sa...

So everything should be done according to śāstra. And the śāstra should be guided by ācārya, guru. Ācārya means one who knows what is there in the śāstra. He practices in his life and teaches the disciple. He is called ācārya. Ācārya is not a whimsical thing. He must know. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja appointed ācārya, śāradvatam. He is the brother of Droṇācārya. Droṇācārya was also ācārya, but he was military ācārya. And here he was ācārya for Vedic rituals, ācārya. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum eva [MU 1.2.12]. Guruṁ kṛtvā. In order to do things very rightly, you must appoint... Just like if you are going to the court to file some suit, do it very nicely. You have to appoint a very good lawyer. Similarly, these Vedic principles, the Vedic rituals, they should be performed under the direction of ācārya, guru, not whimsically. So therefore this kind of sacrifices are forbidden in this age, in this age.

That was discussed between Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Chand Kazi, the Muhammadan magistrate of Nadia. He, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, challenged the Kazi, Muhammadan, that "What is your religion, that you eat your father and mother?" This was the challenge by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. What is that, father, mother? Now, mother, your cow is your mother. You drink milk of cow. And the bull is your father. Because without bull, without the cow and bull being united, there is no milk. So how is that you are eating your father and mother? It is a great challenge. Actually those who are meat-eater, beef-eater, they are killing their father and mother and become implicated in sinful life. Therefore we say no meat-eating. No meat-eating. If you become implicated in sinful life, how you can be happy? There must be nature's punishment. Just like if you infect some disease, nature must punish you. You must suffer from the disease. You cannot get out. It is not possible. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya [Bg. 13.22]. Why there are so many varieties of life? Why not one class of men, all President Nixon? (laughter) Why not? Why there is bum in the Bowery Street? In your country I am saying. Why there are arrangement of first-class, second-class, third-class, fourth-class, fifth-class men? Or animals, or trees? Everything is there. Why?

That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya. As you have infected yourself with a particular type of modes of nature, you will get a body. That's all. If you have infected to get the body of a dog, you must be infected. People who are keeping dog, that means he is being infected by the germs of dog. Next life he will become a dog. He is infected. What he will think at the time of death? If he has got a beloved dog, he will think of... Somebody... In your country, they bequeath great, I mean to say, wealth, for the dog. That means at the time of death, at the time of death he is thinking of his beloved dog. So he must be a dog. So all his wealth goes to the dog and he goes to become a dog. This science is unknown to the rascals. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram [Bg. 8.6]. At the time of death, your position of the mind will create the next body. This is the science. So if you create your the position of the mind, Kṛṣṇa conscious, then you will get a body like Kṛṣṇa, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that "Why you shall love dog and cats? Love God, Kṛṣṇa, and you get the next body like Kṛṣṇa." Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha. Anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, how to think of Kṛṣṇa at the time of death. Then your life is successful.

So that has to be practiced. Sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ [Bg. 8.6]. If you always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, that means you remember Kṛṣṇa always. So there is chance, ninety-nine percent chance, that at the time of your death you will think of Kṛṣṇa and your life is successful. Very simple method. Make always your mind absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. Naturally at the time of death you will think of Kṛṣṇa. Mad-yājino 'pi yānti mām [Bg. 9.25]. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām iti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Such person, Kṛṣṇa conscious person, who knows Kṛṣṇa... If you think of Kṛṣṇa, naturally you know of Kṛṣṇa. You know of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is within your heart. So if you think of Kṛṣṇa, then gradually you become Kṛṣṇized. Just like you put the iron rod in the fire. Gradually it becomes fire. Warm, warmer, warmer, then red-hot. When it is red-hot it is fire. Whenever you touch, it will burn immediately. Similarly, if you think of Kṛṣṇa, the same example... Touching fire. So Kṛṣṇa will purify you. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. Just like you are being purified by hearing about Kṛṣṇa daily. Otherwise why you are coming here? We have no money to bribe you to come here. You are feeling, becoming Kṛṣṇized; therefore you are coming.

So this is the process, simple process. You simply be engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then you become Kṛṣṇized, purified. And as soon as you become purified, you understand Kṛṣṇa. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam [Brs. 1.2.234]. "You understand Kṛṣṇa" means Kṛṣṇa becomes revealed. Just like something is covered, you try to move the covering. You see the goal. Similarly, by your constant endeavor to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, Kṛṣṇa will reveal to you, "Yes. You are so anxious to see Me? Here I am. Here I am. Yes." You will see Kṛṣṇa. So how this is possible? Premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti [Bs. 5.38]. By thinking of Kṛṣṇa, naturally you become attached. Just like materialists. They are always thinking of woman and money. So they become attached to woman and money, the materialists. So similarly, if you think of Kṛṣṇa, you become attached to Kṛṣṇa. It is not a difficult job.

So the aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam [Cc. Ādi 17.164]. This was explained by..., why aśvamedha-yajña is forbidden in this age. In this age no sacrifice is possible. There is no money. There is no guru. Guru means who can conduct the sacrifices. First of all there is no means. Even one can conduct, there is no means. It requires huge amount of money. Here it is said that bhūri-dakṣiṇān. Bhūri means an unlimited amount. Bhūri means very great. So there is no money. Neither there is expert brāhmaṇa also who can conduct such sacrifices, because they must chant the Vedic mantra so perfectly that even a horse or a cow is put into the fire, he will come out with a new life. That is the test. This Chand Kazi, Muslim magistrate, he also challenged Caitanya Mahāprabhu. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, "What is your this religion? You are eating your father and mother?" Directly. Not that He was talking with a magistrate, He should be a little respectful. No. In spiritual matter, everything spoken frankly, no compromise. Just like we say, "You are not a Kṛṣṇa conscious person. Then you are a rascal. That's all." You may be the president. That doesn't matter. But because you are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, you are rascal. There is no compromise, "Oh, here is a big man. How he is speaking." We see everywhere. So many scientists come. I say, "You are rascal. You are demon." (laughter) I say it. And they tolerate. I prove that he is a rascal. I prove that he is a rascal, he is a demon. Then he tolerates, "Yes." We have got sufficient strength to prove, any materialistic man, to prove that he is a rascal. That is possible. Vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate: "If one is practically a devotee of Lord, he doesn't care even personalities like Vidhi." Vidhi means Lord Brahmā. Vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate. Kīṭāyate means such great personalities are taken by perfect devotee as ordinary insect. As ordinary insect has no value, similarly, anyone, however great he may be in this material world, if he is not God conscious, he is no better than the insect. Because it has no value. Because he does not know that he is going to become a dog next life. He loved a dog very much, and he bequeathed his all property to the dog, but he is going to become himself a dog. Therefore he's a rascal. What is his intelligence? He got some money. There are many instances in (your) country. They bequeath the whole wealth to the dog. Is it not?

Devotees: Yes.



Prabhupāda: So how much rascal he is, that? And if you go that "Give us some money for advancing Kṛṣṇa consciousness," "No, no, we are not interested in religion. I am interested in dog." So how much rascal he is, that. Just imagine.



So everyone is a rascal. Everyone is rascal. How we so boldly say that everyone is? Because Kṛṣṇa says. We are Kṛṣṇa-ite. We have to follow. Just like a small child follows the talkings of his father and mother, so similarly, we learn from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says,

na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

[Bg. 7.15]



Kṛṣṇa says. So we have learned from Kṛṣṇa. So we test. What is the test? Na māṁ prapadyante. He does not surrender to Kṛṣṇa. So such person, what he is? Now, duṣkṛtina, sinful. Meritorious sinful, that when merit is applied for sinful activities, you can do it very nicely than the ordinary man. A scientist discovers some method of stealing, how to break the treasury of the bank. So that does not mean... Because he is doing scientifically, stealing, that does not mean he is not a thief. He is a thief. How you can say, "Oh, he has done it very scientifically"? (laughing) The law will say, "You are rascal. You are thief. You must be punished." So these so-called educated scientists, philosophers, what they are doing? They are simply doing mischief. Therefore they are duṣkṛtina. Duṣkṛtina. Mūḍha. Mūḍha means rascal. Ass. Because nobody knows what is the aim of life. They're exactly like the ass. He does not know what is his interest. Unnecessarily he is carrying three tons of cloth of the washerman. Therefore he is called ass. His gain is a little morsel of grass. He can get grass anywhere. Still, he is thinking, "I am obliged to this washerman. Because he is supplying me grass, therefore I must have three tons of cloth on my back." This is ass. This is ass. He has no interest. Not a single cloth belongs to him, and he is carrying, oh, three tons of cloth. Therefore the ass. Ass means one who does not do know his interest, and he works unnecessarily and wastes his time.



So everyone in this material world, he does not know what is the aim of life. Unnecessarily he is making plan, this plan, that plan, this plan, that plan. And all plan is being frustrated by the laws of nature. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Every plan will fail. And those who are plan-making persons, they are all rascals. They do not know that what kind of plan should be made. The plan should be made that everyone should be God conscious. Then every plan will be successful. Otherwise all, everything will fail.

So these sacrifices are forbidden in this age, Kali-yuga, because there is no expert brāhmaṇa who can conduct the sacrifices, neither people have got any means. Now, so far bhūri-dakṣiṇān, so there was one king. He performed this sacrifice, and by the grace of Lord Śiva, he got the information of a golden mountain. So golden mountain, he collected enough gold from that mountain, and in the sacrifice he made everything made of gold, everything. So he distributed utensils. That is the system, that to the brāhmaṇa who attends the sacrifice, they are given money, utensils, cloth, bedding. Because brāhmaṇas, they do not care for material possessions. They are simply engaged in Brahman consciousness, God consciousness. Therefore it is the duty of the kṣatriyas and the vaiśyas to give them in charity so many things, so that they may not feel any want of material necessities. They do not beg. So this king, he arranged for distributing to the brāhmaṇas so many golden utensils that when they were given to the brāhmaṇa, each and every brāhmaṇa, some of them thought, "What is the use of such load?" This is brāhmaṇa. So after coming out from the sacrificial arena, they threw away. "Throw! Who will carry such a load?" Just see. This is brāhmaṇa. A big load of gold they neglected. They threw it away. "I don't want it. This king has given. All right, take. But I will throw away." (laughing) This is brāhmaṇa, yes. He doesn't care for all these things. Brāhmaṇa's another par..., is yajana yājana dāna pratigraha. He accept charity, huge quantity, and next moment he spends or throw it away. That's all. Again poor man. That is brāhmaṇa. Again collect money. Spend it for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is brāhmaṇa. That is brāhmaṇa. So bhūri-dakṣiṇān. Those... In very long, long years ago this was done.

So when Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was in need of money for performing this aśvamedha sacrifice, so he asked his brothers, assistants, "Now we have spent all our money in this Battle of Kurukṣetra. You know the expenditure of battle. So I require money. So where is the money?" So when Kṛṣṇa saw that Arjuna and Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is is very much perplexed to secure money, so he asked his friend Arjuna, "You can go there, near Himalaya. There is huge stock of gold utensils, and formerly they threw it away. You can go and collect. Bring it." So immediately he went, and he collected all the thrown utensils of gold, and enough money was collected. Therefore Arjuna's another name is Dhanañjaya. Dhanañjaya means "who has conquered, securing wealth." Dhana means wealth. Dhanañjaya.

So this is sacrifice. This is sacrifice. But it is not possible. Aśvamedhaṁ gavālambham [Cc. Ādi 17.164]. This is forbidden. Here, at the present moment, the yajña is saṅkīrtana. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ. Here at the present moment this yajña is recommended. This is recommended in the śāstra, not manufactured.

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



This is the process of yajña in this age. What is that? Now, kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣā akṛṣṇam. The God's incarnation, that is incarnation, not a manufactured incarnation. There must be reference to the śāstra. So what is the incarnation? Pracchanna-avatāra. In this Kali-yuga the incarnation is Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It is stated in the śāstra, kṛṣṇa-varṇam, kṛṣṇa



varṇayati: "He is simply chanting 'Kṛṣṇa,' although He is Kṛṣṇa Himself." Kṛṣṇam-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam. Therefore He has hidden Himself. His bodily color is more Kṛṣṇa, but golden. That is also stated. Kṛṣṇa has got four colors. Śuklo raktas tathā pīta idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ. When Gargamuni made the horoscope of Kṛṣṇa, that "This child has three other colors, śuklo raktas tathā pītaḥ. He had His color. Red color and white color and now..., and yellow color. Now He has assumed black color." Śuklo raktas tathā pīta idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ. So therefore His name was Kṛṣṇa. So Kṛṣṇa has another color. Pīta. Pīta-varṇa-gauraḥ. That is Lord Caitanya. Therefore tviṣā akṛṣṇa: "Bodily complexion, not kṛṣṇa." Such Kṛṣṇa, chanting Kṛṣṇa... Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam [SB 11.5.32]. Followed by many devotees, Caitanya Mahāprabhu. At least followed by Nityānanda Prabhu, Advaita Prabhu, Gadādhara Prabhu, like that. So this is the description of the incarnation of God in Kali-yuga. Pracchanna-avatāra. There is another avatāra, Kalki.

So kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam. To such God the method is to sacrifice. The sacrificing method is yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ. Su-medhasaḥ. Medhā means brain substance. Those who have got good brain substance, such persons worship this Lord by the yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtanaiḥ. So that we are doing here. Here is kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam [SB 11.5.32], Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu. Therefore our first obeisance is to Him, then Kṛṣṇa. This is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



740101SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.4

-

Los Angeles, January 1, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "Once when Mahārāja Parīkṣit was on his way to conquer the world, he saw the master of Kali-yuga, who was lower than a śūdra, disguised as a king and hurting a cow and a bull by his leg. The King at once caught hold of him to deal sufficient punishment." [SB 1.16.4]



Prabhupāda: So it was the duty of the king to go on tour and see persons who are actually not abiding by the laws of Vedic principles. This is the duty of the king. Just like in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ: [Bg. 4.13] "In the human society I have divided four classes of men." Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭam [Bg. 4.13]. Kṛṣṇa says, "I have done it."



So by nature, there are four classes of men. Anywhere you go you'll find four classes of men. First-class, intelligent men. In whichever you take, you'll find not all of them of the same category. First class, second class, third class and fourth class. First class means the most intelligent class, scientists, philosophers, like that; mathematicians, great religionists. They're first-class men. The second class, administrator, to see that the government is going nicely, people are not unhappy, people are not suffering from thieves and rogues. This is the first business. Good government means that people will think that they're secure, their property and person is secure. There will be no harm. Not very many years ago, say about hundred years ago, in India the native states, the rule was that if something is lying on the streets, valuable or invaluable, so nobody should touch it. The person who has lost or who has left that thing there, he would come and pick it up. You cannot touch. That was the law. And if one was caught, a thief, his hands will be cut off. In Kashmir state this was the rule. As soon as a thief is arrested and if he's proved that he has stolen, the only punishment is cut his throat, aḥ, cut his hands. Bas. Exemplary punishment so that nobody will dare to steal. So this is second class, administrators. And the third class are to produce money-businessmen, mercantile. Money is also required. So without money nothing can be done, so that is not... But that is the occupation of..., the third class take. And the fourth class, śūdra. They cannot take any post as intelligent class or administrator class or money-producing class. They are simply servant, help others, śūdra. The śūdra was not meant for taking the political part.

Therefore it is said here nṛpa-liṅga-dharaṁ śūdram. Nṛpa-liṅga-dharam. Liṅga means, real meaning is gender. Just the masculine gender, feminine gender. And the other meaning is sign. Just like there are signs, certain signs, we can understand here is a male, here is a female. By the signs. So liṅgam means "signs," "symptom." So nṛpa-liṅga-dharam. Śūdra, actually he was a śūdra, but he dressed like a king. Just like if a woman dresses like a man, that is artificial. Or a man dresses like woman, that is also artificial. So everyone has his original dress and position. There, because a śūdra took the dress of a king, therefore it is called nṛpa-liṅga-dharam. Artificially, he was dressed like a king. That is the position of Kali-yuga. Now the government men, they are elected by votes. People do not consider whether he's a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya or vaiśya or śūdra. As he likes... People are śūdras. Kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. In the Kali-yuga everyone is a śūdra. Therefore naturally he will elect one śūdra. The śūdra is not fit for government management. As such we find so many difficulties in the government because the head or the head man, they are all śūdras. They have dressed like administrator, but they are śūdras. This is the symptom of Kali-yuga. There is no brāhmaṇa, there is no kṣatriya, there is no vaiśyas. Maybe a few vaiśyas, and all śūdras. A brāhmaṇa means the good quality, first-class quality. That is very, very rare to be found.

So it was the business of the king to see that things are going on. First of all, there is classification: intelligent class or brāhmaṇa; and the administrator class or kṣatriya; and the mercantile class, money-producing class. So everyone is engaged, and he's doing his own business. But this division must be there. Without division the society will be in chaos. The example is given... I have several times mentioned that, that just like in this body, there is division: the head division, the arms division, the belly division, and the leg division. They are all required. You cannot say that simply legs will do. What about the head and arms? "I don't require." That is not... That is dead body. That is dead body. Any part of the body, you cannot miss. They must be all in order; then your body is fit. Similarly, in the human society, the social body, there must be these classes: the head class, the arm class, the belly class and the leg class. Very scientific. You cannot simply... If you have got intelligent class of men, but nobody is helping him, then what, what will be the use of intelligence? The intelligent class must be there, but to help him the less intelligent class men also required. Just like if there are only intelligent class, that will be chaos. Nobody will care for anyone. Sometimes we'll find in our society, all intelligent class, and they fight each other. That's all. Everyone is thinking, "I am intelligent. I am boss. I must order you." And the other is thinking, "Why you shall be boss? I am also boss." So (laughs) fighting will go on. So this is going on. At the present moment there is no intelligent class of men. But kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. Therefore things are all in chaos. Everywhere you go, any part of the world, nobody is happy, either in family or community and society, nationwide, you take. Everyone is distrust, unhappiness, godlessness. Because the intelligent class of men is finished.

So the king, his duty was that if you are professing yourself as a brāhmaṇa, then it is the king's duty to see that you are acting as a brāhmaṇa. Brāhmaṇa is not by birth but guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. Guṇa means quality. And karma, and work also. Simply "I have got now sacred thread, I have become brāhmaṇa, doubly initiated; now my business is finished. I can work, I can do whatever we like, like less than śūdra, caṇḍāla." No, sir. If you are initiated as a brāhmaṇa, you must act as a brāhmaṇa. Truthfulness-satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma [Bg. 18.42]-everything is there. A brāhmaṇa must be truthful. That is the first business of a brāhmaṇa-truthful. He'll speak truth even before an enemy. Nobody speaks truth before an enemy because he wants to hide something. But brāhmaṇa's business is to become truthful even before an enemy. That is stated.

There are many instances. Just like Satyakāma-jābāla, a boy, Satyakāma, he went to Gautama Muni: "Sir, I want to become your disciple." "Oh, very good. Are you brāhmaṇa or brāhmaṇa's son?" Formerly, in Vedic ways, nobody could be accepted as a disciple unless he's born in high class family, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya-especially brāhmaṇa. So this question was asked, "Which family you belong to?" So he said, "I do not know what is my classification." "Now, who is your father?" "That I do not know." "Ask your mother." Then he went to his mother, "Who is my father?" "My dear boy, I do not know." So actually his mother was maidservant. So maidservants have so many men, and by whom she was pregnant she cannot remember. She also told the truth. And this Satyakāma, he also came to Gautama Muni, he said, "Sir, my father, my mother also do not know who is my father." "Oh, that's all right. You are a brāhmaṇa, because you are truthful. You do not hide yourself, that 'I am a prostitute's son.' You say this is the position. 'I am plainly speaking that my mother does not know who is my father. I do not know!' " So because he was truthful... That is the symptom of brāhmaṇa. He accepted, "Yes, I'll accept you as my disciple."

Indian: Prabhupāda, how did Kāma...?



Prabhupāda: You do... Don't disturb. So this is the process, that the four castes-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya... They were caste system when they actually things were going on. Just like a carpenter. His son naturally becomes a carpenter by seeing the father's work. So he can be very easily classified as a carpenter. Similarly, formerly, the brāhmaṇa family, kṣatriya family, vaiśya family, they were following the rules and regulations in such a way that naturally a brāhmaṇa's son became a brāhmaṇa. Because he has learned already the brāhmaṇa principle from the parent. So naturally little touch will make him... That is initiation. Even though one is born in a brāhmaṇa family, why does he required initiation and sacred thread ceremony? Because simply by taking birth in a brāhmaṇa family one does not become a brāhmaṇa. He has to be raised to the brāhmaṇa standard. Otherwise, there was no initiation, there was no necessity of initiation or offering the sacred thread. That is called saṁskāra. Otherwise, by birth everyone is śūdra. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. So it is very good that one has taken his birth in a brāhmaṇa family, but provided he has learned the brāhmaṇa's activities nicely from the parent, he is brāhmaṇa. Kiṁ punar brāhmaṇaḥ puṇyaḥ(?).



But if he deviates from the family principle... Just like in the śāstra it is said that in a higher class family, brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, especially brāhmaṇa, if the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is not accepted, the whole family becomes śūdra. Garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. That means begetting the child, there is a ceremony which is called garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. So in the Kali-yuga practically no saṁskāra is performed. Therefore in the śāstra it is said kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ. So Vedic process, Vedic principles of accepting. It is not possible in this Kali-yuga. Because the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is not there. In nobody's family there the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is taken. Sex life is also regulated by garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, dharmāviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi. Aviruddha, "Sex life which is not against the religious principles, that I am. That sex life I am," Kṛṣṇa says. "I am that sex life." That is godly. But sex life for sense gratification or for prostitution, that is not Kṛṣṇa. That is Kali. So this is the process.

So it was the duty of the king to see that if a man is professing himself as a brāhmaṇa, he must act as a brāhmaṇa. That was the duty. Otherwise, he should be punished. Just like here. This śūdra, he was presenting himself as a kṣatriya, nṛpa-liṅga-dharam. Therefore he was punished. Not that the king is callous: "Let him do whatever he likes." Just like now our, everywhere, the government, it doesn't care whether you are acting as a brāhmaṇa, śūdra, or whatever nonsense you are doing. Doesn't care. "You pay me tax, that's all." Bring your tax, income tax, and everything, then you are free, whatever you are doing. That was not the duty of the king. The king's duty is to see that actually one who is presenting himself as brāhmaṇa, he's acting as a brāhmaṇa, he has acquired the qualities of a brāhmaṇa. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. He has got the quality and acting. Similarly, a kṣatriya also, he must act as a kṣatriya. Similarly, vaiśyas. These are all, statements are there in the Bhagavad-gītā, you know. Kṛṣi-gorakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg 18.44]. Śauryaṁ tejo yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam īśvara-bhāvaś ca kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam. Everything is given. Paricaryātmakaṁ karma śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam. Everything is given there. So it is the duty of the government, that this man is professing as a brāhmaṇa, as a kṣatriya or a vaiśya, whether he is acting, or whether he's cheating others. No cheating will be allowed. That is government's duty.

So here, this man was cheating. Because here it is said: nṛpa-liṅga-dharam. He was dressed like a king. Just like king is very gorgeously dressed. But his bodily feature, he was a black man. The black man means śūdra. The brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, they were not black. But the śūdras were black. From external point of view, these things are there. Śūdras, another name is kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa means black. So this black man was dressed like a king, and what was he, was he going to do? Ghnantaṁ go-mithunaṁ padā. He was trying to kill a pair of cow and bull. So naturally he could understand. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going on tour, and on his way he saw that this rascal is dressed like a king and he's trying to kill cows and bulls. Oh, he immediately chastised him. Nṛpa-he has dressed like a king, but his business is like śūdra or less than śūdra. Butchers, butchers cannot be intelligent class of men, brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa is not butcher. Neither a kṣatriya. Kṣatriya fights, kills, but in regular religious fight. Not that by whimsically he'll fight and kill men. No. So, here it is said, nijagrāhaujasā vīraḥ. A kṣatriya must be vīra, hero. Whenever there is injustice, he must immediately come forward. "Why injustice? These poor animals, they are also my subject. How you can kill them? He's also born in this land." "National" means one is born in that particular land. So they are also born in this land. Why he should be treated differently? Just like in your country, even one Indian gets his child here, the child is counted as USA-born, US citizen, eh? Immediately. So if that is the law, that anyone born in this land should be treated as national, what is this law that the cows and the bulls born in that land, they are to be slaughtered? What is this law?

So it is the duty of the king, emperor... Immediately detected that "Why these poor animals are being killed? They are also subject to the laws of the state. As the human being requires protection, similarly, the cows... Not only cows, everyone requires protection by the government. Why they should be not protected? Therefore because the protection was not given to the cows and the bulls, he immediately took him, that "This rascal is not a kṣatriya; he's a śūdra. In the dress of a king, he's doing mischievous activities." Immediately punished him. This is government's duty. If anyone... Just like, anyone is breaking law, it is the duty of the government to chastise him, similarly, the law should be... Exact good government law means that anyone who kills an animal without sanction... Of course, they now give sanction, that "Yes, you can kill as many animals in the slaughterhouse as you like." Because the government is śūdra. Government is not kṣatriya. So therefore is no protection. Why animal? Even a human being, if he's being killed on the street, on the Broadway, nobody cares for him. So this is the position. But Parīkṣit Mahārāja was not such a king or such a head of the executive... He immediately punished. Therefore it is mentioned specially: ojasā vīraḥ kalim. Kali is to be punished.

The Kali begins with this animal killing. That is Kali-yuga. Meat-eating. Therefore, to avoid the influence of Kali we have to give up this habit. The four things are Kali's disciple, friends. We have already discussed this. So one friend is this meat-eating problem, the butchers, Kali's friends. And the liquor distiller, he's also Kali's friend. And the gamblers or the gambling house maintainer. And prostitute house maintainer. These are friends of Kali. Now you will find all over the world these things are very prominent-clubs and butcherhouse and liquor house and gambling house. Therefore the whole atmosphere is Kali.

So because it is now Kali age, just like winter season, everywhere is cold, chillest, so similarly because this is the age of Kali therefore even in India... This king, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, was in India. He wanted to chastise this rascal in the dress of a king and attempting (to) kill cows. So this was in India. Maybe in other place also, because the king was touring. So not only in India, all over the world the Vedic civilization was there. Five thousand years ago, everywhere the... All people used to follow the Vedic principles. That is the proof. Because the king was following the Vedic principles. So this cow-killing by the Kali, it is said it was done on the border of India, somewhere near Sindhu Pradesh, Afghanistan, like that. So anyway, it was on this planet and he wanted to prohibit. But India is the center. This king, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, his headquarters also was Hastināpura, near New Delhi at the present moment. Hastināpura. There is a place still, Hastināpura. There is one broken fort also. They say this fort belonged to the Pāṇḍavas. People go there to see. Anyway, now the king was so strict that even outside India some cow was being attempted to be killed, he immediately took his sword to punish him. Now in India they are killing ten thousand cows daily. This is Kali-yuga. That... Still, they have got some sentiment about cow-killing. There was about say five or six years ago, there was good agitation. But who cares for that? Because the government is śūdra: nṛpa-liṅga. They have taken the position of government, but they are all full of śūdras. Now in India not only killing cows... We had never seen... In Bombay this time I saw in our Juhu-big, big signboards: Beef shop. Beef shop. So Hindus are there also now taking. I asked one lady, she was meat-eater. So I asked her, "Do you eat cow's meat, cow's flesh?" "Yes, sometimes." So this is Kali-yuga. Now government is encouraging drinking and meat-eating. And illicit sex, that is, that has become now a common affair, anywhere you go. Why should you should have to go to brothel? Even big, big, other places. I don't wish to mention. You see.

So this is the age of Kali. So simply full of sinful activities, that's all. That is Kali-yuga. But sinful activities will not help us. That they have no brain to understand. You have to purify yourself. Sinful activities will involve you more and more in the cycle of birth and death. You will take sometimes birth as a king or as a demigod, and sometimes as the worm of the stool. Because according to your karma, you will get next body. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. Therefore the process is at least don't act sinfully. Then you will get higher-class birth. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. You will get chance of taking your birth in higher planetary system where the standard of living is many, many thousands better than this planet. Just like Svargaloka, Janaloka. From our śāstra we understand that the inhabitants of Candraloka, moon planet, they live for ten thousands of years, but these rascals are going there. They do not find any living entity. So that is the contradiction. But we believe that in the moon planet... And why we shall not believe? If the living entities are found everywhere, so why, what moon planet has done that there should be no living entity? From our experience we can see living entity is there on the land, in the air, in the water, even in the fire. So every planet is made of these five elements: earth, water, fire, air, sky. So we find by practical experience that in the water there is living entity, on the land there is living entity, within the land there is living entity. So why in the moon planet or other planet there should be no living entities? That's a wrong theory.

Long, long ago, sometimes in 1930, I had a talk in Allahabad with a great scientist Dr. Shah. He said that there is no reason to disbelieve that in other planets there is no living entity. And recently one Russian scientist also said that there are many planets where very, very intelligent class of men are there. So that is our theory, that the... if you go to the higher planetary system, you will find more comfortable standard of life, the duration of life is very long, and the people are very, very intelligent. They are called demigods. So whatever it may be, we have to follow our own principles, and there is no reason to disbelieve that in other planets there are no living entities. We cannot accept it.

So anyway, in every planet there is kingdom or there is government. Because in the Bhagavad-gītā we understand, Kṛṣṇa says,

imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt

[Bg. 4.1]



Kṛṣṇa said that "This philosophy, this Bhagavad-gītā yoga system, I first of all explained to the sun-god, whose name is Vivasvān." He spoke the same principle to his son Manu, and Manu also spoke the same principle to his son, Ikṣvāku. So Ikṣvāku came from the sun planet. He happens to be the grandson of Vivasvān. So how you can say that in the sun planet there is no possibility of life? We get the history. And if you say that "In fire how one can live?" No. As we see that in water some other living entities can live, similarly, I may not be able to live in the fire, but there are other living entities who can live there. That should be the right conclusion. Because fire is as good another material element as the water is. As water is also one of the material elements, fire is also one of the eight material elements. So if we can see by our practical experience, there are living entities in the water, so why not living entities in the fire? And in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said that living entity, this spiritual spark, is not affected by material influence. In the Vedas also it is..., asaṅgo 'yaṁ puruṣaḥ. It has nothing to do with this material condition. Adāhya. This special word is used that it cannot burned by the fire. Aśoṣya, it cannot be dried up by air. Acchedya, it cannot be cut into pieces. These things are there. So we are firmly convinced that in the sun planet there is also living entity, and the king or the president there is called Vivasvān, his name is Vivasvān. And our gāyatrī-mantra is worshiping the sun planet. Oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur vareṇyaṁ bhargo devasya dhīmahi. So this is the Vedic conception. Every planet there is king, and the king's duty is to see that everyone is executing his professional occupational duty.



So Mahārāja Parīkṣit also, he used to go for examining. Therefore it is said, digvijaye kvacit. Not that at a particular time he went out to, for touring. But he was going, say, yearly, or six-monthly. And one of his tour he found that a person dressed like a king was attempting to kill cows, and he punished him. So this is the statement.

Thank you very much. (end)



740102SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.5

-

Los Angeles, January 2, 1974



Pradyumna: "Śaunaka Ṛṣi inquired: Why did Mahārāja Parīkṣit simply punish him, since he was the lowest of the śūdras, having dressed as a king and having struck a cow with his leg? Please describe all these incidences as they relate to the topics of Lord Kṛṣṇa." [SB 1.16.5]



Prabhupāda: So here is..., the basic principle is yadi kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam. Devotees are interested to discuss something if it is helping us how we can become more and more attached to Kṛṣṇa. That is the... Otherwise, we are not interested in the matter of general principles of morality, social culture, ethics. They are required, but because this material world means it is a contaminated world, infected world. So, here in this material world so-called morality or immorality is the same because it is infected. Just try to understand. If there is an epidemic, infection, so in that condition, first of all what is the necessity? First thing is to disinfect the epidemic. In the infected area you cannot derive any benefit by discussing morality or immorality. The man is dying out of infection. So to a immediately dying person, who is sure to die due to infection, what is the use of giving him instruction of morality or immorality? He's going to die.



Similarly, in this world they have invented so many things-philanthropism, altruism, nationalism, this "ism," that "ism," but without Kṛṣṇa. It is the same position. Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness he's going to hell, however moral he may be, however pious he may be, so-called. If he does not know Kṛṣṇa, it has no meaning. Therefore, the first condition was that we are interested to hear about Mahārāja Parīkṣit's punishing the Kali provided it helps us to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise we have no interest. This should be the principle of devotees. We can take part in everything-politics, sociology or philanthropism, altruism, there are so many things they have discovered-provided by taking part in that department of activities we advance our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise reject. Don't take part. You'll be implicated. There, that, that philosophy, technique: dhari' mācha nā choṅya (?) pāni, that we should fish, but don't touch the water. If on the plea of fishing, you become fall down in the water and you are gone, washed away, then what is this?

So sometimes we say that you take part in politics. Our business is not to take part in politics for acquiring big post like president or secretary or attorney general. What you will do that? We have no meaning for this post. Because for a devotee what are these posts? Even the post of Lord Brahmā or Indra, the heavenly king, it has no meaning. Vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate. That is stated by Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī. He says that kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. Kaivalyam, the monism, to merge into the effulgence, the Absolute Truth, to become one, that is called kaivalyam, only spirit, that's all. So for a devotee this kaivalya perfection, monism, is as good as hellish condition of life. Kaivalyaṁ narakāyate. And tridaśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate. Tri-daśa-pūr means the higher heavenly planets where big, big demigods live. Just like people are trying to go to this planet, that planet. So tri-daśa-pūr. Tri-daśa means thirty, three daśa, ten times...aḥ, three times ten. So there are thirty millions of demigods. And they have got different planets also. So they are promised, "If you come to this demigod's planet, yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25], you will get so much happiness, you will live for so many years, you will have better standard of life, thousand times more than in the... These are... They are described in the Vedas. But a devotee says that this tri-daśa-pūr, this heavenly planet, is as good as phantasmagoria. They have no value for these things.

So the..., this is the aspiration of the karmīs, to elevate life to higher standard of life. As the world is going on... The struggle is going on for having a higher standard of life. But they are becoming implicated. Now, there was bull-drawn cart or horse-drawn carriages. Now they have got nice cars also, but the problem is petrol. So the karmī world is like that. You create one kind of happiness, but side by side you create another kind of unhappiness. This is called karmī-yoga. Just like if you want to raise one big skyscraper building, then you have to dig somewhere to get the earth to make the bricks and the iron. You cannot manufacture without taking help of the nature. So if you raise here, you must dig here. This is karmī-yoga. If you want to enjoy something extraordinarily, you must create another unhappiness extraordinarily. This is called karmī. Therefore they are mūḍhas. Mūḍhas means rascals, asses. They do not know that "By increasing every year new motorcars, I am creating another problem. If there is no petrol, then the whole business will be spoiled." That they do not know. And because they do not know, they are called asses, mūḍha. The effect they do not know. So the tri-daśa-pūr, going to the heavenly planet... Just like they are going to the moon planet, but problems after problem, contemplating how to make a platform in the sky to get petrol. The problem is there, not that very easily going. The problematic... Things are problematic.

So these kinds of plans... Just like Rāvaṇa. He said, "What is the use of becoming devotee? Oh, if you want to go to the heavenly planet, I shall make a solid staircase, reinforced concrete, and you can go there. There is no need of endeavoring for austerities, penances, no." So these people are trying like Rāvaṇa, that "We shall take you to the moon planet, Venus planet, this planet, and give us money. Now we spend. You go on spending... In future, in future." So these karmīs are just like phantasmagoria, will o' the wisp. And jñānī, they are also merging into the effulgence of Brahman. That is also another foolishness, because actually nobody can remain in that. Just like we are feeling happy here because we have got so many friends here, ladies and gentleman, and you are talking. Now, if it was vacant, nobody is here. Sometimes in our temple, That's not very good. Nobody likes to sit. Is it a fact? Every day, because we are so many, it is very pleasing to sit down.

So by nature a living entity wants society. "Society, friendship and love, divinely bestowed upon man." That is required. And if you live in a forlorn place, nobody's there, no society, no friends, then how long can stay there? You cannot stay. Just like if you go on the sky by airplane, after four, five, six hours you, you become disturbed: "When the plane will get down? When the plane will get down?" This is natural. Why...? Why the plane...? You are flying very nicely, huh? There is no turmoil, no noise in the sky. Go nicely. No. Similarly, in the ship also, you travel for many days. So it will be disturbing. People are searching after when we shall land in some place. So living entity by nature, he wants association. Artificially he wants to... Just like some of, some of the devotees, they like that "Now we shall go in a solitary place and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." That is a different position. It is not possible for the ordinary man. So going to the Brahman effulgence, simply realizing that "I am a spirit soul, I have nothing to do," that will not be beneficial. You will again come down. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. If you do not get shelter, simply to remain in the impersonal Brahman effulgence will not make you happy. Artificially, you can stay there for some time; otherwise, you will again fall down in this material world for varieties of enjoyment.

Because that impersonalist, impersonal person, those who are attached to impersonal philosophy, they do not care to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They say, "It is māyā. To become impersonal is perfection." So they cannot remain imper..., in the impersonal feature for very long time because nature... We are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. The only fault is that we have tried to imitate Kṛṣṇa here in this material world. Otherwise, that instinct is there. Just like Kṛṣṇa is enjoying with gopīs and Rādhārāṇī. Now, because I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, that instinct must be in me also, in minute quantity. But that must be in me. Therefore we also want to enjoy with so-called lover or beloved or girls or boys, but we are trying to enjoy in a false platform-this material world. Therefore we are becoming baffled. The same enjoyment is, Kṛṣṇa is offering, by His descendance, that "If you want to enjoy like this in the society of beautiful young boys and girls, come to Me. Here it is, reality." But that they will not. That they will make impersonal. Being frustrated in this material platform, they want to make it zero, śūnyavādi, śūnyavādi, being disgusted... Because you cannot be happy in this material enjoyment. So at time it will be disgusting. That is jñāna-bhumika.(?) "So we have tried our best. What is the use of this enjoyment? Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. This is all false. Now let us become Brahman, become one with Brahman." But that is also false. That idea, to become one with the Brahman, that is also false.

So real reality is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore these sages, big, big great sages, they are hearing Sūta Gosvāmī. So they ask the reason "Why the king Mahārāja Parīkṣit punished that Kali in the dress of a king? 'So if you..., if possible, kindly describe the reason. And provided it will help our Kṛṣṇa consciousness." This is the condition. Yadi kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam: "If there is connection with Kṛṣṇa." Just like the Bhagavad-gītā. It is a topics on the battlefield. Senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me 'cyuta [Bg. 1.21]. Arjuna is asking Kṛṣṇa, "Please keep my chariot between the two phalanxes of armies." This is completely military proposal. But why we are interested to hear about Bhagavad-gītā? Because kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam, because there is kṛṣṇa-kathā, there is instruction of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we are interested. Otherwise, what is the use of hearing, "Somebody is fighting with somebody, and he's asking his chariot driver, 'Place my chariot in this position. Let me see who, whom I shall have to fight'?" So what is the use of? There is no use. People are interested in reading, but they are reading all so-called literature, poetry. But we are not interested in such, such kind of literature, because there is no kṛṣṇa-kathā. We are interested in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā. Why? Because it is kṛṣṇa-kathā. The same propensity. Everyone wants to read something. So we also want to read something. But we read Bhagavad-gītā, Bhāgavatam, Caitanya-caritāmṛta, because there is kṛṣṇa-kathā. We are not interested with any other rubbish literature, however nicely it is prepared.

tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo

yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api

nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni yat

śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ

[SB 1.5.11]



That kind of literature, where nāmāny anantasya, the holy name of the ananta, the Supreme Unlimited, nāmāny anantasya yaśo 'ṅkitāni, His glories are described, such kind of literature, śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ, that is interested, interesting to the sādhavaḥ. They hear, they chant, śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti, and accept the philosophy. Tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo yasmin prati-ślokam... [SB 1.5.11]. Even those verses are not very nicely composed from literary point of view, still, a sādhu, who is saintly person, he'll take interest of that kind of literature. And other literatures: tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham. Other literature, because there is no description of the Supreme Absolute, that is the pleasure place for the crows. Tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham.



So we are not interested with such kind of literature; however from literary point of view, from poetic point of view, they are very nicely written. If there is no kṛṣṇa-kathā, there is no description of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no devotee should be interested. Even though... Even we do not touch the daily newspaper. Why? Because there no is kṛṣṇa-kathā. One and the same thing, punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Repeating the same... "This man was stolen of his property. This politician has said like this. That politician has replied like this. There was disaster. There was fire. There was this..." These news are full with newspaper, so many bunch of papers. So who cares for it? Tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham, crowlike men. Not the swans, white swans. White swans, they go to the very clear water where there is nice garden, nice birds are chirping, nice fruits are there. You will find the white swans will go there, in the park. And the crows will go... Where everything garbage, nasty things are thrown away, they'll enjoy there. Even in the animals, the birds, you'll find this distinction. Why the crow does not go to the nice garden? And why the swan does not go to the crow society?

So there are different classes of men, crow society and swan society. The swan society is different from the crow society. How you can make equal? The people are making, try to make classless society. It is not possible to make classless society because every living entity is being controlled by a different quality. So the qualitative distinction must be there. You cannot make them classless. It is all imagination. The crow class, the swan class, the pigeon class, the dog class, even in the animals, even in the birds, even in the plants... There is a plant, rose tree, and there are other plants, useless, no fruit, no flower. It is simply meant for becoming fuel. So by nature there are so many distinctions. You cannot make equal everything. This is called variety. But everything is required, provided one knows how to utilize it, and that is possible by Kṛṣṇa conscious person, not by ordinary person. To accept all varieties of creation and engage them in Kṛṣṇa's service, that is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

So the first condition is yadi, "if," kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam. That should be the principle of devotees. Anything which has no connection with Kṛṣṇa, we have no interest. Let it go. We are simply interested if it is related with Kṛṣṇa. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. Our principle is to follow the Gosvāmīs. They have given two formulas, Rūpa Gosvāmī.

prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate



Where there is connection of Kṛṣṇa, if you can utilize it for Kṛṣṇa... Just like we are utilizing everything. This building we are utilizing, the chandelier(?) we are utilizing. We are using this microphone and using paper and press. We are using everything. But why? For Kṛṣṇa. We are not engaged here for singing cinema songs or like that. No. We can utilize these instruments for singing the glory of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we have taken advantage. Otherwise... But people..., there are so-called tyāgīs: "Oh, these people are using material things. This man is taking material advantage; at the same time, he's condemning material advancement." We don't condemn. We simply teach people that utilize for Kṛṣṇa. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe. We don't condemn. We don't say that don't manufacture this microphone. Yes. Microphone-use. But use it for declaring glories of the Lord. Then it is fully utilized. That is our process, Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So we are not these so-called Māyāvādī sannyāsīs, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. Why jagan mithyā? Mithyā means false. They say that jagan mithyā, this whole material world is false. We don't say false. We say it is temporary, and so long it is in use, you utilize it for Kṛṣṇa. That even this material world will be utilized for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, this is our proposal. We don't reject anything. Therefore Rūpa Gosvāmī: prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ. A thing which can be used for the service of Hari, Kṛṣṇa, if it is given up as material, that vairāgya, that renunciation, is not very good. That renunciation... "I have renounced everything..." Just like amongst the Jains, they will not ride on car, they'll walk. So our principle is not like that. "No, we shall not take advantage of the motorcar or the airplanes. These are all material. I shall walk." Why shall I walk? If I would not have taken the advantage of the airplanes, how I could preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world so swiftly? We must take all advantage, but for Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We shall encourage people, but the thing is that we may not forget. If by material opulence we forget Kṛṣṇa, then that is suicidal. That is sui... Therefore we have to be little careful. We may drive the Rolls Royce car, but may not identify with the car: "Oh, now I've become Rolls Royce. You are Chevrolet. I'm Rolls Royce." (laughter) Don't become nonsense like that. Rolls Royce car is different from you, and Chevrolet car is also different from you. You can take advantage of them. Don't identify. They are identifying with the matter. That is the defect. That is called māyā. He's not identifying with Kṛṣṇa, that "I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. I am not part and parcel of these Rolls Royce cars." If one keeps himself, I mean to say, awakened in this way, so in any condition of life, he is liberated, any condition.

That is also given by Rūpa Gosvāmī, that,

īhā yasya harer dāsye

karmaṇā manasā girā

nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu

jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate



Īhā. Īhā means "desire." Yasya, anybody's desire. He's always thinking how to serve Kṛṣṇa. How to serve Kṛṣṇa with whole world paraphernalia, he's planning, such person. Īhā yasya harer dāsye. His main aim is how to serve Kṛṣṇa. Karmaṇā manasā girā. One can serve Kṛṣṇa by his activities, karmaṇā, by mind, by thinking, by planning how to do it nicely. Mind is also required. Karmaṇā manasā vācā. And by words. How? Preaching. Such person, nikhilasv apy avasthāsu, in any condition of life he may be... He may be in Vṛndāvana or he may be in hell. He has nothing to do with, with anything else, except with Kṛṣṇa. Jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate: He's always liberated. That is required. Therefore it is said, yadi kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam. "If this description which (we) are asking you, what is the reason that Parīkṣit Mahārāja was going on his tour, royal tour, what business he had to punish one man who dressed like a king and trying to kill cows... So why he was interested? Is it for Kṛṣṇa or for his personal interest? If it is for Kṛṣṇa, then please..." Kathyatāṁ mahā-bhāga. "You are most fortunate. Please describe this."



And another point is nṛdeva-cihna-dhṛk. Nṛdeva. Nṛ means "human being," and deva means "God." So the king is considered as God in the human society. Just see what should be the position of the king. And how much qualified he must be. Because a king is supposed to be the representative of God to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness of the people. That is king's duty. Therefore he's called nṛdeva. Anyone who is trying for Kṛṣṇa, to make people Kṛṣṇa conscious, he is a representative of Kṛṣṇa, real representative. Therefore guru is offered the respect exactly like Kṛṣṇa. Sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tathā bhāvyata **. Because he is kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya, he's the..., doing the most confidential service, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa wants everyone to surrender to Him, and the spiritual master is doing the same: "Please surrender to Kṛṣṇa." Therefore he's the most confidential servant of Kṛṣṇa. He should be honored as Kṛṣṇa. That is the duty of the king also. Everyone should come forward. The father, the mother, the king, the spiritual master. Upon whom the instruction of the disciples, of the subordinate wards, is depending, they should be all Kṛṣṇa conscious. Therefore it is said nṛdeva..., nṛdeva-cihna-dhṛk. And he was punished because, although he dressed himself like a king, but he had no responsibility. Therefore nṛdeva-cihna-dhṛk śūdrakaḥ. He was actually śūdra, and he was taking the place of a king. Therefore he should be punished. This is the duty of the government. Nobody can cheat. If you dress like such and such person, you must deal also honestly. Otherwise you will be punished.

Thank you very much. Take this. Chant. (end)



740103SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.6

-

Los Angeles, January 3, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "The devotees of the Lord are accustomed to licking up the honey available from the lotus feet of the Lord. What is the use of topics which simply waste one's valuable life?" [SB 1.16.6]



Prabhupāda: The same last paragraph. The... Yadi kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam. So the proposal was that "We are interested to hear about Kali's being punished by Mahārāja Parīkṣit if there is some connection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness." That is the principle of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, that we shall not do anything which has no connection with Kṛṣṇa. This is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One should be very alert: "I am going to do this. Whether it has got any connection with Kṛṣṇa? I am going to eat this. Whether there is any connection with Kṛṣṇa?" In this way, we have got always some activities, some action of the senses, but if we test every moment, "Whether this has got any connection with Kṛṣṇa?" then you will remain safe. I am going to talk with you or somebody else. Whether that talk has got any connection with Kṛṣṇa? If it has no, then I am not going to talk. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. That is really renunciation.



Renunciation does not mean I change this cloth to another shape of cloth and another color of cloth. Renunciation means I will not associate with anything which has no connection with Kṛṣṇa. This is renunciation. Because for a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, to waste even a moment of life without Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a great dangerous action. Not only... anyone who is interested for higher level of position. He should be very careful of using every moment of life. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita's advice, moral instruction of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, he says, practical proposition,

āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi

na labhyaḥ svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ

sa cen nirarthakaṁ nītaḥ

kā nu hānis tato 'dhikaḥ



He is advising that our duration of life, that is limited. It is, by destiny, limited. Therefore in the horoscope it is said that "So many years this man will live." That's fact.



So any big scientist, big philosopher, they may be very, very big, big men, but the so-called scientist cannot increase even one day's life. That is not possible. You have to die. The moment you are destined to die, you must die. So not only day, even a moment you cannot increase. A moment you cannot increase. Therefore Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi. We have got a certain duration of life. Now, what is gone in this life... Suppose yesterday was 2nd January, 1974. This morning it is finished. Now it is 3rd January, 1974. Can you bring 1973, 1974, 2nd January, again? No, that is not possible. It is gone forever. It is gone forever. Similarly, every moment of our life is going, forever, never to come back. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says na labhyaḥ svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ. If you request that "Now my age is, say, seventy-eight years." If I request somebody that "I will give you millions of dollars, make my life seventy-seven years," that is not possible. Not seventy-seven years, even a moment. Therefore Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that every moment of life is so valuable that you cannot get back it even offering hundreds and thousands and millions of dollars. That is not possible.

So if that moment is wasted for nothing, just imagine what is your loss. A thing which you cannot get back by paying millions of dollars, if that is lost unnecessarily, so how much loss you are suffering just imagine. This is material calculation. Why we keep some valuable things, some jewel, very carefully? Because we know, "If I lose this jewel, I will lose so much money." Similarly, we should always consider that. The modern civilization, rascal civilization, they do not know how to utilize life. So many days, so many hours, they are simply wasting, simply wasting. It is said that the sunrise and sunset, during this period, the sun's business is to take away the duration of our life, sunrise and sunset. That means twelve hours or thirteen hours which is gone between the sunrise and sunset...This sun's business is to take away the portion, the fixed up duration of life which I have been given. That is, some of it, is taken away. The same example. Just like you have got a fixed balance in the bank. If you draw even ten pence, ten shillings, that means it is taken away. You have to replace it. But replacing is not possible. Bank balance you can replace. But the balance... Suppose you have passed... I have passed... Suppose if I live for eighty years or ninety years or hundred years. So this seventy-eight years is already taken away. It cannot be replaced. You cannot make the bank balance or the duration of..., again complete. That is not possible. This is plain fact.

Therefore here it is said that those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious, they must weigh, measure every moment, "Whether this moment has been spent without Kṛṣṇa consciousness?" That is the criterion. Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19], nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ. This is the test of advanced Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Rūpa Gosvāmī gives, avyartha-kālatvam. Avyartha-kālatvam means "Whether my time has been spent uselessly?" One should be alert. "Whether my time has been used, has been uselessly spent by talking nonsense?" In another place Rūpa Gosvāmī says,

atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati

[NoI 2]



By six kinds of activities, you will lose your holding in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. What is that? Atyāhāraḥ, too much eating. Āhāra means collection or eating. So either too much collection. Our society, international society, we must collect thousands and thousands of dollars, but for spending it for Kṛṣṇa, not for keeping in the bank. That is not our business. We must collect as much. Suppose for doing some business... We are constructing our temple in Vṛndāvana. We require fifty lakhs. That is required. But I shall not collect more than fifty lakhs even one cent. This is atyāhāra. Similarly, if your body can consume foodstuff one kilo or half kilo, you can eat. But not even an ounce or even a, what is called, grain more than that. That is atyāhāra. You eat. It is not forbidden to eating. But you must eat as much as you can digest very nicely, not more than that. This is against bhakti principle. Eating too much or collecting too much. Atyāhāra. And prayāsa. Prayāsa means do something with extraordinary endeavor. So, of course, we have to do sometime, but it is the general principle. We shall accept... Suppose you are constructing a temple. If it is..., suppose two millions of dollars required, or, say, five millions of dollars. If we cannot do that, we shall not attempt. That is prayāsa, unnecessarily endeavor. Which is within your control, you should act. Atyāhāraḥ prayāsaḥ. And prajalpa. Prajalpa means talking all nonsense. Suppose politics. "What Mr. Nixon did yesterday, or what did he say?" So what interest we have got in Mr. Nixon? We shall not waste our time talking this politics, that politics, this sociology, this cinema, this affair, no. We have nothing to do with that. That is called prajalpa, unnecessary talking. Talking means decreasing your duration of life. Talking. So why should you decrease your life unnecessarily? Every moment you have to utilize, "Whether it is used for Kṛṣṇa?" This is sādhana. This is sādhana, practice. Unnecessary talking, unnecessary making enemies. Unnecessarily, "You are my subordinate; I am your master." Who is master? Everyone is subordinate to Kṛṣṇa. Nobody is master. Why you talk unnecessarily?



So therefore it is said that kim anyair asad-ālāpaiḥ. Asat. Asat means that will not exist, and sat means which will exist. That we do not know, which will exist. But we know that this body will not exist. That everyone, we know. And what is that thing which will exist? That we do not know. The soul. That we do not know. We know what will not exist. That everyone knows. And in Bhagavad-gītā it is said,

avināśi tu tad viddhi

yena sarvam idaṁ tatam



antavanta ime dehā

nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ

[Bg. 2.18]



Everything is there. We know that this body is asat, antavanta. Antavanta means "which has got an end." Antavanta ime dehāḥ. This body has got an end at a certain date. Everyone knows. But the, the other is... Nityasyoktāḥ śarīriṇaḥ. But within the body, which is the living force of this body, which is moving this body, that is nitya. Two things are there: my body and the force within the body. Everyone knows as soon as the force is withdrawn or gone away that this body has no more movement, it has no value. That everyone knows. But they will explain in different way. But according to our Vedic knowledge, that which is moving this body, that is eternal. That is not finished. "After the end of this body, the body is burnt into ashes or into, buried into the earth, and still?" Yes. Na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20].



In this way, every step, Svayaṁ Bhagavān is personally..., Kṛṣṇa is instructing us, and we are so fool, we cannot understand. We cannot understand. Big, big politicians, they read Bhagavad-gītā, in our country. But by their action it is seen they did not understand even a word of Bhagavad-gītā. Even a word of Bhagavad-gītā. Big, big politician. They became very big, big mahātmās or great men, but they tried for this body, which is to be finished. Antavanta ime dehāḥ. Nobody tried for that thing which will never be finished, that is eternal. You find from their life, they never instructed about the soul. They dealt with politics very nicely, to give bluff that "Within one year I shall give you liberation and this and that," about the... What is the value of this liberation? Because they did not know the thing which is not perishable, they are after this body, which is, liberated or not liberated, will perish. They are busy. They are busy with the activities of this body, which is surely perishable.

What is the value of your independence? Can you avoid death? Suppose you are independent. What is the meaning of this independence? When death will come, will catch you by your neck and throw you away, your independence, nonsense independence... What is the value of this independence? Be independent from the clutches of māyā. No more death-that is independence. That is independence. No more birth-oh, that is independence. No more death. Otherwise what is the meaning of independence? You are not independent. You are under the clutches of māyā. You are struggling. You are struggling to get out of the clutches of māyā or the material nature, external energy of God. You are trying to make nice medicine to get out of the attack of disease. But you can manufacture a better medicine, but you cannot get out of disease. That is not possible. This is struggle. Now we have manufactured such a nice medicine that cancer or any other disease will not attack us. That is very nice. But find out some medicine that death will not attack you. "Oh, that is not possible." Then where is the meaning of your advancement?

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that medicine by which you can conquer over death. Therefore this is the best medicine. Bhavauṣadhi. It is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, bhavauṣadhi. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt... (aside:) You can stand on the wall, not in the middle. Nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād bhavauṣadhāt [SB 10.1.4]. This word bhavauṣadhi means the panacea for all material diseases. Bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt. Parīkṣit Mahārāja says that this chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, it is chanted by whom? Nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ, one who has finished his hankering after material pleasure. Nivṛtti. Nivṛtti means finished, no more. There are two ways: pravṛtti and nivṛtti. I want to smoke-that is called pravṛtti. And when I give up, that is called nivṛtti. Pravṛtti and nivṛtti.

So there are two things: pravṛtti and nivṛtti. But asuras, demons, they do not know "In which way I shall guide my pravṛtti and which way I shall guide my nivṛtti." This is the paśu. "In which way I will..." Pravṛtti and nivṛtti, these two things are there, but the difference between a demon and demigod is that a demon does not know how to direct these two propensities, pravṛtti and nivṛtti. And a demigod knows how to guide these two things, pravṛtti and nivṛtti. These two...One who does not know... Pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā. Śāstra says that these things... Just like, loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā. This eating, sleeping, mating and defending, every animal, every small animal, knows it very well, how to eat, how to sleep, how to have sex intercourse and how to defend. These four things, everyone knows by nature. So this is called pravṛtti. Pravṛtti. But it has to be made nivṛtti, stop. They do not know what is the perfection. The perfection is... The pravṛtti, propensity is eating, sleeping, mating, defending. And when you make it just the opposite-no more eating, no more sleeping, no more mating, no more defending-oh, that is perfection of life. Who knows this? Ask any scientist, philosopher, of this world, that "Can you show me any way, no more eating, no more sleeping, no more mating and no more defending?" That is spiritual life. Therefore we have to reduce it. It is not possible, but there is possibility. Just like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, he made it in his life, during Caitanya Mahāprabhu's... Even after departure of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, about four hundred years ago. He was a very rich man's son. Very good wife, very good state. He left everything, and ultimately, he made these things, even eating, nil. He was eating every third day a small quantity of butter, nominal, little. Otherwise he gave up eating. So it is possible. It is not that "How one can give up eating and live at the same time?" That is possible. By the life of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī we see.

So actual civilization means to deny material conveniences. That is actual civilization. That is perfection of civilization. Otherwise the cats and dogs, they are also after food, after sleeping, after sexual intercourse, after defense. Then what is the difference? The difference is the animals after it and the human beings should be not after it. Negation. That is perfection of life. So how we can negate? The Māyāvādī philosophers, they want to negate. Or the Buddhist philosopher. "Make it zero. Make it zero." Śūnyavādi. Śūnyavādi. Nirviśeṣavādi. Nirviśeṣavādi and śūnyavādi, almost the same. So they are after negation. But that is not possible. Artificially, if you negate, "I shall not eat," you cannot continue it for very many days. That is not possible. That is not possible. Similarly, eating, sleeping, mating-everything-artificially you cannot do. But you can do it as perfectly, as much possible, simply by Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore it is said here that kim anyair asad-ālāpaiḥ. If we stop hear Kṛṣṇa talking, then that is negation. If we stop artificially these mundane talks, that will be artificial. You cannot sit down. If I say that the so-called meditation... So meditation is artificially stopping mundane activities. That is meditation. But how long you will do that? He is becoming suffocated, "When I shall talk? When I shall talk? I am meditating, meditating, meditating." But how will it stop? That is not possible. Just like these Māyāvādī philosophers, they say, "Become desireless, no more desire." That is not possible. I am a living entity. How can I be desireless? It is not possible.

So this negative process will not help us, śūnyavādi. Śūnyavādi. Nirviśeṣavādi. It will not be helpful. Therefore in the śāstra it is said that āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ [SB 10.2.32]. The same example I have given several times, that these rascals, they are going to the moon planet and sun planet, but they do not get any shelter, and they come down again. Their advancement means go to some extent and again come back again, earthly planet. When the Russian aeronauts was flying, he was seeing, "Where is my Moscow? Where is my Moscow?" The anchor is there. The attraction is there in the national, in the country, in the city, in the home, in the wife, in the cats, in the dogs. And he is trying to go up. So that is not possible. Just like a vulture. He goes three miles up or more than that, but his aim of life is to find out a dead body. That's all. He is finding. He has gone so up. You can see that advancement of going up, but the business is to see where is a dead body so that he can eat.

So this kind of artificial going up and making things negation will not help us. That is not possible. Therefore they are failure. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ [SB 10.2.32]. These Māyāvādī philosophers, they may go very high by knowledge, by speculation, but they will again fall down. Why? Anādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ: "Because they could not get the shelter of Your lotus feet, therefore they will fall down." That is not secure. Because a man cannot remain without any activity, without any desire. That is not possible. A man, animal, any, even insect, he must be doing something. I have got practical experience. One of my sons in child..., when I was young man, he was very naughty. So sometimes we used to put him on the rack. He could not get down. So he was feeling so uncomfortable because his activities stopped on the rack. So you cannot stop activity. That is not possible. You must give better activity. Then you will stop. Paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate [Bg. 9.59].

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is that you get better activity. Therefore you can give up the inferior activities. Otherwise, simply by negation, it is not possible. We must work. We must work for Kṛṣṇa's sake. We shall go to the Kṛṣṇa's temple, or we shall go for selling Kṛṣṇa's books, or meeting some Kṛṣṇa devotee. That is nice. But you cannot stop working. That is not possible. Then your idle brain will be devil's workshop. Yes. Then you will fall down, "How to go to that woman? How to go to that man?" If you stop working, then you have to work again to sense gratification. That's all. Similarly, you take any sense; you cannot stop it, but you have to engage it. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You engage your hand and engage your legs, you engage your eyes, you engage your ears, engage your tongue-simply in Kṛṣṇa. You can engage everything. For eyes, instead of hankering after some beautiful man or beautiful woman, just see Kṛṣṇa, how nicely dressed. Then you will forget these other seeing. For tongue, you engage your tongue simply for chanting. Then your nonsense talking will automatically stop. You engage your tongue eating very nice prasādam of Kṛṣṇa, offered to Kṛṣṇa. Then you forget to go to restaurant. In this way our time should be utilized. As it is said that kim anyair asad-ālāpaiḥ. We should not allow our senses to be engaged in such thing which will never exist. That is the criterion. Simply engage yourself in such things which will continue, will exist forever.

Just like we are learning here Kṛṣṇa's service. So Kṛṣṇa's service is here, and if you are perfect, then Kṛṣṇa's service is there after death also, the same thing. Therefore it is said, māra vā jīva vā. One saintly person said to a royal prince, rāja-putra cirañ jīva, cirañ jīva: "Oh, you are the son of a king. You live forever." Muni-putra muni-putra mā jīva mā jīva: "Oh, you are the disciple of a saintly person, brahmacārī, you please die immediately." Just see. Rāja-putra cirañ jīva, blessing rāja-putra, "You live forever." And muni-putra, the son of a muni, or the disciple of a muni, he says, mā jīva, mā jīva: "You don't live, you die. You die." And that thing... That, what is called? This butcher. Butcher, he is advising the butcher, jīva vā māra vā: "Either you..." No. He is advising butcher, mā jīva mā māra: "Don't die, don't live." And to a sādhu, saintly person, he is advising, jīva vā māra vā, two things. So what is the purport? The purport is that this prince, he is enjoying material enjoyment, but next life he will have to become a dog. "So better you live with your enjoyment. Cirañ jīva. Because as soon as you die, you are going to be a dog. So better you live. So long you will live it is good for you." And muni-putra, a brahmacārī, his business is fasting and go to collect for Guru Mahārāja, and then whatever he takes, he offers to the guru. Then the guru says that "You can eat," he can eat. It is hardship, but by this hardship he is now prepared to go back to home, Godhead. So he says, "You immediately die so you can go to Vaikuṇṭha immediately." And the cruel butcher, he is advised, mā jīva mā māra: "You don't live and don't die. Because your living condition is so horrible that every day, morning, you have to kill so many animals and see bloodshed and this. It is a horrible life. Your occupation is very, very horrible. Therefore you should not live. But at the same time, if you die, then you are going to suffer all this suffering yourself. Then you don't die also." So this is the position. And sādhu, those who are saintly person, devotees, he is advised, jīva vā māra vā: "Either you live or either you die, your business is to serve Kṛṣṇa. You are serving Kṛṣṇa now, and after death, you will serve Kṛṣṇa. So there is no question of your death, neither there is no question of your birth." So these are some moral instructions.

So here it is said that kim anyair asad-ālāpair yad. What is this? Avyayaḥ, asad-vyayaḥ. What is the meaning of vyayaḥ? Asat, "unnecessary waste of life." So unnecessary waste of life, we should be very careful. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the criterion of Kṛṣṇa conscious life. We should not waste our time. That is advised by Rūpa Gosvāmī also. Avyartha-kālatvam [Cc. Madhya 23.18-19]. We should be very cautious not to waste a single moment without Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So we have got so many activities. If we have no activities, then we can polish the floor of the Temple. That is not very difficult. If I am illiterate, I have no interest in reading books, I have no interest in chanting or I cannot do it constantly, then take something and mop over the temple and cleanse the temple. That is also service. It is not that one who is engaged in the Deity worship, he is better engaged, and one who is polishing the floor, he is less engaged. No. Both of them will get equal benefit. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. So find out some business for Kṛṣṇa. Don't waste time. That is the perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Thank you very much. (end)



740104SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.7

-

Los Angeles, January 4, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "O Sūta Gosvāmī, there are those amongst men who desire freedom from death and get eternal life. They escape the slaughtering process by calling the controller of death, Yamarāja." [SB 1.16.7]



Prabhupāda: Kṣudrāyuṣāṁ nṛṇām. Kṣudra, means very small, āyuṣām, duration of life. As we can compare that an ant's life or a germ's life... They are also living entities. Their duration of life is very small. There are many flies, they take their birth at night, in the evening, and the whole night they are busy, the same way: eating, sleeping, begetting children and being afraid of. All the qualities are there. In India we have got experience. They are called diwali germs or insects. In the evening before the light-one, two, three-in this way, by midnight, it increases to thousands and millions. And in the morning, at the end of the night, you will find heaps of insects or dead body. Heaps. Millions.



So there are different grades of life. It is called mṛtyu-loka. This material world is called mṛtyu-loka: "where everyone dies." But there are grades of duration of life. One living entity has got four minutes life, another, ten minutes, another, hundred minutes. Then days. One day, hundred days. Then year. One year, or four year, or five year, or utmost, hundred years, on this planet. So the human being can live up to utmost hundred years, but in other planets there are other living entities, demigods. And the highest, the topmost planet is Brahmaloka. And you have learned from Bhagavad-gītā, in the Brahmaloka, the duration of life, to our calculation, is very, very long. Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. In the Brahmaloka, the duration of twelve hours, our twelve hours, morning to evening, that is many millions of years to our calculation. So even if you go to that planet Brahmaloka, as you are trying to go to the moon planet... From śāstra we understand in the moon planet, they live up to ten thousands of years according to heavenly calculation. In each planet, in each society, the calculation is different. So it is calculated that in the moon planet you can live for ten thousands of years, and that calculation is compared: our six months equal to one day in that planet. So just imagine how many years of our calculation they can live.

But Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa informs us that wherever you may go, the Yamarāja is ready, the representative of Kṛṣṇa as Yamarāja. Just like the magistrate is also the representative of the government. So he is ready to come exactly as you finish your terms of duration of life. That is the way. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. So at the end of life, everyone becomes disgusted. Therefore there is some release interval. At the end of life, mostly, people, those who are..., especially ordinary human being, they do not wish to live anymore. Even from the point of view, this bodily, old body, always diseased, rheumatic pains, so... And there is no life. For old man there is no enjoyment, material enjoyment. He wants to enjoy, but he cannot enjoy. Therefore generally, they become disgusted.

There was a question, very nice question, by Akbar Vasar, the Muhammadan emperor, Mogul emperor of India, Akbar Vasar. He was in the fifteenth century, five hundred years ago. So he kept very intelligent ministers. They would reply. Whatever inquiries are made by the emperor, the particular minister will inform, "This is this, sir." So he inquired one minister. His name was... I forget now. So "How long the lusty desires continue, sex desire?" So he replied, "Up to the point of death." So the emperor said, "No, no, how it can be?" "No, he has got the desire, but he cannot use it. His instruments become dull or useless. Therefore... But the desire is there." And, "I don't believe. I cannot...I am not satisfied with this answer." "All right, sir, I will satisfy you."

So one day, all of a sudden the minister came to Akbar Vasar, "Sir, you will have to come with me immediately, and take your young daughter with you." So Akbar Vasar could understand there is some meaning, so immediately he prepared and took his young daughter with him. So he asked, "Where you are going?" "You will come to know." So he entered a house where an old man was on the death bed, a very old man. So the minister requested the emperor that "While entering the room, you kindly try to see the face of the lying man who is going to die." So Akbar was very intelligent. So he was seeing the face. So he marked it that the man was looking towards the young girl, not to the emperor. So he said, "Yes, I have got your answer."

So these desires... This is the root cause of our coming to this material world, to enjoy. Enjoyment is there in the spiritual world, but there, in the spiritual world, the enjoyer is Kṛṣṇa, and everyone is enjoyed. That is the position. Just like in the Western countries, the women declare that "Why we should not have equal rights with the man?" But by nature it is different. The man is the enjoyer, and the woman is the enjoyed. That is the position. Bhoktā and bhogya. There are many social problems in your country-I do not wish to discuss-but it is very grave problems. But they do not know how to systematize the human form of life because they do not know what is the aim of life. That they do not know. So aim of life is to stop this repetition of birth and death. That is the aim of life. The so-called scientists, they do not know it, and neither they work for it. They do not know it.

So here it is said, kṣudrāyuṣām: "those who have got small duration of life." Although this small duration of life, human life, in comparison to the duration of life of other planets, it is very, very small, so but they do not know how to fulfill the mission of living condition during this life. In the animal life, the consciousness is not developed, but in the human form of life, although it is perishable, adhruvam... Prahlāda Mahārāja said, adhruvam. Dhruva. Dhruva means certain. So he advised,

kaumāra ācaret prājño

dharmān bhāgavatān iha

durlabhaṁ mānuṣaṁ janma

tad apy adhruvam arthadam

[SB 7.6.1]



That is his advice, Prahlāda Mahārāja. He was talking with his classfriend, five years old. So he was teaching them that "Just become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Chant Hare Kṛṣṇa." Nārada taught him. He listened from Nārada. So he was convinced that this is the only business, how to make advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.



So he was Hiraṇyakaśipu's son. He did not appoint any teacher to teach him about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But when he was in the womb of his mother, Nārada Muni advised the mother about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. She had to live for some time at the care of Nārada Muni when her husband was out being defeated by the demigods, the Hiraṇyakaśipu. So the woman's anxiety was when her husband will come back. And at that time the child was within the womb, and she begged a benediction from Nārada, "Sir, kindly arrange in that way, that as long as my husband does not come back, I may not give birth to this child." Nārada Muni said, "All right, it will be." So Nārada Muni was giving her advice about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But her mind was absent, but the child within the womb, he was hearing. He was hearing. This is stated in the Bhāgavatam. You will find that when Prahlāda Mahārāja was asked this question by his friend, "My dear Prahlāda, we are also being taught by the same teacher. You are also being taught by the same teacher. You are a prince. You cannot go out. Wherefrom you have learned all this nice instruction?" So he replied that "This instruction was given by Nārada. So it was given to my mother, but as woman she has forgotten, and I remember."

So that is the difference between a child in the womb and a grown-up woman. You see? That is by nature. They forget. Strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnāṁ trayī na śruti-gocarā [SB 1.4.25]. Therefore Mahābhārata was created by Vyāsadeva, Vedic instruction through history, to battle of Kurukṣetra. Because strī, śūdra, woman, śūdra and dvija-bandhu... Men born in high-class family, but behavior is different, they are called dvija-bandhu. So they cannot understand the Vedic lessons directly. It is not possible. They have no such intelligence. Strī, śūdra and dvija-bandhu. So Vedānta-sūtra says, janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś cārtheṣu [SB 1.1.1]. They cannot understand. Therefore through Mahābhārata they are instructed. History. History they can hear. So Prahlāda Mahārāja says, "It is the duty of a human being, even from childhood, kaumāra..." Kaumāra means from the age of fifth year up to tenth year. This is called kaumāra. So people should be educated about this, that the problem is how to stop janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi [Bg. 13.9]. This education. This is called Bhāgavata instruction. You are noting. We are talking on the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The subject matter is how one shall transfer himself from this material world to the spiritual world and thereby stop birth, death, old age and disease. This is the whole subject matter.

So martyānām ṛtam icchatām. Martyānām. They should be conscious that "I do not wish to die. Why death is forced upon me?" This is intelligent question. This is the most intelligent man's question. "I do not want death." Just like if there is immediately some natural disturbance... I have got experience. Sometimes there was little trembling in the front house. People were crying, especially ladies, screaming. And that I have seen many times. As soon as there is a big trembling, everyone becomes afraid, "Now we are going to die. We have to die." So everyone is afraid of death, but nobody thinks how to make a solution of this problem. But there is solution. Therefore here it is said, martyānām. Martyānām means those who are destined to die. Ṛtam icchatām. If they are willing to live, if they want to stop calling the Yamarāja... Yamarāja means he will take you or take me, every one of us, after this body is finished, according to our karma. Yamarāja is there when we are sinful. Yamarāja is not for the devotees.

That is stated in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The Ajāmila upākhyāna, Ajāmila. Ajāmila was a great sinful man. So at the time of death, somehow or other, he remembered Nārāyaṇa, Nārāyaṇa. So he was very fond of his youngest child, and the Yamarāja, not directly, by sending his men, Yamadūta... So they are very fierceful. So at the time of death this Ajāmila saw fierceful creatures, very odd-looking. So he was very much afraid, "Who are they?" So he thought, because he was very much affectionate to his youngest child... So his name was Nārāyaṇa. He called him, "Nārāyaṇa, please come here. I am very much afraid." But just see the power of chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa. He immediately become eligible to go to Vaikuṇṭha. He did not mean Nārāyaṇa also isn't said. But Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he gives his commentation that he remembered real Nārāyaṇa after reference to the context. When he called for his child Nārāyaṇa, he remembered real Nārāyaṇa. Because in his boyhood, when he was... Up to his youthhood, he was very sincere devotee of Nārāyaṇa, a son of a brāhmaṇa. But he fell under the clutches of a prostitute. Therefore, after mixing with the prostitute, his all spiritual activities stopped. That is natural. So he became too much inclined to the prostitute, and he became a drunkard, he became a thief, he became a gambler, meat-eater, and debauch. All these qualifications he acquired, by the association of one prostitute. And in this age our only business is to mix with prostitute. Just see our position. How much fallen they should be. There is open market for prostitution. This is modern civilization. By the association of one prostitute... Ajāmila was a brāhmaṇa's son, very regulated, following all the rules and regulation. But as soon as he associated with a prostitute, he became fallen down. So this man remembered Nārāyaṇa. According to Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, he supports that simply calling the name of his son was not sufficient. He remembered Nārāyaṇa. But according to śāstra, that Nārāyaṇa, the holy name of the Lord, if one chants even neglectfully, he also gets the chance of being liberated. That's a fact.

There is one statement in the Nṛsiṁha-Purāṇa that a Muhammadan was attacked by a white boar. They kill by the tusk of the nose. So while the boar was killing that Muhammadan, he uttered, "Hārāma, hārāma." Hārāma is an Urdu word, but this word is found in Purāṇas also, hā rāma. Hārāma means condemned, condemned. So the Muhammadans, they do not eat, I mean, the flesh of pig. Just like the Hindus, they do not eat the flesh of cow, similarly, this flesh of pig is hārāma. So he did not mean Rāma. He wanted to say, "Condemned. This boar is condemned, hārāma." But he got the result of chanting hā rāma, hā rāma, "O my Lord Rāmacandra." He got the result.

So the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa... There are hundreds and thousands of names of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So any name, if you chant, you get the result. That is the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ. The person, Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His name, they are identical. Caitanya Mahāprabhu's, this is instruction. If we chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person, that is not different. That is Kṛṣṇa absolutism. Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's form here, they are not different. Kṛṣṇa's form can give you the same result as He can do being personally present. That is Kṛṣṇa's absolutism. So nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktiḥ. So in the name of Kṛṣṇa, there is complete potency, as it is in Kṛṣṇa personally. Therefore it is so important. In this age, we are so fallen. It is not possible to understand Kṛṣṇa as He is. But if we associate with Kṛṣṇa's name, then that is also association with Kṛṣṇa. This is the advantage. Nāmnām akāri. So as you associate with Kṛṣṇa in His sound form, so you become purified. Śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. This is the advantage.

So everyone's duty is to stop this birth and death problem by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. That is the only duty. And this should be taught from the very beginning of life. Just like these pious children, those who are dancing here, taking part in this meeting. You see? And one side you can see that this is the only path of Kṛṣṇa realization that even a child can take part in it. He has no education, he has no knowledge, but the method is so nice that they can also take part. They can enjoy with their father and mother. There is no other yoga system... There are many yoga system, but this bhakti-yoga system is so perfect that the great-grandfather of the child and the child himself-anyone can take part in it. That is practical. They are dancing here. Sometimes they are chanting. These things are going to their credit of spiritual advancement. The Deity worship is introduced for the general public, that anyone who will come, who will see the Deity, who will chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, dance little or play the karatāla, some way or other, if somebody is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, that will be credited to his account. "Yes. This living entity has advanced so much." Therefore in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said, svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. Even you do very little of this process of bhakti-yoga, it can save you from the greatest danger of life. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt.

The example is this Ajāmila. This Ajāmila, in the beginning of his life, he executed some service to the Lord under the instruction of his father. That was in his credit. So when he became first-class sinful man and was dying, so somehow or other, he chanted the name of Nārāyaṇa, and he became saved. He became saved. Even though it is taken as a chance, but the chance also gives him the benefit. So as soon as he uttered the name of Nārāyaṇa, he became eligible to be transported to Vaikuṇṭha, and immediately Nārāyaṇa sent his men, Nārāyaṇa-dūta, "Just go and save this man. He is being harassed by the Yamadūta." So Yamadūta, they were taking away him. In the meantime the messenger from Vaikuṇṭha, Nārāyaṇa-dūta came, stopped, "No, you cannot take this." So they were surprised. "Oh, who are these, so good-looking?" Because they were very odd-looking, and they did not see any good-looking men, especially from Vaikuṇṭha. They were coming with four hands, very nice. In the Vaikuṇṭha, the people are also exactly looking like Nārāyaṇa. Just like in this planet, the president is there. So far bodily features are concerned, there is no difference. The president has also two hands; we have also got two hands. Similarly, in the Vaikuṇṭhaloka, the president is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So He has got four hands, so the devotees or the inhabitants there, they have also the similar feature of the body, four hands. So these Yamadūta were surprised, that "You are looking so gentle, so nice. Why you are stopping in our duty? This man is sinful. It is our duty to take to Yamarāja, Mṛtyu."

So there was argument, and their attempt was foiled by these Nārāyaṇa-dūta. So when they came to their master Yamarāja, that "This is our first experience, that somebody else took away from our hand the person who was to be brought here. So is there any greater personality like you, er, more than you?" So he explained, "Yes, I am servant of Nārāyaṇa." So in that time Yamarāja advised that "To a devotee, you shall never go. It is not your jurisdiction." Just like the police jurisdiction is for the criminals, not for the gentlemen, similarly, Yamarāja's duty and his servant's duty, to take away to the Yamarāja only these sinful men. And those who are devotees, they are supposed to be not sinful. Naturally, they should be sinless. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā. Without becoming sinless, one cannot completely devote himself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



A person can be completely engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness business if he is completely sinless. Of course, by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious, even there is little tinge of sin, it is evaded gradually. But one should be very alert. It is not that "Because I am Kṛṣṇa conscious, and by becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious or chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, I am getting out of the jurisdiction of sinful activities..." This should never be thought of. We should be very much alert, because māyā is very strong. As soon as she gets the opportunity, immediately captures. So we should be... Therefore it is said, ṛtam icchatām. Ṛtam icchatām. So they should try to avoid sinful activities if they actually want relief from this cycle of birth and death. This is the program.



So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is in support of this desire. One must be serious and execute Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Follow the rules and regulation, very simple, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, and they will be saved from Mṛtyu, Yamarāja.

Thank you very much. (end)



740105SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.8

-

Los Angeles, January 5, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



na kaścin mriyate tāvad

yāvad āsta ihāntakaḥ

etad-arthaṁ hi bhagavān

āhūtaḥ paramarṣibhiḥ

aho nṛ-loke pīyeta

hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ

[SB 1.16.8]



"As long as Yamarāja, who causes everyone's death, is present here, no one shall meet with death. The great sages have invited the controller of death, Yamarāja, who is the representative of the Lord. Living beings who are under his grip should take advantage by hearing the deathless nectar in the form of this narration of the transcendental pastimes of the Lord."



Prabhupāda: So Yamarāja, Yamarāja is the representative of the Lord. Just like the police chief. The... What is called, the police chief? The superintendent or what? Commissioner. Commissioner of police. He is representative of government. So the police department is fearful department for the criminals, not for the law-abiding persons. Similarly, Yamarāja, who is the superintendent of death... Death is certainly cruel. At any moment death can stop all our activities. Nobody can protest. That is not possible. So... And nobody wants death also. That is also fact. But nobody can stop death also. The so-called scientific advancement, they cannot stop death. You can talk all kinds of nonsense of advancement of life, but after all, you have to die. Big, big scientists, professors, they talk so many things, but when death came, it could not save him by his scientific process. Because death is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Who can check? Therefore the Lord's name is Ajita, Ajita. Ajita means one who is never conquered by any other means. Sva-rāṭ, self-independent. These are the words used. Sva-rāṭ. Sva-rāṭ means fully independent. Nobody can make him dependent. That is Kṛṣṇa. That is God. Every one is dependent, but Kṛṣṇa is not dependent. Therefore He is called sva-rāṭ.



So Mahārāja, the Yamarāja... Yamarāja is representative. There are twelve recognized representative of God. We have many times cited this verse. Svayambhū, Brahmā. Lord Brahmā is representative. And Nārada, great sage Nārada, he is representative. Śambhu, Lord Śiva, he is representative. Kapila, Kapiladeva, he is also representative. Kumāra, the four Kumāras, Sanaka, Sanat-kumāra. And Manu, Manu, Vaivasvata Manu. This is the age of Vaivasvata Manu. Manu received the transcendental knowledge from his father, Vivasvān, the sun-god. So... And Prahlāda. Prahlāda Mahārāja is also representative of God. Prahlāda, Janaka. King Janaka, father of Sītādevī or father-in-law of Lord Rāmacandra. He is also representative. Gṛhastha. This Janaka-rāja is gṛhastha, householder, and Nārada is brahmacārī. Lord Brahmā is also gṛhastha. Lord Śiva is also gṛhastha; Kumāra, brahmacārī; Kapila, brahmacārī. So there are many. Yamarāja is also gṛhastha. Śukadeva Gosvāmī is brahmacārī. So it doesn't matter whether one is brahmacārī or householder or a sannyāsī. He must try to become confidential servant of the Lord. Then he becomes the representative, representative of God, Kṛṣṇa.

So Yamarāja is a great devotee Vaiṣṇava. We should not be afraid of Yamarāja. Those who are devotees, they are... Yamarāja says that "I offer them respect, my obeisances." He advised his messengers that "Don't go to my devotees. They are to be offered respect by me. You go to persons who are reluctant to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. You go there and bring them here for judgment." The Christian also believe, "the day of judgment." The judgment is given by Yamarāja. But who goes to his court for judgment? The criminals, those who are not devotees, those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious, they go to the court of Yamarāja.

So in other words, it is the duty of the Yamarāja to see that everyone is becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious. That is his duty, just as the police department's duty is to see that everyone is law-abiding, acting according to the law of the state. Police is not anyone's enemy. He is enemy to the criminals, not to the law-abiding citizens. I have seen it, personal experience. In one of my friend's house there was burglary. The police inquiry was there. So we were going in another's house, the policemen and we also. So we saw in distant place a few men were fleeing. They were going away, hastily running away. So I inquired the police, "Why these people are running away?" So he answered, "You do not know Bābājī, that they are criminals. Because we are passing, they are thinking, 'Now the police is coming to arrest us,' although there is no purpose. How one can arrest? But they are..." What is called, this? Culprit mind is always suspicious. Because they are culprit, criminals, as soon as they saw, "The policeman is coming," they began to go away, run away.

So Yamarāja is not to be afraid by the devotees. This is the purpose. And it is the Yamarāja's duty to see that these rascals who have forgotten Kṛṣṇa, or God, and come here to enjoy material sense gratification, they must be punished. Because material sense gratification is always sinful. We may create so many artificial laws, "This is good, and this is bad." Just like in your country, drinking is good. And in some other country, drinking is bad. In your country, meat-eating is no offense. But in the Vedic civilization, meat-eating is one of the foremost sinful activities. So here the so-called "good" and "bad," they are all mental creation. Otherwise, everything is bad, nothing good. Here, only goodness is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. Otherwise, everything is bad. So-called ethics, morality and law, good and bad, they are all rascaldom. It has no meaning. Because they are punishable. They can avoid the punishment of the law of the state. Just like in the government in every state, there is some punishment if one kills another living entity. Another man, not living entity. There is punishment. The law punishes. If you kill someone, if you commit murder, then you will be punished. This is punishable. But because it is man-made law, therefore it is defective. A man is a living entity, and a cow is also a living entity. Why this discrimination, that if a man is murdered or killed, that murderer must be punished? But that law is not permissible in God's law. In God's law, either you kill a man or you kill an ant, you are punishable. You are punishable. You cannot avoid this. Because in the eyes of God, the Brahmā, Lord Brahmā, and a small ant, they are all sons of God.

sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā

[Bg. 14.4]



Kṛṣṇa says like this, "I am their father." To whom? Sarva-yoniṣu: "In all species of life, beginning from Brahmā down to the ant." So if you kill your brother, say, who is not important, will your father approve, "Oh, you have done nice. You are very nice son. You are earning millions of dollars, and this man is useless, this, this boy. So you have killed. It is very nice"? No, father will never tolerate. To the father, the useless son and the earning son, both are equal in affection.



So therefore it is the duty of the elderly son, those who are advanced, not to kill the insufficient son, but to give them education of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the duty. It is not that "Because this living entity is useless, then kill him." So you can kill, but you will be implicated. Therefore Yamarāja is there. Yamarāja's business is to see how much sinful this living entity is, and he is offered a similar body. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. You will be judged after your death, every one of us. Of course, if he takes Kṛṣṇa consciousness seriously, then the path is automatic. Automatically you go back to home, back to Godhead. There is no question of judgment. Judgment is for the criminals, the rascals who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious. But if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious, even if you cannot finish the job in this life, even if you fall, still, you will be given another chance of human body, to begin where you ended, to begin from the point where you fell down. That is...

Therefore svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt. If you have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, try to execute it very seriously, means to follow the rules and regulation and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. That's all. Five things. No illicit sex, no gambling, no meat-eating... We don't prohibit sex, but illicit sex is most sinful. Most sinful. Unfortunately, they are so rascals, one sex to another, another sex to another, another sex... That is māyā's illusion, influence. But if you stick to Kṛṣṇa... Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. If you catch up Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet very tightly, then you will not fall down. But if you make a show of so-called brahmacārī, so-called gṛhastha, or so-called sannyāsī, then you will fall down. We are experiencing that. Then you must fall down. Kṛṣṇa will not tolerate a defaulter, a pseudo devotee. Māyā is very strong. Immediately capture him: "Come on. Why you are here? Why you are in this society? Get out." That is Yamarāja's duty. But if you remain in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Yamarāja will not touch you. Your death is stopped from the point where you begin Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Your death is stopped. Nobody is prepared to die. That is a fact. You may say, I may say, "No, I am not afraid of death." That is another rascaldom. Everyone is afraid of death, and nobody wants to die. That is a fact. But if you are serious about that thing, that "I shall stop my process of death, dying process," then it is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Therefore it is advised, aho nṛ-loke pīyeta hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ. "O the human society, you have got this body. Just go on drinking the nectarine of kṛṣṇa-kathā." It is advised here. Aho nṛ-loke. Especially it has been advised in the nṛ-loke, the human society. It is not addressed to the dog-loke or cat-loke. They cannot. They have no capacity. Therefore it has been: nṛ-loke. Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke. Another verse in the Fifth Canto: nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye [SB 5.5.1]. These are the Bhāgavata. There is no comparison. There is no literature throughout the universe like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. There is no comparison. There is no competition. Every word is for the good of the human society. Every word, each and every word. Therefore we stress so much in the book distribution. Somehow or other, if the book goes in one hand, he will be benefited. At least he will see, "Oh, they have taken so much price. Let me see what is there." If he reads one śloka, his life will be successful. If one śloka, one word. This is such nice things. Therefore we are stressing so much, "Please distribute book, distribute book, distribute book." A greater mṛdaṅga. We are chanting, playing our mṛdaṅga. It is heard within this room or little more. But this mṛdaṅga will go home to home, country to country, community to community, this mṛdaṅga.

So it is advised that nṛ-loke. Nṛ-loke means the human form of body, in the human society. We don't discard that "This is American society" or "This is European society," "This is Indian society..." No, all human being. All human being. It doesn't matter what he is. All human being. What to speak of civilized men, even uncivilized, anārya. They are also described in the Bhāgavatam. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ [SB 2.4.18]. These names are there. Kirāta. Kirāta means the black, the Africans. They are called kirāta. Kirāta-hūṇa āndhra. Hūṇa, the nation or the community on the North Pole, above Russian, German, they are called hūṇa. There are so many we do not know. Khasādayaḥ, the Mongolians. Khasādayaḥ means who does not grow sufficiently mustaches and beard, this Mongolian group. Kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ. Yavana, the mlecchas, yavanas, means those who are Muhammadans and others. So they are also included. Nṛ-loke. Because it is nṛ-loka. Every human being. Superficially, externally, there may be, this nation is better than that nation. That is fact. The Aryans and non-Aryans. There are divisions: civilized, noncivilized; educated, noneducated; cultured, noncultured; black, white; this and that. There are... Externally these divisions... But that distinction is of the body.

But spirit soul is not this body. He is spirit. That quality is one. There is no such distinction, "This is better," "This is lower," "This is black," "This is white," "This is civilized." In the spirit soul platform, everyone is one, one. Samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Samaḥ. Samatā. Samatā means equality. Where? Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. When one is self-realized, ahaṁ brahmāsmi... "I am not this body. I am not Christian, I am not Hindu, I am not black, I am not white, I am not fat, I am not thin. I am Brahman." Brahmāsmi. That is called Brahman. "I am spirit soul, part and parcel of God. My only business is to serve God, because I am part and parcel of God." Just like I have given several times: the part and parcel of my body is this finger. What is the duty? To serve the whole body. I ask the finger, "Come here immediately. Do this." "Yes." Natural. If I am part and parcel of God, then my only duty is to serve God. That's all. I have no other duty.

So that is brahma-bhūtaḥ. It is very simple thing. Not that by becoming brahma-bhūtaḥ, one gets four legs and one dozen hands. No. The hand is there, the leg is there, the mouth is there, everything is there. When it is purified, that "These hands, legs, are meant for serving Kṛṣṇa," that is called brahma-bhūtaḥ. That is brahma-bhūtaḥ. Not that brahma-bhūtaḥ means I become nirākāra, no form. The Māyāvādī philosophers, they think like that, something different. Because this is not Brahman. This is asat. Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā. "This world is false. Therefore Brahman realization means that something opposite must be there. In the māyā, everything is variety. So Brahman must be without variety." This is also material conception, because he is thinking like that. But my thinking, if I am in māyā, so whatever I am thinking, that is also māyā. But these rascals they do not understand that. They do not understand that. I am thinking that "Brahman must be opposite of this variety. Therefore Brahman must be impersonal." But what is their conclusion? The conclusion... He is thinking. He is thinking like that. But real Brahman, Parabrahman, Kṛṣṇa, is not impersonal. He does not say that "I am impersonal." But these rascals say that "God is impersonal." So this kind of thinking by the person who is in māyā, that is also māyā. Therefore they are called Māyāvādī. Māyāvādī means all their philosophy is also māyā. It has no meaning. Therefore they are Māyāvādī. They are handling something in the māyā. Therefore they are called Māyāvādī.

So here it is said that nṛ-loke. Nṛ-loke, in this human form of body... Here advising, aho nṛ-loke pīyeta hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ. This is advised. Those who are born in the human society, they should join this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement where simply hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ, there is no other business. What is our business here? Constantly, twenty-four hours, we are engaged in hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ. That's all. And so long you are engaged in hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ, there is no question of death. There is no question of death. Then if you say, "We are seeing that devotees are dying," "Yes, but death has been stopped. "Then still, why he is dying?" "He is not dying. He is going back to home, back to Godhead." Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. Tyaktvā deham. He has given up this body, but he is not going to accept anymore a body like this. Then? Mām eva: "He is coming to Me." What is that mām eva? Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. If you go somehow or other to Kṛṣṇa, you will never come back.

So mṛtyu, death, is stopped as soon as you take Kṛṣṇa consciousness very seriously, immediately, from that moment, as soon as you are initiated. You promise before the spiritual master, "Yes, I am initiated, I shall act like this," and if you follow, then your death is stopped from that point. No more death. No more death. Simply an official business, just like you sleep and again you awake, similarly, a devotee's death is like that. It is like sleeping, and next moment in the spiritual kingdom, immediately. Immediately. When he will rise, he will see that "I am with Kṛṣṇa."

Devotees: Jaya! Prabhupāda!



Prabhupāda: This is the fact. So don't fall down. Don't be childish, that "Yes, I have promised before spiritual master, before Kṛṣṇa, before fire. All right, that's all right. Let me break." No, don't do that. Don't do that. Don't lose this opportunity. You are now on the point of deathlessness, but if you again commit... Bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi. There is chance. If your execution of devotional service is not going perfectly, so there is chance of falldown.



So devotional service so nice, that even if you fall down, there is not very great loss. Great loss means you get human body, not an animal body. That is stated in the Bhag... Yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ [Bg. 6.41]. One who has fallen down from the bhakti-yoga, where does he go? Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe: in the house of very rich man and in the house of nice, Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa. This is the opportunity. This is first-class opportunity. If you take your birth in the house of Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa, just like these children are taking birth, father and mother Vaiṣṇava... They are very fortunate. They are not ordinary children. Otherwise they would not have gotten this chance of chanting and dancing before Deity and Vaiṣṇava. They are not ordinary children. The parent must take care, very good care, that they may not fall down. They have got the chance. Now train them to complete this Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the duty of father and mother. "Now this child has come under my care." If both the father and mother think like that... Not contraceptive. Oh, rascaldom. "Oh, here is a child who has taken shelter of me as mother, who has taken shelter of me as father. Oh, it is my duty to train him in such a way that no more birth, no more death." Therefore Bhāgavata says, pitā na sa syāt...na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum: "One should not become mother, one should not become father, if he cannot release his children from the clutches of death." And how one can be saved from the clutches of death? This is the process, hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ. If he is trained up... Therefore we have got this school from the Dallas. From the beginning, hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ. They are being trained up in hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ.

So once one becomes situated in hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ, that means he has stopped his process of death. So this dying again of this body... Of course, this body is material. It must make a show that this material body... But he is a spiritual body. He is going back to home, back to Godhead. There is no doubt about it. Therefore Yamarāja's duty... Yamarāja is Vaiṣṇava. He wants to see that you do not die again. He wants to see that you continue your deathlessness. Now you are engaged in kṛṣṇa-kathāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ. So that is the point of... Just like a diseased man. A diseased man, as soon as goes to the physician and he gives the right medicine, and he takes it, that means his diseaselessness condition has already begun. It will take little time. So in the meantime, in that treatment time, diseaselessness condition, if you make another infection, that is your fault. Otherwise, deathlessness begins from the day of initiation. Ādau gurvāśrayam. As soon as you take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master, your point of deathlessness begins immediately. Immediately. And if you continue the advice and instruction of the spiritual master, or the śāstra, then you become deathless. No more death. And Yamarāja wants to see that actually you are continuing your deathlessness process. This is... Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so nice. Therefore it is advised.

Now if somebody argues that "Here is... A devotee is also dying." A devotee is also dying. How can I say that it is deathlessness? No, he does not know. Devotee is not dying. There is very good example. Just like a cat. He catches the rat and he catches his cub also. But these two kinds of catching is different. When the cat catches a rat, that rat means his, "Chi chi chi," means dying, actually dying. And the cab (cub), he is feeling very comfortable: "Meow, meow, meow." Because the same cat, catching, process is the same, but the feeling is different. So a devotee seemingly dying, he is not dying. He is going back to Kṛṣṇa. He is very pleased, "Now my labor is finished. I am going to Kṛṣṇa." That is his feeling. And others, they are crying, "Oh, this is my estate. This is my family. This is my, this is my, this is my... I am leaving. I do not want to leave it. What will happen to that?" He is crying. That is death. And this is not death.

So it appears like death, but it is actually not death. Just like the electric fan, if you make the switch off, it has stopped running, but if you say, "Still running," that is not running. That is a show of running. Actually, the running is stopped. Similarly, as soon as you surrender to God, through His representative, your death is stopped unless you make it nullified by accepting anything which is against the bhakti principle. Otherwise your deathlessness is guaranteed. That is stated here. Na kaścin mriyate tāvad yāvad āsta ihāntakaḥ. If you simply know that "Yamarāja is there; he is supervising that I may not fall down," then you will not die. You will not die. It is not impractical. It is practical. Try to perceive the truth that since you have begun Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, your death has been stopped. But don't fall down and again capture death. That is the instruction.

Thank you very much. (end)



740107SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.10

-

Los Angeles, January 7, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



sūta uvāca

yadā parīkṣit kuru-jāṅgale 'vasat

kaliṁ praviṣṭaṁ nija-cakravartite

niśamya vārtām anatipriyāṁ tataḥ

śarāsanaṁ saṁyuga-śauṇḍir ādade

[SB 1.16.10]



Translation: "Sūta Gosvāmī said: While Mahārāja Parīkṣit was residing in the capital of the Kuru empire, the symptoms of the age of Kali began to infiltrate within the jurisdiction of his state. When he learned about this, he did not think the matter very palatable. This did, however, give him a chance to fight. He took up his bow and arrows and prepared himself for military activities."



Prabhupāda: So Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the ideal monarch. Yadā parīkṣit kuru-jāṅgale 'vasat. He was so powerful king that there was no possibility of anyone rising against him. He was so powerful. Therefore he was peacefully living in his capital, kuru-jāṅgale. So he was not getting any opportunity to fight because there was no enemy with whom to fight. But as soon as he got the news that Kali has entered in the jurisdiction of his kingdom, he got the chance of fighting.



Those who are sportsmen, they want to play. Naturally, one who is expert in some art... Just like there was one Bhasmāsura. So... Bhasmāsura? Bhaumāsura? What is the name? Bhaumāsura. So Bhaumāsura, by the grace of Lord Śiva, he got one thousand hands. And he wanted to fight, but he was so powerful that nobody would dare to come before him to fight. Therefore he was practicing to fight with the hills and mountains and cracking them and smashing them. So one day he complained to Lord Śiva, "My Lord, you have so kindly given me the hands to fight, but I don't find any opponent to fight. So what is the use of these hands, so many?" So Lord Śiva could understand that "He is a demon." So he said, "You rascal, one day you will find some enemy when your desire will be fulfilled for good." So he had to fight with Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa finished him. So it is a natural desire.

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja had no desire to fight, but he got the news that the Kali has entered. His grandfathers, the Pāṇḍavas, left the kingdom, that "Now the Kali is coming. Let us retire timely. So the next king, our grandson, will look after it." Not that everyone should remain at home until he is forced by death to get out of home. That is not very nice principle. One should retire timely. That is the system, Vedic system. Brahmacārī... Suppose one lives for hundred years. Twenty-five years remain brahmacārī at the shelter of guru, twenty-five years. So guru teaches him to remain brahmacārī, naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī. Just like my Guru Mahārāja, Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda. He was brahmacārī. He was brahmacārī, strict brahmacārī, ideal personality. So that is recommended for everyone. Up to twenty-five years' age, nobody should have any connection with woman. That is brahmacārī. Strictly. That brahmacārī rules and regulation are there in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that he would go door to door for collecting alms for his spiritual master, and address every woman as mother, from the very beginning. From five years old, if a child is trained to call all woman as "Mother," naturally his culture is different. Because he has learned to call all woman as "Mother." He has no other idea. A small child, any woman comes before him, he knows "(S)He is my mother." So this was the practice. That is not only religiously, but morally, it is so good, to look upon all woman as mother. That is the system still in India, any unknown woman who has no introduction with you, (s)he is addressed "Mātājī." Address her. She may be just like daughter or granddaughter, but one would address, as a respect to the woman, as "Mother, Mātājī." This is Indian system. Now some rascals have introduced "Bhaginījī, sister." But that is not shastric. In the śāstra, all the woman, except one's wife, should be addressed as "Mother."

That is the instruction by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, a great politician moralist. He said that "Who is learned scholar?" He was himself very learned scholar, but he is giving definition of learned scholar. What is that? Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu: "Anyone who sees all woman..." Para-dāreṣu. Para-dāra means other's wife. Para-dāreṣu. Mātṛvat. Not his own wife, but other's wife. So except one has got one wife, and all others, other's wife. So mātṛvat para-dāreṣu, to treat and see other's wife as mother. Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu. Para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat: "And other's property as garbage in the street." As nobody is interested in the garbage on the street, similarly, if one is not interested in anyone's property... It may be insignificant thing, but one cannot touch it. Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam [Īśo mantra 1]. This is the Upaniṣad. Īśopaniṣad, Vedic injunction. Mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam: "Don't touch any other property." Tena tyaktena bhuñjīthāḥ: "Whatever is given by Kṛṣṇa, God, as His prasādam, you accept it. That you can enjoy. Don't touch anything." So similarly, a person should be so nicely trained up that the one wife with religious, by performing religious ceremony, is given to him, he should be satisfied with her, not to see other women, adulteration. This is Kali-yuga. This is Kali-yuga. Now this adulteration, prostitution, is common affair, common affair. Nobody sees other's wife as his mother, nobody. And neither the woman sees other's husband as father. No.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit, when he saw that the principles of Kali-yuga, meaning adulteration, prostitution, animal-killing, drinking, intoxication, gambling, these things are coming gradually... Because the age Kali-yuga, this is Kali-yuga. Just like before winter there is some wind, very cold. One can understand, "Now winter is approaching." So of course, you cannot stop winter, but you be careful so that you may not catch cold, coughing. You dress yourself nicely, have warm cloth. It is no use fighting with the seasonal changes. That is not possible. Just like it is raining. It is no use to fight with the cloud and rain, stop it. That is not possible. But you can take raincoat, umbrella, so that you may not be affected. That is your business. So Kali-yuga has entered. Kali-yuga has entered all over the world. Not now. Five thousand years ago, during the time of Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Gradually, people are degrading, only on these principles: illicit sex, animal slaughter, intoxication and gambling. These are the four pillars of the platform of Kali.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit when... That means five thousand years ago, all over the world these things were unknown. You won't find in history these things. So as king, he has to punish the debauchers, the rogues, the thieves. So immediately he become alert. It says, niśamya vārtām anatipriyām. When he got news, so although no enemy is there attacking, but Kali is attacking. Kali's attacking. Kaliṁ praviṣṭaṁ nija-cakravartite. Praviṣṭam. Kali has already entered in his own jurisdiction, cakravartī. The cakra, cakra means circle, and vartī means remaining in the center. So a king is supposed... A king or a spiritual master or the head is supposed to be the center of a circle. So his kingdom is supposed to be the circle. He is the center. Nija-cakravartite, within his jurisdiction, within the circle. Kaliṁ praviṣṭam, niśamya. As soon as he heard, he became alert to punish.

That is responsible king. Not that "They want to drink, and we can levy tax for drinking." Because by, I mean to say, encouraging people drinking... That we see in India now. Gandhi's started his movement on this basis. Nobody could drink even tea. At least amongst his associates, nobody could drink even tea. No cigarette. Gandhi was very strict. And of course, he could not prohibit, but he was also against illicit sex, drinking, gambling. But he prohibited. He introduced prohibition in so many states. But now government is encouraging. Government is giving license, "Yes, openly you can drink." Kali's influence. Meat-eating. In India, at least, we never saw big signboard in a beef shop. In upper country, even there was... Always there are meat-eaters. So the meat shop is kept out of the vision of public. I mean to say, privately one could purchase, and if one was accustomed to eat meat, he could not get the chance daily. Because in the family, no Hindu family will allow meat-eating or fish-eating. No. In our childhood we have seen, our family also. If one wanted to eat meat, then he would do it hundred miles away secretly. Nobody will know. Or he will go to some rascal hotel. That was the system. Now they are keeping chickens, everyone's roof. This is the advancement, Kali's advancement. And government is giving license, "Yes, you manufacture liquor." Because it is a great profit for government. I know. I had also license to keep in my medical business, this rectified spirit. Rectified spirit means pure alcohol, from which whiskey is made. Absolute alcohol. So I know that the cost of rectified spirit, distilled by the government, was one rupee per gallon. One rupee per gallon. But the same rectified spirit, when turned into liquor by some process, not any very difficult process, just making it coloring or flavoring... The real thing is the rectified spirit. The government would charge sixty rupees per gallon. The cost, it is one rupee. And they would sixty charge rupees. Because government knew it or know it that when a man becomes drunkard, he will drink at any cost. At any cost. Pramatta. Pramatta. Matta means mad, and pramatta means prakṛṣṭa-rūpeṇa matta. So people are already mad under the influence of this material nature, and our government, all over the world, encouraging that "You become more mad, more mad." This is their welfare activities.

So Mahārāja Parīkṣit was not that kind of government. It is the duty of the government or the king to see that the citizens are properly raised to the spiritual platform, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is the duty of the government. Therefore the social division is brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. The brāhmaṇas should be ideal teachers of Vedic understanding. The kṣatriyas should follow, even by force... Just like Parīkṣit Mahārāja. As soon as he heard that Kali, these four principles of Kali has already entered, he immediately took his bows and arrows and... "Who is that rascal, he is drinking? Kill him." That was king. "Kill him, that rascal." So if one is killed because he was drinking, then others will be very careful. That was king's duty. "Anyone who has got illicit sex, kill him. Anyone who is drunkard, kill him. Anyone who is eating meat, kill him. No other consideration. Directly kill him." Then you see within a few years all these things will stop. Within a few years. But the government must be strong. But the government wants that "You go to hell by drinking, but we are making profit. One rupee cost, we are getting sixty rupees. Go on with this business." This is Kali-yuga. Everyone is doing his own personal interest.

The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is quite opposite. Only interest of Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No more personal interest. They are thinking of personal interest. But they do not know what is personal interest, these rascals. Just like the same example I have given many times that the part and parcel of my body... Suppose this hand gets one nice sweetmeat, and if the fingers think that "It is our personal interest to enjoy the sweetmeat," that is mistaken idea. The finger's catching a sweetmeat cannot enjoy it. The real interest, personal interest is, give it to the stomach. Don't smash it. Give it immediately to the stomach, and your interest is fulfilled. Immediately your fingers will be fed. This is personal interest, to enjoy through Kṛṣṇa, not directly. But these rascals, they do not know. They defy Kṛṣṇa, "Why Kṛṣṇa? I am Kṛṣṇa. I am God. I am everything." Therefore they are suffering. They do not know actually how to fulfill the personal interest.

That we are teaching: "Fulfill your personal interest through Kṛṣṇa."

na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ

durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ

andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās

te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ

[SB 7.5.31]



The rascals, they do not know that his personal interest is Kṛṣṇa. That he does not know. Therefore he is rascal. And Kṛṣṇa says. It is not that we have manufactured this word. Kṛṣṇa says, na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15]. Kṛṣṇa is asking everyone, "Please surrender unto Me. Give up all this nonsense engagement." That is his interest, the living entity's interest. You surrender or not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, what Kṛṣṇa gains or loses? He has got many servants. He can create His servants. He doesn't require your service. But if you surrender to Kṛṣṇa and render service unto Him, that is your interest. That is your interest. They do not know this.



So na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇuṁ durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ [SB 7.5.31]. And people, the blind leaders, are teaching everyone that "This is your interest: You eat whatever you like, you drink as much as you like, you go on gambling." If such leader is there, there is no restriction of eating. If such swamiji comes, that "No, no, you can eat everything," "Oh, a good swami." And "This swamiji is very conservative." Just like Allen Ginsberg told me, "Swamiji, you are very conservative." Because I restrict. But he does not know that actual benefit will be derived when you are actually conservative. Otherwise you are going by the waves of māyā. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura therefore said, miche māyār bośe, jāccho bhese', Khāccho hābuḍubu bhāi: "You are being washed away by the waves of māyā, material energy, illusion. Why you are putting yourself in such dangerous condition, sometimes being drowned, sometimes up, trying to...?" This is struggle for existence. The only remedy, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, jīva kṛṣṇa-dās, e biśvās, korle to' ār duḥkho nāi: "If you accept this principle, that 'I am eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa,' then you become immediately saved from this washing away by the waves of māyā."

So already, anyone who is in this material world, he is being carried away by the waves, the three guṇa, the three modes of material nature. Somebody is carried away in goodness, sometimes we see passion, sometimes in ignorance, but everyone is being carried away. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. So everyone is being carried by the material modes of nature. One has to become above this, nistraiguṇya. How it can be? That is also said in the Bhagavad-gītā:

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



Immediately.



So it is the duty of the king, it is the duty of the government, it is the duty of the father, it is the duty of the guru, it is the duty of the husband to see that his subordinate is being trained up in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this life, so that there will be no more death. Na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum. People do not know that he is being carried away. One is being carried away by the clutches of māyā in the cycle of birth and death. They do not know it, neither they want any solution. Although everyone does not want to die, but no scientist, no philosopher can give you any information that death can be checked.

There is way. Here is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, whereby you can stop your process of birth and death. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti kaunteya [Bg. 4.9]. He comes back. These things are there, information is there, the process is there. Everything is there in Vedic knowledge, Vedic cultivation. Simply people have to take it. Then they will be happy. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. Vāsudeva, you can sing. (end)



740108SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.11

-

Los Angeles, January 8, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit sat on a chariot drawn by black horses. His flag was marked with the sign of a lion. Being so decorated and surrounded by charioteers, cavalry, elephants and infantry soldiers, he left the capital to conquer in all directions." [SB 1.16.11]



Prabhupāda: So each king had different colored horses and differently marked flag on the top of the chariot. Just like Arjuna's chariot was drawn by white horses. Śveta. Śveta means white. And his grandson, his horses are of blackish. Not... Śyāma is not black. Blackish. Swarthy. No, blackish. Turaṅga, jeweled. They have four horses in chariot, and there is a charioteer and flag marked with lion. This lion is not to be considered an ordinary lion. This lion is Mṛgendra or Narahari, Nṛsiṁhadeva. Arjuna's chariot was with flag marked with Vajrāṅga, Hanumānjī, Hanumānjī. Kṛṣṇa's chariot flag is marked with Garuḍa. So these are the distinctive marks. One will understand immediately, "This is such and such king's chariot." That mark is there.



So Arjuna kept upon him Vajrāṅgajī, Hanumān, because he considered Hanumān his guru. Hanumān was servant of Lord Rāmacandra. He fought the battlefield of Laṅkā between Rāma and Rāvaṇa. He could not use any weapon, but he was very strong. He knew how to throw stones. In this way, he fought in the battle and won over the Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa was killed by Lord Rāmacandra. So Vaiṣṇava does not mean he cannot do anything else except chanting. That is, of course, the supreme objective, śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23], to hear about Viṣṇu and chant about Kṛṣṇa. That is very experienced life, experienced Vaiṣṇava. He can concentrate chanting. Just like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Haridāsa Ṭhākura was chanting. But Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself, Nityānanda Prabhu, they were preaching.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, a very young age, twenty-four years only, He took sannyāsa. Why? Tyaktvā, rāja-lakṣmī. There is that verse? Vande mahā-puruṣa te caraṇāravindam. That is predicted. "The Lord will give up His Lakṣmī and will take sannyāsa and preach." These are stated in the Vedic literature. So this is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There are many evidences in the śāstras about Śrī Caitanya, the Lord, Supreme Lord's taking of sannyāsa and preaching. So we accept Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu not only by His uncommon action, but also on the evidence of the śāstra. You can accept. Not that any rascal comes, that "I am incarnation of God." No, no. We cannot accept that. We must first of all see that He is mentioned in the śāstra, and He is actually acting uncommonly, which is not possible by any human being. These two things, features, must be... Just like Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we accept, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are many instances, He is playing like ordinary man, but at times showing, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just like in Jagannātha Purī, Ratha-yātrā festival, sometimes the ratha, chariot, will be stuck up, will not move. People draw it, but does not move. Even King Pratāparudra engaged some elephants, and the ratha is not moving. And Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would say, "All right, let Me try." So He would go back side of the car and with His head push it, and very easily it will go. This is extraordinary. Even the elephants, big, big elephants, could not draw. But by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's pushing by head, even there was no need of drawing it or catching the rope... Similarly, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, when He was performing kīrtana, He used to form four parties. And each party will see that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is present there.

So there are many other things, which is not possible by ordinary human being. These things are to the test. Not very small, insignificant. Just like in India, there are so many so-called incarnation of God or God. They declare themselves God. But that God is for the fools and rascals, not for any intelligent man. Intelligent will test it by the description of the śāstra. Sādhu-śāstra-guru-vākya, tinete koriyā aikya. Anything we shall accept through sādhu, devotees. A devotee accepts something. That we shall accept. And śāstra, not only devotee accepts, but it is confirmed in the śāstra, in the revealed scripture. Sādhu-śāstra. And guru. And guru also will say, "Yes, it is all right." So Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is accepted by sādhus like Advaita Ācārya, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa, Haridāsa Ṭhākura, in His own... They are sādhus, accepted. And śāstra also says. In Mahābhārata, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavata, in the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's name and activities are mentioned. Dhyeyaṁ sadā paribhava-ghnam abhīṣṭa-doham. This verse. It is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, also in the Rāmāyaṇa. And

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]



It is mentioned in Bhāgavata, Eleventh Canto, that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in this age, Kali-yuga, will be kṛṣṇa-varṇam, always describing Kṛṣṇa. He is Kṛṣṇa, but kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣā akṛṣṇam. Varṇa means also category. Just brāhmaṇa-varṇa, kṣatriya-varṇa, vaiśya-varṇa, śūdra-varṇa. In the horoscope, as we discussed the other day, jāta-karma, after the birth of the child, everything, characteristic, what will be his future, everything is mentioned in the horoscope. So in the horoscope it is stated, brāhmaṇa-varṇa, kṣatriya-varṇa, śūdra-varṇa, like that, in which category this child belongs. Even if he is born in a non-brāhmaṇa family, but what will be his characteristic, that is stated. That is called brāhmaṇa-varṇa. Similarly, kṣatriya-varṇa, vaiśya-varṇa. So everything is predicted by astrological calculation.



So Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is predicted in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We do not accept Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu simply because He was a saintly person. There is controversy about Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu amongst the Vaiṣṇava community. Just like the Nimbārka Sampradāya. They say that "We accept Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu as a great devotee," but we, Gauḍīya Sampradāya, we say that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because it is stated in the śāstra. Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam [SB 11.5.32]. He is Kṛṣṇa, in the category of Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-varṇa... Just like brāhmaṇa-varṇa. Kṛṣṇa-varṇa, same category. But He is, by complexion, yellowish, not kṛṣṇa. Tviṣā akṛṣṇa. Tviṣā means "by the bodily skin." Just like we have different color, different skin, different color, similarly, tviṣā, by His skin, He is not kṛṣṇa, He is not black. Tviṣā akṛṣṇa. Akṛṣṇa means not black. So "not black" means you can accept any other color which is not black. So that there is proof in the śāstra that Lord, Kṛṣṇa, has also many colors. Śuklo raktas tathā pītaḥ. When, similarly, when Kṛṣṇa's horoscope was made by Gargamuni, he said that "This child formerly had śuklo raktas tathā pītaḥ. He was white color, He was yellow color, and He was red color." So this pītaḥ, yellow color, is also Kṛṣṇa's another color. Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam. So here, tviṣākṛṣṇa. Akṛṣṇa means not black. So "not black" means you must take the other three, namely white, red, and pīta. So other two colors in the Satya-yuga and Dvāpara-yuga, was manifested, red color and white color. Hayagrīva, white color. So the pīta..., kṛṣṇa color is also finished. Therefore pīta, yellowish color. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has very nicely

So kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam [SB 11.5.32]. And another feature is sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam. Astra-pārṣadam. Astra means weapon. So in the Kali-yuga, Kṛṣṇa does not come with weapon. In other yugas, the Lord comes with weapon. Just like Lord Rāmacandra. He came with bows and arrows to fight with Rāvaṇa. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa also appeared with His sudarśana-cakra. Because in those days, the demons were killed by weapons. Kṛṣṇa killed many demons, because Kṛṣṇa has got two kinds of activities, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: [Bg. 4.8] for sādhu, simply to deliver them, and for the demons, to kill them. But the result is the same. That is called Absolute. Whether Kṛṣṇa pats somebody and kills somebody, the result is the same. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is Absolute. It is not ordinary fortune to be killed by God. It is a great fortune. Just like Rāvaṇa and Hiraṇyakaśipu. They were Kṛṣṇa's personal guards, Jaya-Vijaya. Some way or other, they became offender to the Kumāras. So they cursed him that "You are not well-behaved." They stopped him going in the house of Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa. So they became very angry. They cursed him that "You do not deserve this place. You must go to the material world. In the material world there is enviousness, jealousy. In the spiritual world you have become envious. So you are not fit. You must go down to the material world." So they became very much disturbed. Lord Nārāyaṇa personally came out to settle up. "So this you have been cursed; it cannot be withdrawn. You have to go. But after going in the material world, if you treat Me as your enemy, then in three births you will be liberated and you will come back. But if you treat Me as my friend, then it will take seven, seven births." So decided, "We shall become Your enemy, Sir." So therefore this Rāvaṇa, Hiraṇyakaśipu, they are Jaya-Vijaya, and they appeared to be very strong enemy. To become enemy of Kṛṣṇa, that is not also joke. He has to fight with Kṛṣṇa. It is not ordinary thing. No ordinary man can fight. So Vaiṣṇava commentation is that when Kṛṣṇa wants to fight, the fighting is not possible in the spiritual world. And whom with fight? Everyone is engaged in His service. So therefore, to fight, He has to come here to execute His mission. Vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, to kill the duṣkṛtām, miscreants. So when He personally fights... The duṣkṛtām can be finished simply by indication of Kṛṣṇa. The material energy is so powerful. Yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ. Even the sun, the most powerful, aśeṣa-tejāḥ, high temperature. Aśeṣa-tejāḥ, unlimited temperature, that sun is also moving within it's orbit, yasyājñayā, under the order of Kṛṣṇa. Yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. So to kill a demon in this material world, the Lord does not require to come Himself. But He comes in special case. Just like Kṛṣṇa came to kill Kaṁsa, to kill Rāvaṇa, to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu, like that. So that is also His pastime.

So His devotees are also like that. They have to execute the mission of Kṛṣṇa. Just like here, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, he is a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. So he is going out with soldier to fight. Similarly, Dhruva Mahārāja also, he fought. Prahlāda Mahārāja fought. Because they were kings, so their duty is to subdue, to conquer over the demons. Not that because one is Kṛṣṇa's devotee, he should not do any other thing. If required, a devotee can do anything, as ordered by Kṛṣṇa. As Kṛṣṇa ordered Arjuna to fight. Arjuna personally was not inclined to fight. He is Vaiṣṇava. He, rather, wanted to forgive. "Let them enjoy, Kṛṣṇa. I do not wish to fight with my cousin-brothers. I cannot tolerate their death, my grandfather. So better I will not fight. Let them enjoy the kingdom." So Kṛṣṇa said, "No, that cannot be. It is My plan that they should be killed. So you must fight." So therefore a devotee's duty is to carry out the order of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore he fought. Personally he did not want to fight. But he cannot disobey the order of Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. Kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73]. When Kṛṣṇa inquired, "What is your decision?" he said, "Yes, even though I do not like to fight, still, because it is Your order, I must fight." Kariṣye vacanaṁ tava [Bg. 18.73].

So devotee hasn't got any personal decision. That is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. We should decide by the order of Kṛṣṇa through the disciplic succession, via media, the spiritual master. That is required. A devotee cannot decide personally. If Kṛṣṇa desires... If somebody says that "We cannot see Kṛṣṇa personally," then you have to decide by Kṛṣṇa's representative. If your spiritual master, guru, says that "You do this," that is Kṛṣṇa's order. That is Kṛṣṇa's order. Therefore it is said, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. By satisfying the spiritual master, you satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is very natural. Just like when you go to your work, the immediate person who is in charge of your work, he must be satisfied. You don't jump up to the proprietor. The proprietor will be automatically satisfied. If something is done and the proprietor sees that the immediate office superintendent is satisfied, then he accepts, "Yes, that's all right." He hasn't got to inspect personally. If the superintendent of the office says that "Yes, this clerk or this man works nice," then proprietor accepts. Similarly, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ **. We have to satisfy our spiritual master, sevayā.

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 4.34]



So Parīkṣit Mahārāja is going to conquer over the world. He was appointed by his grandfathers to become the emperor of the world. But he was not a coward. Not that because his grandfathers appointed, he will sit down in the, comfortably in his capital and let things go on as it is. He doesn't care. No. Personally he wanted to prove himself that he is not a nominated president only. He is actually president. He is not nominated. "Because his grandfather nominated, therefore he has become. He may be a rascal number one." No. The nomination was there, but also on full strength... But if the people are given for nomination, as it is the practice now, by vote, then ordinary people, they are all rascals What is the value of their vote? Therefore another rascal is selected. Because one who is voting, he is a rascal. He does not know whom to give vote. He is not trained up. Simply by number, "Yes, I vote." And that vote you can purchase by bribing, by propaganda. So this kind of democracy is no value. It has no value. If somebody is voted by a number of asses, so what is the value of such vote? Those who elect, they must be very sober. So formerly a king was nominated not only by his father or grandfather, but confirmed by the society of learned brāhmaṇas and saintly persons. So... And he must personally prove that he is actually king.



So here Parīkṣit Mahārāja, digvijayāya. Digvijaya. Vijaya means to own victory, conquering. Just like Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu argued with a digvijaya-paṇḍita. There were several kinds of digvijaya. A learned scholar also would travel all over the world and challenge the other scholars about philosophical discussion, literary credit, so many other fields of activities. So one digvijaya-paṇḍita came from Kashmir. He got victory all over India and then came to Navadvīpa, Nadia. Because Nadia, still there are many, many learned scholars, and in those days, it was simply full of learned scholars. Some of the Indian cities were famous for learned scholars, like Navadvīpa, Nadia, Vārāṇasī, and there were several places, in Garabanga,(?) in the southern India also, there is a place. So there were several places where different schools, Māyāvādīs... Chiefly there are two schools of transcendental subject matter, namely the Māyāvādī school and the Vaiṣṇavas. So Māyāvādīs, were there in Vārāṇasī, mostly. And Vaiṣṇavas also they have their place, especially in Navadvīpa, Vṛndāvana, like that. So one digvijaya-paṇḍita, Keśava Kāśmīrī, he also came to Navadvīpa. He got victory in all other cities, but when he came to Navadvīpa, he became defeated, because Caitanya Mahāprabhu was there.

At that time Caitanya Mahāprabhu was only sixteen years old. So the learned scholars there first of all decided that "Let now Nimāi Paṇḍita..." Caitanya Mahāprabhu's student life was known as Nimāi Paṇḍita. His mother gave a very beloved name, Nimāi, because He took His birth underneath a tree, nim tree. So His name was Nimāi Paṇḍita. As a student He was known as Nimāi Paṇḍita. So the scholars there first of all decided that "Let this Keśava Kāśmīrī talk with Nimāi Paṇḍita. So if Nimāi Paṇḍita fails to conquer over him, then we should challenge that 'He is a boy. Now let us talk. You come to us.' " But even the boy, Nimāi Paṇḍita, He defeated that Keśava Kāśmīrī. That is mentioned in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, how He was digvijaya, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. This Keśava Kāśmīrī was a very learned scholar, and he was requested by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that "You are sitting on the bank of the Ganges. You can compose some prayers for the mother Ganges." So he was learned scholar. Immediately he composed one hundred ślokas. So out of that one hundred ślokas, He found some fault in the sixty-fourth verse. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that "You are such a learned scholar, but We are simply student, grammarian. We cannot understand your poetic and literary magnitude of knowledge. So will you kindly explain the sixty-fourth verse which We cannot understand very nicely."

So immediately he was astonished. He thought that, "I have composed these hundred ślokas like wind, immediately. And He catch up, He catches up, with sixty-four, one particular śloka. What kind of boy this is?" Then in that śloka, there were so many literary fault. Literary fault. Formerly, amongst the learned scholar, any nonsense you write will not be accepted as poetry. It must be according to the rules and regulation of literary perfection. So there were some literary imperfection, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu pointed out, and He was also learned scholar. He admitted that "He is a wonderful boy." So therefore it is said that "You make your enemy a learned man, but don't make your friend a fool and rascal." Because an enemy, even though he is enemy, if he is learned, he will not make injustice. That he cannot. Any learned scholar cannot make any injustice. So he admitted his defeat, because he is learned scholar. That is scholarship. Not that... Just like Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. He argued with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu as a scholar. But when he became defeated, he accepted His discipleship. This was the method, that two persons may argue, but one who is defeated, he must become his disciple. Not that simply waste time arguing and no conclusion. Formerly this was the system, to come to a conclusion. If two parties are arguing on a subject matter, the one party will be defeated, he must become his disciple, under control.

So here the same digvijaya. Digvijaya, for learned scholar, by arguing on śāstra, that is another kind of digvijaya. And digvijaya for kṣatriya, by subduing others who do not accept the authority. So here Parīkṣit Mahārāja went for digvijaya just to challenge all over the world, "Now I have been selected by my grandfather as the emperor of the world. If you do not accept my authority, then here is fight. Come on. Here is fight. Let us fight." So if by fight he becomes victorious... Just like in modern sporting also, there are rival parties, and ultimately, the party which defeats all other sportsmen, they get some reward, seal, or some cup. Similarly, this is also another type of digvijaya. Parīkṣit Mahārāja went out of home not king, simply drinking and enjoying the dancing of the young girls just like the Muhammadan kings when they deteriorated. Still there are so many fools. No. King's duty is to subdue the miscreants who will create disturbance. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was such a nice, what is called, hero, that he got out of his home. Sva-senayā digvijayāya nirgataḥ. Nirgataḥ means went out of home, not simply enjoying comfortably at home. Similarly, for a preacher also, that is digvijaya. Go from country and country, from village to village, town to town, and make digvijaya: "Here is our philosophy. There is God. We can prove there is God. Who are you, you deny God? Come on." That is digvijaya.

Thank you very much. (end)



740109SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.12

-

Los Angeles, January 9, 1974



Pradyumna: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit then conquered all parts of the earthly planet-Bhadrāśva, Ketumāla, Bhārata, the northern portion of Kuru-jāṅgala, Kimpuruṣa, etc.-and exacted tributes from their respective rulers." [SB 1.16.12]



Prabhupāda: So in this verse it is descriptive, different parts of the world. So the important word is here, vijitya jagṛhe balim. Balim, I do not know how it is said, "strength." Tax, tributes. The king, the emperor, would conquer a country and levy tax. Must give at least token. Doesn't matter even one pound or one dollar per year, but he must pay something, token. That means he agrees to become subordinate. Just like according to rent act, a poor man must pay something. It may be... In our country it is so... So that the landlord has the claim. Without rent, after some years it becomes his property.



So this conquering of other countries was not like the Napoleon conqueror or Hitler conqueror. No. As it will be evident from the character of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the idea was to keep the whole world Kṛṣṇa conscious. If certain countries, certain portion of the world, would not be Kṛṣṇa conscious, then this king would go and chastise them. Just like Kṛṣṇa used to kill the demons. There was one Pauṇḍraka. Even during Kṛṣṇa's time, he placed himself as Viṣṇu. He artificially made four hands. So he challenged Kṛṣṇa that "I am Viṣṇu." So Kṛṣṇa immediately cut his head. So any imposter, pretender, representing as the incarnation of God or something like that, in those days, the king would not tolerate; immediately would cut his head, what to speak of thieves and rogues. So king's going to other country, conquering, it did not mean that to acquire some possession, land possession. No, that was not the aim.

The aim was... All the fights in Mahābhārata or in Rāmāyaṇa, it was meant for chastising the godless, godless. Just like Rāmacandra. Rāmacandra, Lord Rāmacandra, chastised Rāvaṇa. So he went to Laṅkā-they call Ceylon-and crossed the sea by making bridge. But what was the idea? The idea was that "This rascal demon is a godless person; so therefore he must be punished." He was punished not alone. Anyone who joined with him, everyone was punished. But Lord Rāmacandra did not occupy the land for His kingdom. He installed his brother Vibhīṣaṇa, who was a devotee in the place of Rāvaṇa. Just like Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa was taking part in the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra and inducing Arjuna that "You fight." Arjuna was not willing to fight, but He was inducing to fight.

So what is the purpose? Because the other party represented thieves, rogues, and demons. So Kṛṣṇa wants therefore that somebody must be king who is His representative, devotee. That is the whole plan.

yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham

[Bg. 4.7]



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya...

[Bg. 4.8]



This is the purpose, dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya, to establish religious principles. If people become irreligious, then the whole world becomes a hell. Just like at the present moment, anywhere you go, it is hellish condition. Nobody is peaceful, nobody is happy, although materially very much advanced. Political entanglement, social entanglement, religious entanglement, economic entanglement. Simply entanglement. No peaceful living, anywhere. Just like at the present moment, the whole world there is... What is that crisis? Power crisis? Energy crisis. So crisis must be there. Otherwise, if you live peacefully, even within so many crisis, war, and fighting, we are thinking this world is very nice. In spite of all these difficulties. Especially in the Western countries, every ten years there is a war. First World War, Second World War. Before that, Hundred Years War, Seven Years War, Trafalgar's war, Waterloo war. War, war, war. There cannot be any peaceful life, because everyone is rogue and rascal, so there must be war. There must be punishment by nature. As soon as there is overpopulation...



That is Malthus's theory also, that as soon as there is overpopulation, there must be something disturbance, war, pestilence, epidemic, and finished, finished. The extra population, unnecessary. Varṇa-saṅkara. They are called varṇa-saṅkara. Varṇa-saṅkara... Because by nature there must be brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, by nature. That should be organized. Head is head, tail is tail, not that head, tail, everything is one. That is called varṇa-saṅkara. Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna has argued that if the family members... If the woman becomes widow, then there will be varṇa-saṅkara population. Varṇa-saṅkara population means a population who cannot say who is his father. That is varṇa-saṅkara. Or which caste does he belong, what is his father, what is his family. No, nothing, no information. That is called varṇa-saṅkara. So when the varṇa-saṅkara population increases, then the whole world becomes hell.

So in order to save the world to become hellish, the king was so alert. That is also bhakti. Because the whole natural plan is to come back to home, back to Godhead. This is nature's plan. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. Just like the police department. What is the meaning of police department? Why government spends so much money for police department? Just to keep law and order. There must be. As soon as there is disobedience of law and order, immediately police department must go and punish and arrest. We can experience these things. Similarly, by God's side, there is such department, police department. That is māyā, Durgādevī. Durgādevī, you have seen. Most of you might not have seen Durgādevī's picture, with trident, trident in the hand. The asura is being attacked by the trident. So this trident means threefold miseries. You have seen the picture, mother, goddess Durgā is piercing the trident just here on the heart. This trident means threefold miseries: adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. I have several times explained: pertaining to the body and mind, pertaining to the other living entities, adhibhautika, adhidaivika, pertaining to the nature's disturbance.

So always we must be disturbed. If everything is all right... Just like in your country, supposing everything is all right. But what is that severe disease? Cancer. Cancer. People are afraid of cancer. Or something else. Must be. You cannot be peaceful here. That is not possible. Daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā [Bg. 7.14]. But the foolish rascals, they cannot understand that "I want to live peacefully, happily. Why these things are enforced upon me?" That is consciousness, real consciousness. Nobody wants to die, nobody wants to suffer from disease. Nobody wants to be suffering from any calamity, or nobody wants that there should be fire. Now just see. Especially in America we see, dun-dun-dun-dun-dun-dun, going down, fire brigade. But nobody wanted fire, but the fire brigade is alert because there must be fire somewhere. That is expected. That is expected. And if there is fire, there will be havoc. So nobody wants the havoc, but it takes place. It takes place. This is the nature's law. Because as soon as dharmasya glānir bhavati, tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham. There may not be discrepancies in the process of religious life. That is nature's law.

So what is that religion? That is also explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. This is religion, to surrender to God. It doesn't matter what religion you profess. It doesn't matter. But you must learn how to obey the Supreme Lord. That is religion. Religion does not mean that you stamp some stereotype religion, "I am Christian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am Buddhist," and then fight. That is not religion. That is fanaticism. Religion means how one has become devoted to God. That is religion. Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. You claim to be religious, or you claim to be Hindu or Christian or Buddhist. That's all right. But do you know what is God? Oh, everyone silent. Everyone, all nonsense rascals, silent. He does not know what is God. And what is his religion? If you do not know what is God, a vague idea, that is not religion. You must know what is God. Just like to become American citizen, it requires to know something of the history of America. So if American citizen, if you ask him, "What you are?" "Now I am American." "Who is your president?" "I do not know." What is this nonsense, American? Would you like to hear from him that "I do not know who is president"? Similarly, a human being professing some certain type of religion, but you ask him, "What is God?" Religion must be in relationship with God, any religion. But ask him, "What is God?" No answer. But religion means,

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

[SB 1.2.6]



This is religion, first-class religion. What is that first-class religion? Yato bhaktir adhokṣaje, by practicing which one becomes a devotee of the Lord. That is religion. That is religion. So instead of becoming devotee of the Lord, we are devotee of dog. This is our position.



So in order to save the human society from this dangerous condition, without any knowledge of God, without any knowledge of religious principle, there must be some strong king, strong government, to save the people. Because this human life is a chance. Other inferior type of life, animals, birds, beasts, trees, it is not possible. They are also living entities, but human life is developed consciousness. So this is nature's gift, that "Now you try to understand what is God. Now you try to understand what is your relationship with God. Now you practice yourself, how to go back home, back to home, back to..." This is the business of the human society. So unless the king or government looks after it, how people will be advanced? The government is advocating that "You drink, you eat meat, you have prostitution and gambling, and give me tax. Finished. My business is finished." So Parīkṣit Mahārāja was not like that. Parīkṣit Mahārāja is conquered all these places to serve Kṛṣṇa, to teach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore he conquered. Otherwise... That is the business of all devotees.

Yesterday we were speaking of digvijaya. So every devotee should be so sincere to Kṛṣṇa, or God, that he must execute Kṛṣṇa's mission. Kṛṣṇa Himself comes. Kṛṣṇa comes as devotee. When He came personally, He established His position as God, with all opulences, six opulences. And He asked, through Arjuna, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. This is Kṛṣṇa's demand, "You rascal..." Because we are all parts and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. We are suffering. Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati. A great struggle for existence within this material world, simply by mental speculation. Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhāni indriyāṇi. And then the indriyas are misguided, simply sense gratification, not for controlling the senses. Human life means to control the senses, not to open the senses, naked. This is not human life. So control... That is the distinction between animal and human life. Animal cannot control. The human civilized man must be, must have the capacity to control. That is human civilization. That is called tapasya. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa yamena damena vā [SB 6.1.13]. This is human life. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja, in so many ways... He was king, emperor, not for exploiting the citizen, but to give them real sense, real consciousness, so that they may become happy. And you can read some of the description of the places, we have selected from Mahābhārata. Read it, purport.

Pradyumna: "Bhadrāśva: It is an island near Meru Parvata. There is a description of this island in Mahābhārata, Bhīṣma-parva, 7.16-18. The description was narrated by Sañjaya to Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira also conquered this island, and thus the province was included within the jurisdiction of his empire. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was formerly declared to be emperor of all the lands ruled by his grandfather, but still he had to establish his supremacy..."



Prabhupāda: This island might have changed, the name. Because there are so many islands. Just like the Java(?) island and Laksadvipa island, very small islands. Similarly, this Meru is also another island. Not only these small island, but according to Vedic culture, each planet is called island. Each planet. Just like this planet, earthly planet, is called Jambūdvīpa. Why it is called dvīpa? Dvīpa means island. Because actually it is island of the air. Just like there are so many islands in the sea, similarly, this vast air, outer space, and all these planets, are floating like island. Therefore they are called island, dvīpa, Jambūdvīpa. Here in this earthly planet, long, long ago, it is said in the Vedic literatures, sapta-dvīpa. Sapta means seven. So this earthly planet is of seven dvīpa, seven islands. These two Americas, north and south, they are islands. Africa, one island. And combined Asia and Europe, another island. The two poles, two islands. Australia, another island. You see? Sapta-dvīpa. So they say they discovered America. But this discovery was long, long, many, many millions of years, it was known. Where is the discovery? Their poor fund of knowledge. Because they have no knowledge in the Vedic literature, they think, "Now I discovered." Just like a child born, he thinks, "Now I've discovered the world. Before my birth, there was no world." This kind of knowledge called poor fund of knowledge.



Therefore knowledge must be taken from the Vedic literature. Veda means full knowledge. And that full knowledge, when it is properly utilized, then you can understand Kṛṣṇa. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. First of all you have to take to take to the Vedic literature for real knowledge. And when you come to the platform of real knowledge, then you can understand Kṛṣṇa. Before knowing Kṛṣṇa, you are in darkness. You are in darkness. Because it is said, vedaiś ca sarvaiḥ. Veda means knowledge. The ultimate goal of knowledge is to understand Kṛṣṇa. And therefore it is called Vedānta. Vedānta. Veda means knowledge, and anta means the ultimate. Vedānta. Vedānta philosophy. So Vedānta philosophy gives you direction that what is the object of knowledge. Athāto brahma jijñāsā: "Now object of knowledge is to understand the Supreme, the origin of everything." That is object of knowledge, philosophy. Philosophy means science, anything. Science also trying, "What is the original cause of this creation? What is the original cause of life?" But because andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ [SB 7.5.31], the so-called philosophers, scientists, they have been taught by another unscientist, not scientist, so he is also not scientist, not philosopher, because he has been taught by another andha. Just like one blind man leads other blind man. So what he will get, knowledge? So therefore, according to Vedic civilization, it is enjoined, it is ordered, that "If you want to take knowledge," tad-vijñānārtham, "to understand the complete science," tad-vijñānārtham, "the spirit," sa gurum eva abhigacchet, "oḥ, you must approach a bona fide guru." Otherwise there is no knowledge. That is not knowledge.

So Vedic knowledge is so perfect that this Bhārata-varṣa, seven islands. Now the seven islands still there. You cannot make eight or nine, or six. The seven islands are still there. So seven islands means, within seven islands, the two Americas, North and South America, are there. So why it is called Columbus, Columbus discovered? No. It was already in the Vedic literature. You will find in Śaṅkarācārya's... When Columbus discovered America, how many years ago? Two hundred years?

Devotee: Five hundred.



Prabhupāda: Five hundred years. And Śaṅkarācārya has described about the seven islands 1,500 years ago. So why the credit should go to Columbus? (laughter) It should go to Śaṅkarācārya. But andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānāḥ. He says that "I have discovered." So he was talking, perhaps you know this story. He was talking among his friends. So the friends ridiculed another friend. So they were criticizing, "Oh, for nothing you got some credit, that you have discovered America. What you have done? It was already there." So he said, "Yes, that is knowledge. Things are already there, but one who puts it into the forefront of the public, that is credit."



So actually, everything is existing. We have to simply take the knowledge. The modern method is ascending process. The knowledge is there, but still, they are trying to understand it by āroha-panthā, ascending process. It is called inductive knowledge. Inductive knowledge means that... Suppose a man is mortal. So the so-called scientists, they are trying to discover the law, why man is mortal. They are studying, "This man is mortal, this man is mortal, this man is mortal. Therefore it is concluded that all men are mortal. Nobody is immortal." But another man will argue that "You have not studied all the human society. How you can conclude? Therefore we must study." So this study will go on for life after life. They will never come to a person who is immortal. But they will protest that "We cannot accept." But our process is deductive. We say that man is mortal, first of all. Therefore John is a man. He is also mortal. This is deductive process. First of all we accept, man is mortal. The inductive process is that "Why shall I accept man is mortal? I may not have seen a person who is immortal." So that argument can be given.

But we accept this Vedic knowledge, the first premises, accept, accepted. Just like we accept that God is the source of everything. God says, Kṛṣṇa says, that,

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

[Bg. 10.8]



Kṛṣṇa says, "I am the origin of everything. Everything emanates from Me." Mattaḥ sarvaṁ prava... Sarvam means everything. There are two things: animate and..., what is opposite? Inanimate. There are two things. So Kṛṣṇa says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: "I am the source of both animate and inanimate." So Kṛṣṇa. What is Kṛṣṇa? Kṛṣṇa is life, supreme life. Kṛṣṇa is not dead. We are getting Kṛṣṇa's description. He is not a dead body. These are things very, I mean to say, elaborately described in the Vedic literature. Just like in Vedānta it is said, "The origin of everything is Brahman." Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], athāto brahma jijñāsā. Now this origin of everything, what is the formation, animate or inanimate? This is accepted, that Brahman means, the Absolute Truth means, the origin of everything. Now the next question would be that "What is that origin?" The modern scientists, they think the origin is chemicals. But we say, "No. It cannot be chemicals." Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The origin of everything must be cognizant. He knows everything. Otherwise how He can be origin? It is very logical. Janmādy asya yataḥ anvayāt [SB 1.1.1], origin. Just like I have established this institution. I know how it was established perfectly, and how it is going on. And somebody may not know how it was established in New York with so great difficulty. But because I am the origin founder, I know. So similarly, so many things are going on in the nature's way. So the origin, He must know everything. And if He knows, then He cannot be inanimate. Where is the possibility of the origin becoming inanimate? No. Because the argument is, if one is origin of everything, or something he is origin of, he must have sense how things are going on.



So that is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: janmādy asya yataḥ anvayād itarataś ca artheṣu abhijñaḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Abhijñaḥ. This word is used. Abhijñaḥ means cognizant. Then if He is the origin of everything, how He got all knowledge perfectly? Therefore the next word is sva-rāṭ: He is fully independent. He doesn't require to take knowledge from anyone else. Otherwise how He can be origin? Sva-rāṭ. Muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ. That origin is so perfect, and still, sūrayaḥ, many scholars, many scientists, philosophers, they are also bewildered, that "How He can be a person?" Muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ. Tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ. These things are described.

So actually, if we want to have knowledge of everything, the source of knowledge is Vedas. And the essence of Veda is called Vedānta. And the descriptive explanation of Vedānta is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: bhāṣyaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇām **. Brahma-sūtra. Brahma-sūtra is the Vedānta philosophy. Kṛṣṇa has also referred to Brahma-sūtra: brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ [Bg. 13.5]. He recommends that hetumadbhir prasthāna. There are three prasthānas, and Brahma-sūtra is also prasthāna, the way of understanding. So Kṛṣṇa has recommended that "If you want to know things with reason and argument, then try to understand Vedānta-sūtra." Those who want to know the Absolute Truth through reasoning and argument, then one should study Vedānta-sūtra. But Vedānta-sūtra... Sūtra means codes. Just like they have got code book. One word, it is meaning so many other things. Businessmen, they have got codes. When they send cable to their customer or to their principle, they use some codes. It saves so many words. So Brahma-sūtra. Sūtra means codes. So in that code also, required explanation. That explanation is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhāṣyaṁ brahma-sūtrāṇām **. Brahma-sūtrāṇām, the codes explained in the Brahma-sūtra, that is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Thank you very much. (end)



740110SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.13-15

-

Los Angeles, January 10, 1974



Pradyumna: "Wherever the King visited, he continuously heard the glories of his great forefathers, who were all devotees of the Lord, and also of the glorious acts of Lord Kṛṣṇa. He also heard how he himself had been protected by the Lord from the powerful heat of the weapon of Aśvatthāmā. People also mentioned the great affection between the descendants of Vṛṣṇi and Pṛthā due to the latter's great devotion to Lord Keśava. The King, being very pleased with the singers of such glories, opened his eyes in great satisfaction. Out of magnanimity he was pleased to award them very valuable necklaces and clothing." [SB 1.16.13-15]



Prabhupāda: So Mahārāja Parīkṣit is on his tour, and what did he meet in every place? Tatra tatra upaśṛṇvānaḥ. Everyone was speaking very highly, Sva-pūrveṣām, about his forefathers, especially the grandfathers, Pañca-Pāṇḍava, mahātmanām. They are not ordinary persons. Mahātmanām. Mahātmā and durātmā, two words. Mahātmā, a great mind or great personalities. And durātmā means mischievous person. There are two kinds: mischievous and magnanimous. Everywhere.



So the forefathers of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, sva-pūrveṣām, they were not ordinary person. They were mahātmās. So how one can become mahātmā? It is not very difficult, provided one wants to become mahātmā. Nothing is difficult in this world, provided one wants to have it, or to become. So how to become mahātmā? That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. What is that? Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ, bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. This is mahātmā. Sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. First of all Kṛṣṇa says, sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ: "To get a mahātmā, broadly-minded great personality, it is very difficult to find out." But still, one may try to find out what are the symptoms of mahātmā. That is discussed in Bhagavad-gītā. When one understands, "Kṛṣṇa is the origin or original source of everything," janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], as it is indicated in the Vedānta-sūtra that "The Absolute Truth is that from whom everything emanates." That is Absolute Truth.

So what is the nature of that Absolute Truth, animate or inanimate? That is also discussed: abhijña, animate. The origin, source of everything, must be animate. In this way, when one comes to the conclusion, as it is stated by Kṛṣṇa Himself personally, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "My dear Dhanañjaya, there is no more superior," I mean to say, "objective than Myself." So people will not accept this. If I say that "There is no more superior person than me," so people will laugh. It may be true or not true, that is also... But if anyone is very much proud of his personality and he says that "There is no more superior person than me," then at least in the beginning people will laugh. That is nature. But when Kṛṣṇa says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no more superior person than Me anywhere," so who will accept it? One who knows. He will accept, "Yes, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

So how this knowledge is achieved? Because to accept Kṛṣṇa... Just like we accept, by authority. We belong to the Caitanya Mahāprabhu's cult. He preached. His cult means, Caitanya cult means Kṛṣṇa cult. Kṛṣṇa-varṇam, simply describing Kṛṣṇa. That was His business. So in this way, when one understands Kṛṣṇa, not perfectly... One cannot understand Kṛṣṇa perfectly. It is not possible. Even Kṛṣṇa Himself cannot understand Himself, He is so great. That is greatness, "God is great," that the God who is great, He cannot also understand how great He is. That is God. Nobody can understand. But as far as possible, we can understand from the śāstras-sādhu, śāstra, guru, three sources-we can understand and make our conclusion that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme.

So that is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā, that

bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ

[Bg. 7.19]



People are searching after knowledge, philosophers, scientists, politicians, and others, so many. Everyone is after knowledge. Brahma-jijñāsā. Jijñāsā, everyone is inquiring what is the Supreme Absolute Truth. That is possible in this human form of life, not in the cat's and dog's life. So those who are cats and dogs in the form of human being, they cannot inquire. They cannot inquire. Because they may be in the form of a human being, but actually they are no better than cats and dogs. Who are they? So āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithunaṁ ca sāmānyam etat paśubhir narāṇām. Then the eating, material necessities of life... Eating. We want to eat something. We must eat, to keep this body fit. Then we must sleep also after eating. Not always. Not in this assembly, but after eating, you can sleep. (laughter) There is sleeping place, but not here. That is not good. So eating, sleeping. Then, after eating, after sleeping, everyone knows-the sex becomes agitated. Then mating. Eating, sleeping, mating, and defending, "How to protect myself?" Because the whole world is full of enemies. This is material world. So everyone is struggling hard, "How to protect myself?" So these four principles are animal principles. So that is the difference, that such animal propensities are there amongst the cats and dog, and in the human being also, these necessities are there. But if we remain captivated only by these four principles, then we remain cats and dog. It doesn't matter, however nicely we are dressed, but we remain as cats and dog, in the category of cats and dog. The modern civilization is that he is actually a dog, a cat, but he dresses himself very nicely, to become gentleman. So śāstra says, no. We have to test whether he is human being or a cat and dog, what he is. So if we see that people are engaged only in these four business-eating, sleeping, mating and defending-he is cat and dog. Above them, they are inquiring. Athāto brahma jijñāsā. They are inquiring about the Absolute Truth. They are above these cats and dogs. This is the test, what subject matter he is inquiring. Just like there are big, big scientists. They are making research, "If petrol can be substituted?" So in the eyes of the common man he may become a very great scientist, but those who are advanced in spiritual consciousness, they will take him no better than cat and dog-because his subject matter is how to eat, sleep or mate or defend. The subject matter... We have to understand what is the subject matter of this person. In the English proverb it is said, "A man is known by his company." So similarly, if the subject matter is animalistic, āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna, then, however he may be big man, we will take him amongst the categories of cats and dogs.



Then who is above? That above-who is inquiring about the Absolute. Jijñāsuḥ śreya-uttamam. He is human being, jijñāsu. He may not know in the beginning, but if he is inquisitive about knowing the Absolute Truth, he is human being. Just try to understand what is the distinction between a human being and cat and dog. So a human being means he is inquiring about the spirit soul or the spiritual world, the supreme spirit, God, Kṛṣṇa. He is human being. Otherwise cats and dogs. It is very simple to distinguish who is a cat and dog and who is a human being. There is no difficulty. What is the subject matter of his inquiry and what he is after? What he wants in life? Everyone wants to eat very nicely in table, chair and nice plate, nicely cooked food, and palatable. Never mind whatever nonsense it is; it must be palatable. So that is eating, eating problem. So in this way, if we analyze, it is not difficult to find out who is a human being and who is a cat and dog. That is... Everything can be understood.

So when one is inquisitive, jijñāsu... And jijñāsu means, what kind of jijñāsu, inquisitive? Śreya uttamam. Jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam. There are fields, different fields of activities. So when becomes inquisitive to know the ultimate necessity, ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti, ultimate necessity. Śreya uttamam. There are two things: śreya and preya. I have discussed all these thing many times. Preya means immediately very palatable. That is called preya. And śreya means ultimately good. Suppose if you take some palatable foodstuff, it may be very palatable to you... There are many examples. Just like smoking. Smoking. Everyone knows, the scientists, the doctor, they declare, "This is a nonsense thing. It should be avoided." They advertise even in the packet also. But people still smoke. But that is called preya. That is called preya. Preya means immediately very nice. And śreya means when one gives it up, "No, it will keep my health nice." That is śreya. Try to understand what is śreya and preya. Another example: just like a child he wants to play whole day. Even Kṛṣṇa was playing with His friends. Mother Yaśodā had to call Him thrice, four times, then He would come back. So that is the nature of children-they want to play whole day and night. But that is not preya, er, that is not śreya. The mother, the parents, take care, "My dear boy, come here, take your bath, change your dress, take your food. It is already late." So he does not know that these things are śreya. He wants to play. Just try to understand śreya and preya. Preya means according to one's position, there are different subject matter of sense gratification. That is called preya. And śreya means for future goodness. Ultimate good. That is called preya, er, śreya. Therefore a human being is he who is inquisitive about his ultimate goal of life, to know "How, what is my ultimate goal of life?" That is human being. So jijñāsu.

So when a human becomes jijñāsu, inquisitive, śreya uttamam... Śreya means ultimate goal of life, and uttamam... Uttamam. Tama means darkness. Tama means darkness. Not in the darkness, but uttamam. Udgata-tamaṁ yasmāt. When he transcends this darkness field of activities... Tamasi mā jyotir gama: "Don't remain in the darkness activities. Come to the light activities." So when one becomes inquisitive for the light activity, he is human being. He's called jñānī. The karmīs, they are in darkness. Their activity has no meaning. The other day we have discussed, vyartha-karmabhiḥ. Vyartha-karmabhiḥ. Vyartha means futile, useless. The karmīs, they are thinking very busy. If you go to see a karmī, he will say, "Oh, I have no time." "What you are doing, sir?" "No, I am very busy. I am earning money." So... But śāstra says, "You are simply wasting your time." Vyartha-karmabhiḥ. Vyartha-karmabhiḥ. The karmīs, they are working simply for useless result. How useless result? Because you have to change your body. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. That is a fact. You believe or not believe, you are changing your body every moment. So simply you have no eyes to see, you have no brain to understand. You may be... Because you are cat and dog, you cannot understand. Because the cats and dogs, they cannot understand that there is another life after this dog's body and cat's body. They cannot understand. So anyone who cannot understand the simple truth of the transmigration of the soul, he is no better than this cat and dog.

So these karmīs are like that. Some of them understand. They at least believe in future life. But they do not know how to stop this transmigration of the soul. That they do not know, karmīs. They know, "It is unavoidable to change the bodies. So there is no need of endeavoring..." Therefore they do not know, they cannot know, neither they can do. They simply, "Yes, there is life, but let me become in more comfortable situation." Just like in this life, they are trying just to become in comfortable situation of this body, similarly, when they understand that, accepting at least that there is next life, they want to go to the heavenly planet, svarga. But they do not know that that is also not ultimate happiness. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā. You read nicely. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Because even if you go to the Brahmaloka, the highest planet, either by good work or by your airplane sputnik... It is not possible to go there by sputnik (laughter), but you can go there by your pious activities. Yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ. Yānti [Bg. 9.25], you can go, but you have to adopt a means. But these are for the karmīs, those (who) simply want comfortable life of this body. They cannot understand that "However comfortably I may live, I have to give up this body. Then what is my next position?" They do not know. They are called karmī.

So when one comes to this point to understand that "This is simply futile, to work for this body," he is jñānī. He is jñānī. Jñānī means he is inquisitive to know the ultimate goal of life, "How I am eternal, how I can get eternal life." In this way, he tries for it. That is called jñānī. Karmī, jñānī, yogi, and bhakta. There are four kinds of men. So jñānī and yogi... Jñānī simply speculates, and yogi tries to practice. That is the difference. Their aim is the same. But yogi means he practically endeavors, and jñānī means he is simply theoretical. Just like everything, in science also, there is theoretical and practical. So karmī is in the darkness. Actually, nicely dressed cats and dogs. That is karmī. And jñānī, who understands the futility of simply being engaged for the bodily comfort... He understands, "After all, the body will not stay. So why I am wasting by this way, if there is another business?" That is jñānī. And yogi means who practically endeavors.

So out of the yogis, the bhakti-yogī is the best. That is recommended in the Bhagavad-gītā, yoginām api sarveṣām. Yoginām api sarveṣām [Bg. 6.47]. There are many classes of yogis. Out of all these yogis, the one yogi who is always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, he is first class. He is first class. Yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā. Mad-gata, "thinking of Kṛṣṇa only." He may not know very much about Kṛṣṇa, but simply he is thinking of Kṛṣṇa. That is sufficient. That is sufficient. Here we have got the Deity of Kṛṣṇa, and if we twenty-four hours see the Deity only, seeing here, you will be perfect. You will be perfect, simply by seeing. And then hear, then chant. There are so many. Śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23], nine kinds of methods. You adopt them all, or some of them, or at least one. Then you become perfect. That is bhakti-yogī. Some way or other, think of... Yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet. That is the instruction of Rūpa Gosvāmī, "Some way or other, just engage your mind in Kṛṣṇa." Some way or other. Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānām [Bg. 10.10].

Kṛṣṇa also says, satata-yuktānām, "continuously attached to Me." Teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam [Bg. 10.10]. Prīti-pūrvakam. Here it is prīti, it is said. Prīty-ujjṛmbhita. So with love. With love or no love. Without love, you cannot think of Kṛṣṇa. That is not possible. So as soon as you think of Kṛṣṇa, there is a tinge of love, must be there. So as you increase your thinking of Kṛṣṇa, then you increase your love of Kṛṣṇa. That is recommended by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. That is our ultimate goal of life. Premā pum-artho mahān. Premā pum-artho mahān. Everyone is attached to... Those who are human beings... Dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣa [SB 4.8.41]. The karmīs, they want to be religious. They go to temple, church, for some material benefit, "O God, give us our daily bread." That is their purpose. But still, that is accepted. So in this way, we have discussed many times. The jñānī... Who is mahātmā. That is the subject matter here discussed. So jñānī, the mahātmās are to be found not amongst the karmīs, but of the jñānīs, jñānī field. Just like in India, we manufacture some mahātmā. But according to śāstra, he is not mahātmā because he was-Mahatma Gandhi, I mean to say-he was not on the platform of knowledge. He was on the platform of karma, karmī. He wanted to deliver his countrymen from the clutches of the British, Britishers. That was his aim. But because he was not jñānī, he could not understand that "Why I am trying to drive away some people for the benefit of another?" That is a great subject matter.

So anyone who is on the karmī field, he is not jñānī. He is not jñānī or mahātmā. Then who is mahātmā? That is explained in the Bhagavad-gītā. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19]. After working uselessly for many, many lives like cats and dogs, trees and plants and like that, evolution, when one works for understanding the ultimate goal of life, jñānī... So jñānīs also cannot understand immediately that Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal of life. They cannot understand, although it is stated that vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]. Through the studies of Vedas, what knowledge one should achieve? When one achieves the knowledge that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, that is, I mean to say, perfection of Vedic study. But these so-called jñānīs, they are simply bookworms, simply reading Vedas, four Vedas. And they say, "We are concerned with Vedas. We are not concerned with Kṛṣṇa." So... Just like the yājñika-brāhmaṇa. Yājñika-brāhmaṇa, they were interested in the Vedas, but their wives were interested with Kṛṣṇa. So they got perfection. So in this way, jñānīs... Karmīs are rejected. Karmīs are useless. And jñānīs, when they cultivate knowledge, not in one life... Because immediately they will not accept that Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal. They are surprised, "How Kṛṣṇa? He was a cowherd boy, playing with the cows and calves. He can be...? This is māyā." Therefore they are called Māyāvādī. They cannot understand. They cannot understand what is the position of Kṛṣṇa, although they are studying Vedas.

So the jñānīs, who actually... No, I mean to say, jñānīs, they also immediately come. Therefore they have to try to come to this position of understanding Kṛṣṇa, many, many, births, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante [Bg. 7.19], not in one birth. They will have to take birth. Their so-called liberation is not possible, because if you have to take birth, then where is your liberation? There is no liberation. Liberation means no more accepting birth in this material world. That is called liberation. So Bhagavad-gītā says, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān. Those who are cultivating knowledge, so there is no mukti. Because they have to take birth again. So in this way, bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19], when he actually comes to the knowledge point, he surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. Then vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. This is mahātmā, when he understands that Kṛṣṇa is the... Because the perfection of knowledge means to know the ultimate source, athāto brahma jijñāsā, janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1], from where everything is emanating. But they do not know. The scientists, philosophers, they do not know. They are simply speculating. That's all. Actually, they do not know. But when one knows, then he is perfect. And what is that knowledge? Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. That is mahātmā. Again, it is further explained.

Then what is the business of mahātmā? He... Suppose he understands, surrenders to Kṛṣṇa. Then what is his business? Simply knowing and surrendering will do? No. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ [Bg. 9.13]. Engaged in service. Not that "I have understood Kṛṣṇa. Let me sit down and sleep now." He is not mahātmā. But vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa ma... [Bg. 7.19]. Mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ [Bg. 9.13]. Daivī. Daivī means spiritual, spiritual energy. He is in the spiritual energy, not this material energy. Āhāra-nidrā-bhaya-maithuna. Spiritual energy. And what is the symptom of being in the spiritual energy? Bhajanti: always chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. So they are mahātmā.

Thank you very much. (end)



740111SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.16

-

Los Angeles, January 11, 1974





Pradyumna: Translation: "Mahārāja Parīkṣit heard that out of His causeless mercy Lord Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu, who is universally obeyed, rendered all kinds of service to the malleable sons of Pāṇḍu by accepting posts ranging from chariot driver to president to messenger, friend, night watchman, etc., according to the will of the Pāṇḍavas, obeying them like a servant and offering obeisances like one younger in years. When he heard this, Mahārāja Parīkṣit became overwhelmed with devotion to the lotus feet of the Lord." [SB 1.16.16]



Prabhupāda: So this is the exchange of love between the Lord and the devotee. It is not Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead... He's master, the Supreme, but we may not calculate the master and the Supreme by our material experience. Just like in our material experience we see the master is always master and the servant is always servant. But in the spiritual world, sometimes the master is the servant also. This is called Absolute, Absolute world. Here there is distinction between master and the servant, but in the spiritual world there is no such distinction. Sometimes the servant is rendering service to the Lord, and sometimes the Lord is serving to the master. Just like Kṛṣṇa, when He was playing with His friends, so they were sporting, and in the sporting there is defeat and victory. So if some of the friends would become victorious, then the challenge was that one who will be defeated, the victorious person will ride on his shoulder. That was the challenge. So when Kṛṣṇa became defeated, the other boys, they rose up and got up on the shoulder of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa had to carry them.



So although Kṛṣṇa is master, but He became a servant. Just like Kṛṣṇa, when He was playing as a child of mother Yaśodā, so He was taken with stick, "Kṛṣṇa, if you become again very naughty, then see the stick." So Kṛṣṇa used to cry. There are very nice verses in the Kuntī's prayer, that "The whole universe is afraid of Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa is afraid by the stick of mother Yaśodā." (laughter) Just see. This is Kṛṣṇa. This is spiritual world. When Kṛṣṇa was a little boy playing, Nanda Mahārāja, father of Kṛṣṇa... Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja, they are foster father and mother. Real mother, father, is Vasudeva and Devakī. So Nanda Mahārāja came within the house and saw little Kṛṣṇa, "Yes." He was playing. So Nanda Mahārāja challenged Yaśodāmāyi, "Your Kṛṣṇa can do something work." "Oh, yes, why not? He can do anything." Immediately Yaśodā-mātā, mother Yaśodā, ordered Kṛṣṇa, "Just carry the wooden slipper of Your father and go there." So Kṛṣṇa immediately took the slipper on His head and brought it to Mahārāja Nanda. Then Nanda Mahārāja said, "Oh, your Kṛṣṇa is very good. Come on, come on, come on." These were, that, the childhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa was enjoyed by the foster father and mother.

Therefore all the sages were surprised that "What pious activities this mother Yaśodā did that Kṛṣṇa is completely under her control? Completely." The supreme controller. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme controller. There is no controller of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, govindam ādi-puruṣam, He is the original person. So who can be His father and mother? He is the father of everyone, the supreme father. Sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ [Bg. 14.4]. Kṛṣṇa says, "In all species of life, as many forms as there, I am the seed-giving father of all of them." So nobody can be Kṛṣṇa's father. Nobody can be controller of Kṛṣṇa. Nobody can be master of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme. Mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: [Bg. 7.7] "Nobody is superior than Me." But He accepts inferior position out of love. If you love Kṛṣṇa... The Māyāvādī philosophers, they are very much eager to become one with Kṛṣṇa, merge into the existence of Kṛṣṇa. That is their perfection. And Vaiṣṇava philosophy is: "What is there becoming one with Kṛṣṇa? We want to become father of Kṛṣṇa." This is Kṛṣṇa philosophy. "Why I shall be one with my son? We want to become master of Kṛṣṇa." Just like gopīs. Gopīs were addressing Kṛṣṇa with very slanting language, but Kṛṣṇa enjoyed that. That is service to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa... Everyone worships Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme. So sometime Kṛṣṇa becomes disgusted, that "Everyone is coming, simply offering Me respectful obeisances. Nobody comes to chastise Me." So who can chastise Kṛṣṇa? His devotee. Therefore a devotee who comes to the position of chastising Kṛṣṇa, he is more liked by Kṛṣṇa. That is Kṛṣṇa's position.

So here, about the Pāṇḍavas it is described that Kṛṣṇa accepted sārathyam. Kṛṣṇa's another name is Pārtha-sārathi. Pārtha. Arjuna's name is Pārtha. Pārtha means "the son of Pṛthā." Kuntī's another name is Pṛthā. Kuntī's father's name was Pṛthu, so Kuntī's name was Pṛthā. Therefore Arjuna's name was Pārtha. And because Kṛṣṇa served as the chariot driver of Kṛṣṇa, His another name is Pārtha-sārathi. So it is a fact that God has no name. Sometimes some philosopher says that "God has no name." That is fact. But why God has so many names? These names are calculated according to His pastimes. Just like Kṛṣṇa is known as Devakī-nandana. Because He appeared as the son of Devakī, therefore His name is Devakī-nandana. By the action. Kṛṣṇa is known as Yaśodā-nandana. Because Kṛṣṇa acted as the son of mother Yaśodā, His name is Yaśodā-nandana. Kṛṣṇa's name is Rādhā-ramaṇa. Because Kṛṣṇa enjoyed with Rādhārāṇī, therefore His name is Rādhā-ramaṇa. Kṛṣṇa's name is Govinda. Because He gave pleasure even to the cows, therefore His name is Govinda. Or Kṛṣṇa gives pleasure to every sense; therefore His name is Govinda. There are so many thousands and millions of names of Kṛṣṇa. Actually, His name is calculated in relationship with devotee. That is Kṛṣṇa's name. And there are devotees in all fields of life, amongst human beings, among demigods, among plants, amongst trees, among animals, among insects. Everywhere, Kṛṣṇa has got His relationship. So therefore the supreme name of the Lord is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa means all-attractive. That is the meaning. (aside:) Please sit down properly. Kṛṣṇa's name is... This is the supreme name, Kṛṣṇa, "All-attractive." He can attract everyone.

So this statement, that "God has no name," that is fact, but He has got His name in relationship with His activities with devotees. So Kṛṣṇa worked as sārathi, as it is stated here, sārathyam. He acted as the chariot driver of Arjuna. Therefore Kṛṣṇa's name is Pārtha-sārathi. So Kṛṣṇa did all these things. He acted as a chariot driver. He acted as the president of the assembly. Not that He is eternally chariot driver. Eternally servant is the human being or the living entities. Eternally master, that is. In Vaikuṇṭha, in the spiritual world, there is equality with God and the living entities. They enjoy on equal level. But everyone knows that "Here is the Supreme." That is spiritual world. When Kṛṣṇa drives the chariot, Arjuna does not forget, that "He is my chariot driver." He knows that "Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme. But He is so kind, He has accepted the post of my chariot driver." This is spiritual sense. And sometimes, by the influence of yoga-māyā, Kṛṣṇa also forgets that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the devotee also forgets that he is eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. That is the action of yoga-māyā.

So this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, there are so many things to learn. And when practically one learns everything-not everything; as far as possible, perfection-then his position is janma karma me divyaṁ yo jānāti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9]. Anyone who learns about Kṛṣṇa, His janma... He has no father, but He is accepting a father. Therefore janma. Janma means birth. When there is birth, there must be father and mother. So when Kṛṣṇa takes His birth, appears, as a son, so there must be father and mother. But who can be His father and mother? His devotee. Because His business is with the devotees; with no other else. When He wants father and mother, the devotee must be father... Even when He wants some enemy, the devotee will become His enemy, what to speak of father and mother. Therefore He is all-attractive. He is as much attractive to His father and mother, similarly, He is attractive to the small calf. You have seen the picture. Kṛṣṇa is embracing. Kṛṣṇa is not simply embracing Rādhārāṇī or the gopīs. He is embracing the insignificant animal, calf. Therefore He is all-attractive. And when the calf goes to Kṛṣṇa... This is described in the Kṛṣṇa book, how all the cows and calves were so much, I mean to say, attached to Kṛṣṇa. That is Vṛndāvana. Everyone is attached to Kṛṣṇa. It doesn't matter whether he is human being or plant or trees or water or animal or the land or the flowers or the fruits. Whatever there is, they are all attracted to Kṛṣṇa.

So similarly, if we become attracted to Kṛṣṇa... We are attracted to... Actually we love Kṛṣṇa. That is the fact. But we have forgotten it. We are under illusion. Just you analyze yourself. Why we love this body? It is very easy to understand. Because the soul is there. Does anybody love a dead body? Is there any instance, a dead body is loved and embraced and taken into the room and kept it? Nobody cares. Throw it. Or burn it. So the body is not a lovable object. But because the soul is there within the body, therefore we love this body. This house, if it is vacant, nobody will come. But because there is Kṛṣṇa or because there are devotees of Kṛṣṇa, so many people come. Not that this house is lovable. Similarly, you analyze. You love this body. You work so hard day and night to keep this body fit. Why? Because the proprietor of the body, soul, is there. Then the love transfers from body to the soul. Then why do you love the soul? Because it is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore we love the soul. So ultimately, the love goes to Kṛṣṇa. This is natural feeling of love between Kṛṣṇa, or God, and between living entities, but the māyā is interrupting the relation. It is called illusion. The process of interruption is called illusion. Otherwise, we, every one of us, we love Kṛṣṇa. Everyone of us. You analyze. You see that ultimately goes to Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-bhakti: "The loving attitude of the living entity towards Kṛṣṇa is nitya-siddha." That is eternally fact. Not that we are preaching this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, artificially we are creating some situation that a person may love Kṛṣṇa. No. That is not. That is not fact. We are cleansing the process which has covered our Kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya. The love for Kṛṣṇa is there automatically. Everyone loves. But it is now covered by māyā. So śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte. Just like when you become diseased... Actually your position is, normal position is, that you can eat nicely, you can sleep nicely, you can talk nicely. That is healthy life. But when you cannot eat nicely, when you cannot sleep nicely, you cannot have sex life nicely, you take the help of a physician. The physician helps you, not that artificially he is creating some machine in you so that you can eat. The eating process is already there. You (are) competent to eat. But it has been disrupted by another influence. That is called māyā. Similarly kṛṣṇa-bhakti, or our love for Kṛṣṇa, is eternally fact. Some way or other, it has been interrupted by the influence of māyā, and we have to cleanse this. Or, as the physician cures the disease, so this māyā, māyā, means an illusion, means it is not a fact. Just like you cannot eat-this is not a fact. You can eat, but something has come between you and your healthy life. That is disease. So not to become Kṛṣṇa conscious is disease. To become Kṛṣṇa conscious is healthy. That is real health. Not to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, to become a demon, that is disease.

So our process is to cure the disease, not that we are enforcing something by some artificial means. That is not possible. That is not possible. Otherwise, in the foreign countries... Now, for Kṛṣṇa there is no foreign country, because He is the proprietor everywhere. But people think that "Kṛṣṇa is a foreign name, and He is Indian, Indian God," like that. But actually that is not for... Just like you cannot say the sun, "This is American sun and this is Indian sun or this is African sun." Sun is one. Similarly, God is one. There cannot be two Gods, American God or Indian God or African God. God is one. But when God consciousness comes into, I mean, awakening, then we can understand what is God. Therefore in the Bhāgavata there it is said, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. By our these diseased senses, blunt senses... Diseased means blunt condition. So ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi. Simply I speak, "Kṛṣṇa is God," and you hear, it will not be appreciated. It will not be appreciated. "Eh, why Kṛṣṇa God?" You will make so many protests. So... But actually, Kṛṣṇa is God.

So Kṛṣṇa... Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi. Not only Kṛṣṇa, to accept Kṛṣṇa as God, to hear about His name also. Just like we are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's name. So this name, Kṛṣṇa's form, Kṛṣṇa's quality, Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, Kṛṣṇa's entourage, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi... Nāmādi means "beginning from name." Nāma ādi. Ādi means beginning. So we can understand Kṛṣṇa from the name. When name is perfectly chanted, then the form, the pastimes, the quality and all other things in relation to Kṛṣṇa becomes revealed. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. But these blunt senses cannot appreciate what is Kṛṣṇa. Then how it will be appreciated? Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. When we engage our tongue... Kṛṣṇa consciousness begins from the tongue, not from the eyes. Some rascals want to see Kṛṣṇa. They will see that Guru Maharaj(-ji). You see? Such rascals will see that so-called Kṛṣṇa. But to see real Kṛṣṇa, one has to purify the eyes, purify the senses. Not that anyone comes, "I am Kṛṣṇa," and I can see and become perfect. No. Sevonmukhe. And how the senses will be purified? By sevonmukha, by rendering service. For many, many thousands of years, if one is engaged in the service of Kṛṣṇa, then one day there is chance of understanding what is Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is not so easy thing. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ, sevonmukhe hi jihvādau [Cc. Madhya 17.136]. Kṛṣṇa also says in the Bhagavad-gītā: manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye [Bg. 7.3]. Kṛṣṇa seeing is not so easy. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu. Out of many millions of people. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye. To siddha, to become siddha, is not that "I go on doing all nonsense work, I become perfect man." No, no. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa śamena ca damena ca, tyāgena satya-śaucābhyām [SB 6.1.13]. This is a process, how to become perfect. The rascals cannot become perfect. These are the process. One has to undergo austerity, penance, brahmacaryeṇa, completely cessation from sex life, brahmacaryeṇa. Not that any rascal doing everything and he has realized Kṛṣṇa, he has seen Kṛṣṇa. These are all rascaldom.

Kṛṣṇa is paraṁ pavitram. Paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. So to go to Kṛṣṇa, one requires to be perfectly purified. Just like without becoming fire, you cannot enter into fire. If your body is not fire, as soon as you enter fire, you will be burned. But you take another fire and push into the fire, there is no reaction. There is no reaction. Just like to live within the water, you must have a particular type of body so that living within the water, you will not be infected. Just like a human being, if he artificially enters into the water, for few hours he can remain. That is also with great difficulty. He will feel bodily pain. But the fishes within the water, they are living very peacefully, happily, for hundreds of years. So this is real fact. You cannot enter into an atmosphere without being fit for living in that atmosphere. Is it very difficult to understand? Because they are going to the moon planet, why they are coming back? Because they have no arrangement to make the body fit to live there.

So God's creation is like that. You cannot by force enter into any atmosphere unless you become fit to live there. That is God's creation. By force you cannot live within water. By force the fish cannot live on the land. You'll die. Similarly, by force you cannot enter into the moon planet. Therefore they are frustrated. It is not possible. Similarly, without being Kṛṣṇized, you cannot understand what is Kṛṣṇa, you cannot associate with Him. That is the process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to become perfectly Kṛṣṇa-ite, as good as Kṛṣṇa. That is purification process. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. Nirmalam. Nirmalam means purification. Now we are sa-malam. We have got so many dirty things with us. So one has to become nirmalam. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam. First business is to become free from the designation. If you think yourself that "I am American," "I am Christian," "I am Hindu," "I am Indian," "I am black," "I am white," these are all designation. So sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam, when you become transcendental to all designation, when you come to the platform to understand that "I am not this body; I am spirit soul," brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54], then you become happy.

So long we are with designations, we are not happy. To become designationless means feeling complete happiness. That is the test. If you simply artificially say that "I am not identifying with this body," that is fact. But real identification with..., identification with the body will be realized when you don't feel pains and pleasure. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam, hṛṣīkeṇa. When your senses will be purified in that way, without any designation, then you can begin devotional service.

sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]



Hṛṣīka. Hṛṣīka means the senses. Hṛṣīkeśa. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa. Hṛṣīka means the senses, and hṛṣīkeśa. Hṛṣīka īśa. One who knows Sanskrit, the sandhi, hṛṣīkeśa. Because Kṛṣṇa is the master of the senses, so when our senses will be... Kṛṣṇa is purified, the most purified, paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramam [Bg. 10.12], transcendental, completely purified. So unless you are also completely purified, how you can touch Kṛṣṇa? This is common sense reasoning. Therefore Kṛṣṇa realization is not so easy. (aside:) You just train them how. This is not the process. Then you shall sit down backside. And before the Deity it should not be done. From the childhood it should be trained up.



So this is called purification, to learn how to sit down before the Deity, how to talk before the Deity. So everything should be learned. There are sevā-aparādha, sixty-four kinds of offenses in the service. So we have to become offenseless. Then Kṛṣṇa will accept your service. Not by making a show. Kṛṣṇa will accept your service when you are sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ [Brs. 1.2.234]. Automatically there will be. As soon as you're purified, automatically Kṛṣṇa will appear, immediately. Kṛṣṇa will ap... Kṛṣṇa is there. Therefore premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti: [Bs. 5.38] "Those who are purified, santaḥ, saintly persons, they can see Kṛṣṇa in every second, every moment." Because they have been purified. After purification, there will be prema, love. The symptoms of purification is that when you do not love anything except Kṛṣṇa, that is purification. We have got our love. So instead of loving Kṛṣṇa, we are loving dog, cats and this and that-my country, community, family, nation, so many ways distributed.

So when you love Kṛṣṇa, automatically you love other thing. But at the present moment, we do not love Kṛṣṇa, only the other things. But love is there. Just like to keep the tree quite fitness, you have to pour water in the root. But if you simply you give up the watering to the root, if you simply water the leaves, twigs, and the branches, then what you will get? Naturally there will be declination of the tree, automatically. If you do not give food to the stomach and if you supply food to the eyes, to the ears, to the... Then what will be your health? Similarly, so long we do not love Kṛṣṇa, then whatever those so-called love we are showing to the society, friendship and love and country and community, they are all futile. Therefore, in spite of so much advancement of so-called civilization, there is no love between one another. You try to love Kṛṣṇa. Then everything will be perfect.

Thank you very much. (end)



740112SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.17

-

Los Angeles, January 12, 1974



Pradyumna: Translation: "Now you may hear from me of what happened while Mahārāja Parīkṣit was passing his days hearing of the good occupations of his forefathers and being absorbed in thought of them." [SB 1.16.17]



Prabhupāda: So the question was, "How Mahārāja Parīkṣit punished this Kali-yuga?" The chapter name is "How Parīkṣit Received the Age of Kali." So why he punished the Kali? Because... Here it is said, pūrveṣāṁ vṛttim anvaham, tasya vartamānasya. He was situated always on the platform where his forefathers remained. This is called aristocratic. Every family or every caste... Family... First of all, there must be division. Then family. Community, society, then family. So Parīkṣit Mahārāja belonged to the royal family. His forefathers, own-Bhārata-vaṁśa, the Bhārata dynasty. Therefore you will find the members of the Bhārata dynasty is called Bhārata, Bhārata. Arjuna was addressed by Kṛṣṇa as Bhārata. Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra was also addressed as Bhārata. Vidura was addressed as Bhārata. Many times you have seen it.



So these descendants of the Bhārata dynasty, especially... Not especially. All of them. When Parīkṣit Mahārāja was born, so... I have told you already. Learned scholars in astrology, they were calculating the horoscope of the newly born child. So he was being described that "This child, this baby now born, he will be hero like this. He will be devotee like this. He'll be..." This horoscope made, in future what he will be. So Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira was anxious and he informed the learned brāhmaṇas that "This is all right. I thank you for your calculation. First of all, I want to know whether he will follow his forefathers. I want to know." That was the question. Because that Bhārata dynasty, they were rulers of the world, emperors and great devotees at the same time. Evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. They were not emperors and kings, simply tax collector. No. They were rājarṣayaḥ, rājarṣi. Rājarṣi means royal majesty. But in their behavior, they exactly like great saintly persons. Rāja and ṛṣi. That is called rājarṣi. Rāja means royal king and ṛṣi means saintly person.

There are many examples of rājarṣi. Just like Rājarṣi Janaka, Janaka Mahārāja, Rājarṣi Prahlāda Mahārāja, Rājarṣi Dhruva Mahārāja, Rājarṣi Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, Rājarṣi Parīkṣit Mahārāja. All the kings almost, when monarchy was accepted... And that is the only thing. Monarchy must be accepted. But at the present moment democracy means abolish monarchy and elect a rascal as monarch. This is called democracy. But after all, you have to accept a man... (aside:) These legs should not be spread before the Deity. Monarchy, that is required, monarchy. Because a monarch is rājarṣi. He should be rājarṣi, a saintly person. Without being saintly person, how he can become representative of God? A king is supposed to be representative of God. So unless he has got godly character, saintly character, great devotee, how he can become the head of a state? Just like the demigods in the heavenly planets... The king of heaven is Indra. So Indra is materially very opulent, although they are after material enjoyment. You cannot compare their material enjoyment with this material enjoyment on this earthly planet. There are thousand, thousand times better standard, the duration of life, paraphernalia for enjoyment, facilities, so many things. They are higher and higher. As you go to the higher planets, they are higher and higher, thousand times. Just like in this planet also we see that some nation's standard of living is higher than other nation. Take for example you Americans. Your standard of living, from material point of view, you have got greater facilities, or you have created your own good facilities. Similarly the more the intelligent persons are, they create their own facilities by the grace of God. Just like in this America, the Red Indians were there, but they could not develop the country. But when the Europeans came and settled in this country, now this country has become the first-class country in comparison to other countries. So it is the intelligence.

So the standard of living, intelligence, increases, as you go higher, higher, higher, higher. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ [Bg. 14.18]. Ūrdhvam. Ūrdhvam means higher. And adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ. There are three qualities. The whole material world is being operated under the influence of three qualities. Traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna. So according to the quality, there are different grades of people, and that is called cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. [Bg. 4.13] So everyone is not on the same platform. Everyone is under the influence of some quality of nature-goodness, passion, ignorance. So there is division. So the kṣatriyas, they are supposed to be in the mode of passion, a desire for controlling, ruling. That is kṣatriya's spirit, ruling. Therefore one kṣatriya king used to attack another kṣatriya king. The idea is not to take possession of other's property. The idea was that "This king is not ruling nicely." Just like in your country, you want to change the president, but forcibly he is sitting in his position, so as you want good government or good man as president, similarly, formerly, although there was fight between the two kings, the objective was different, not to occupy one's property, not to become a big thief.

You know the story of Alexander the Great and the thief. Alexander the Great arrested one thief, and he was going to punish him. The thief pleaded, "Sir, you are going to punish me, but what is the difference between you and me? I am a small thief, you are a great thief. That's all. [laughter] You are by force occupying other's kingdom, and you have no right. But because you are strong, or some way or other, you have got the opportunity, and you are conquering country after country, country after... So I am also doing the same thing. So what is the difference between you and me?" So Alexander considered that "Yes, I am nothing but a big thief, that's all." So he released him, "Yes, I am no better than you." Just like dacoits. Nowadays there are many thieves who steal scientifically, legally. There are many lawyers, many scientists. They do harm, but legally. Legal murderer, legal cheaters, so many things. We have got experience, every one of us. If you can protect yourself under the cover of law and you cheat others, then it is nice. But you cannot cheat the supervision of the Supreme. That you cannot do. A thief may steal secretly, but there is no secret. There is no secrecy for God. It is said in the Bhagavad-gītā, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: [Bg. 15.15] "I am sitting in everyone's heart." So suppose you are planning to do something, mischievous activity. You can cheat the man-made law or the man-made police, but how you can cheat Kṛṣṇa? He is sitting within your heart. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ: "I am sitting in everyone's heart." So whatever you're thinking, feeling, and willing, it is immediately being observed and noted, "This rascal wants to do this." Besides that... This is inside. Then outside, there is sun, there is moon, there is day, there is night. Everyone, there are eight kinds of witnesses, whatever you are doing. And karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa [SB 3.31.1]. Just like a man is punished according to his gravity of criminality, similarly, whatever you are doing... Here everything is criminal, in this material world. Everything is criminal.

Therefore Caitanya-caritāmṛta kaṛacā says,

dvaite bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba-manodharma

ei bhāla ei manda-ei saba bhrama



Dvaite. Dvaite means things which is not directly Kṛṣṇa, dvaita. Bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt, dvitīya. This dvitīya, this is called māyā. Dvitīya means second. The one is Kṛṣṇa, and māyā is secondary. Just like light. Light and darkness. Darkness is not first; light is first. And darkness means where there is no light. Where there is no light, that is darkness. Similarly, darkness has no separate existence. It is simply absence of light. That's all. Real existence is light. The whole creation is... Just like real existence is the sun. Try to understand, very easy. Sun, but when it is covered by the cloud, it is called darkness. Or it is covered by another planet, then we find darkness. Actually, there is always light. If you go through the cloud, you come to the sunshine. Everyone has got the experience. Down, when you start your plane, it may be very dark, and then, when you go beyond the sky, seven miles above, then you see there is sunlight. And again, if you start your plane in sunlight, in the morning, in daylight, so in the morning, and go to the western side, you will find never night. You will find never night, always light, always light. Sometimes we have got experience. We start from a place, say, at ten o'clock, and going western side. Then, after few hours, we see it is still ten o'clock, and the light is there. This is our practical experience.



So actually, there is nothing material. Everything is spiritual. Spiritual means īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam [Īśo mantra 1], everything belonging to God. But when we think that "There is no God, I am God," or "It is mine," that is darkness. This consciousness is darkness. So Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means to be situated above this material conception. Ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. Janasya moho' yam ahaṁ mameti. This conception, that "I am the proprietor, and everything belongs to me," this conception is called illusion. And this illusion increases by mental speculation. Ultimately, that mental speculator remains in darkness, but he thinks that he has become liberated. This is another darkness. Another darkness. That is described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. He Aravindākṣa. Kṛṣṇa's name is... (baby starts crying) (aside:) You take him out. (long pause in lecture and everyone starts chanting while baby is crying and being taken out)

ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

[SB 10.2.32]



Prahlāda Mahārāja says, "My Lord," Aravinda-akṣa. Kṛṣṇa's another name... As I explained yesterday, God has no name, but He has got thousands and millions of names according to His relationship with the devotee or the world, like that. As I explained yesterday, Kṛṣṇa is called Devakī-nandana because He has got relationship with Devakī. Therefore He has become Devakī-nandana. Kṛṣṇa is called Yaśodā-nandana. So similarly, Kṛṣṇa's another name is Aravindākṣa, Aravinda, because His eyes are just like petals of the lotus flower. Aravinda-nābhi. Aravinda-nābhi means Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, from His navel, one lotus flower is grown. Therefore He is called Aravinda-nābhi.



So here Kṛṣṇa is addressed, he aravindākṣa. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa. Ye anye. Anye means neglectfully, others. Prominent men are especially mentioned, "Here is Mr. such and such and such," and there are others. So these others, he aravindākṣa, ye 'nye. Who are that others? Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. The others means less intelligent class of men who are thinking that "I am now liberated. I have now become God by mystic yoga, by meditation." So therefore it is called māninaḥ. Māninaḥ means they are thinking wrongly like that. Actually, they are not liberated, not liberated. They are in darkness. Because he is foolishly thinking that he has become God. How you can become God? What is your power? What you have shown like God? We accept God, Kṛṣṇa, Lord Rāmacandra, and others, by seeing His activities. Kṛṣṇa, at the age of seven years old, He lifted Govardhana mountain. Govardhana-dhārī, Giridhārī. So what you are? You cannot raise even five kilos of load, and you are becoming God?

So these so-called gods are accepted by so-called devotees. These are all rascaldom. Therefore it is called māninaḥ. They are thinking, by mental speculation, that "I have become God." What you have got, power? What you have done that you have become God? But they are foolish. They do not calculate the value of his, strength of his becoming God. But they are thinking of... Therefore it is called māninaḥ. Now, you can think at your home that "I am the proprietor of the Bank of America." So you may become a crazy fellow like that. But to become proprietor of the Bank of America is different thing. But these foolish men will think like that. "I am God, I am moving the sun, I am moving..." This is their meditation. Perhaps you know. These rascals, these dogs, not gods, they think like that: "I am moving the sun, I am moving the earth..." Therefore it is called vimukta-māninaḥ. Mānina, thinking, foolishly thinking. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ.

Why they are thinking foolishly? We see they are advanced in knowledge. They can put forward so many words about becoming God. That has been described by Śrīdhara Svāmī, vāk-cāturya. Their so-called explanation that they have become God, that has been described by vāk-cāturya, jugglery of words, to be fool another fool. That's all. Therefore in Bhāgavata, in another place, it is said that śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ [SB 2.3.19]. Puruṣaḥ paśuḥ. If one person who is not devotee, if he is praised as very exalted, so wherefrom these praising words are coming? Śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ. Such praising comes from the persons who are like dogs. Śva-viḍ-varāha, the stool-eater pigs. Śva-viḍ-varāha uṣṭra, camels, and khara means ass. These classes of men, they praise such another big, big animal, śva-viḍ-varāha uṣṭra. Because anyone who is not a devotee of the Lord, he is not rājarṣi, devarṣi. He is not praiseworthy at all. He is a fool. He is a rascal. That is our conclusion. No, it is real conclusion. Because Kṛṣṇa says, mūḍha. Mūḍha means rascal. Na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ [Bg. 7.15].

So our simple test is whether a man is devotee or not. If we find that He is a devotee, then we respect, "Yes, here is nice Vaiṣṇava." Even Yamarāja says, "Offer my respect to the Vaiṣṇava." But if we see that he is not a devotee, he is claiming himself as God, as the supreme, then immediately, according to the formula of Bhagavad-gītā, we accept-mūḍha. Because a mūḍha does not surrender. Mūḍha. That is the test. Anyone who has not surrendered to the principle of Bhagavad-gītā, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja... [Bg. 18.66]. That is the test. If he has not surrendered to God, or Kṛṣṇa, then he is mūḍha. That is also explained in the Bhāgavata that ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ. Why they are so mūḍhas? Just like cause and effect. If a man has no money, he is called poor, poor man. Similarly, if a man has no such sense to surrender unto God, he is mūḍha. He is mūḍha. So ye 'nye... But thinking that he has become liberated, he has become one with God, and he is God Himself, everyone is God. Therefore they are mūḍha. Ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninaḥ.

So it is in good words, vimukta-māninaḥ. Because it is said by Vyāsadeva or a devotee, little respectful, vimukta-māninaḥ, falsely thinking that he has become liberated. But when Kṛṣṇa says, because He is the Supreme Lord, He says that "He is a mūḍha. He is a rascal." Just like father can immediately call his son rascal or spiritual master can say, because superior position, a rascal. Others, the rascal may be addressed in an ornamented language. He is to be proved a rascal. But some, for friendly sake... Just like Kṛṣṇa, when He was talking with Arjuna, He directly did not say, "My dear Arjuna, you are rascal number one. You are rascal number one." Because friend. But He did not say that. But He said,

aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ

prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase

gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca

nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ

[Bg. 2.11]



"My dear Arjuna, you are simply lamenting on this body. So, this is not the subject matter of lamentation." Actually, that is the fact. He was thinking that "My grandfather, my brothers, they will be killed," and he was putting forward great philosophy, this, that. "Humbug. And after all, this body will be finished. Either your grandfather's body or your brother's body, we do not kill them, in due course of time everything will be finished. That's a fact. Therefore aśocyān, why you are anxious, pertaining to their body?" Aśocyān anvaśocas tvam [Bg. 2.11]. "And at the same time, you are talking great philosophy." Prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase. Prajñā, philosophy means prajñā-vādān. So aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase [Bg. 2.11]. But nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ: "One who is actually learned, he does not take very much care of these things." That means "You are a fool." That means "You are a fool." It is called parenthesis, or... That "A paṇḍita, a learned man, does not do like this." It is called... What is the English? I do not remember now. That if I speak that "Sometimes, from my home, this thing was stolen, and the man who stole, he looked like you." But not directly, "You are the man who had stolen my property," but you can say in a gentlemanly way, "He looked like you." You see?



So similarly, Kṛṣṇa says, "Anyone who is not surrendering unto Me, who is not a surrendered soul, and thinking that he has become God, he is very learned scholar, Vedantist... These things are vimukta-māninaḥ." "Now I have no business to go to temple." In our country, there is a class. They have developed a system not to go to the temple. That is their propaganda, not to go to the temple. "Why you should go to the temple for finding out God? God is everywhere." If God is everywhere, now why not in the temple? What the temple has done? If God is everywhere, then in the temple there is God. You may call Deity worship as idol worship, but this situation created by Deity worship, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, practical... This was a church. This was a church. How many years ago? Since when we have occupied? Four years ago. And because nobody was coming, so this church was sold, and we purchased. Now why people are coming? The church or temple, if there is no God, so why people are coming? The same church. Because you could not convince them about the science of God. Therefore it was vacant. You cannot bluff all people for all the time. That is not possible. You must give them substantial. Then they will agree, "Yes, there is God."

So Parīkṣit Mahārāja special qualification... Sva-pūrveṣāṁ mahātmanām. This mahātmā I have already described. Mahātmā means devotee. Mahātmā does not mean a politician. Mahātmā means simply...

mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manasaḥ

[Bg. 9.13]



He is mahātmā. Ananya-manasaḥ, without any deviation, twenty-four hours, he is engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. That is mahātmā. That is mahātmā. So Mahārāja Parīkṣit's situation is described. Here it is said, tasyaivaṁ vartamānasya. How he kept himself always, na pūrveṣām. Pūrveṣām, the very word again, as it was used previously in the thirteenth and fifteenth verse. Sva-pūrveṣāṁ mahātmanām. He was so responsible that always thinking, "Whether I am deviating from the path of my grandfathers, Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuna?" That was his... In this way he was always thinking. That was his first business. Because his grandfathers were devotees, rājarṣi. Rājarṣi Yudhiṣṭhira.



So he wanted to keep himself on the position of rājarṣi. And because he kept himself on the position of rājarṣi, therefore he was able to punish the Kali. Because at the present moment there is no rājarṣi, all rascals and fools and animals are on the top of government, they cannot see what is Kali. They cannot see. Because he is also one of the members of the Kali. How he can see? Therefore the whole world is now being led by the Kali's agent. So they cannot check. Here it is said that nātidūre kilāścaryaṁ yad āsīt tan nibodha me. Suppose if you are not yourself in healthy condition, you cannot understand what is unhealthy condition. If you are not a scientist, you cannot see how the other thing is not scientific. If you are not yourself a medical man, you cannot understand what is the disease. So Mahārāja Parīkṣit, because he was addressed, rājarṣi, pūrveṣāṁ vṛttim anvaham... He was following strictly the occupational duty of his forefathers. Anu, ahani, day to date, not forgetting even for a single moment. Therefore he could see that what is that Kali. The Kali, we have, I mean, avoiding Kali: no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication, and no meat-eating. These are Kali. You will understand from this chapter gradually. These four things are representative of Kali. Now at the present moment, all over the world, Kali's influence is going on. Everyone, almost everyone, 99.9 percent. You cannot say cent percent because there are some saintly persons. So take it, 99.9 percent, all under the influence of Kali. Illicit sex life, gambling, intoxication and meat-eating. So how these people can see what is Kali? He is himself under the influence of Kali.

Therefore, Parīkṣit Mahārāja's situation, vartamānasya, tasyaivaṁ vartamānasya, how he was being situated, in what position he was. Just like not to go so far as to go to Parīkṣit Mahārāja. Even those who are neophytes, trying to be beyond the range of Kali-yuga, our members of the Kṛṣṇa society, because they have given up these four sinful activities, they can see how one is influenced by Kali. So this is the position. Therefore he could see. Now because the so-called leaders, so-called presidents, they are themself agent of Kali, how they can stop this illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling, and intoxication? They cannot do. So you have to take shelter of the śāstra, and then you will be able to avoid it. Otherwise, it is not possible.

Thank you very much. (end)



740115SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.19

-

Hawaii, January 15, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



dharma uvāca

kaccid bhadre 'nāmayam ātmanas te

vicchāyāsi mlāyateṣan mukhena

ālakṣaye bhavatīm antar-ādhiṁ

dūre bandhuṁ śocasi kañcanāmba

[SB 1.16.19]



Translation: "Dharma, in the form of a bull, asked: Madam, are you not hale and hearty? Why are you covered with the shadow of grief? It appears by your face that you have become black. Are you suffering from some internal disease, or are you thinking of some relative who is away in a distant place?"



Prabhupāda: You can read the purport; it's small.



Pradyumna: "The people of the world in this age of Kali are always full of anxieties. Everyone is diseased with some kind of ailment. From the very faces of the people of this age, one can find out the index of the mind. Everyone feels the absence of his relative who is away from home. The particular symptom of the age of Kali is that no family is now blessed to live together. To earn a livelihood, the father lives at a place far away from the son, or the wife lives far away from the husband and so on. There are sufferings from internal diseases, separation from those near and dear, and anxieties for maintaining the status quo. These are but some important factors which make the people of this age always unhappy."



Prabhupāda: So this age of Kali, we have discussed in the previous verses, is very degraded age. In the beginning, there is Satya-yuga; and next, Tretā-yuga; next, Dvāpara-yuga; and this is the Kali-yuga. The aggregate of all these four yugas is called yuga: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ [Bg. 8.17]. The duration of Satya-yuga is 1,800,000's of years; and the next, Tretā-yuga, roughly 1,200,000's of years; and Dvāpara-yuga, 800,000's of years; and this Kali-yuga, 432,000's of years. So we are in this Kali-yuga. In this Kali-yuga we have passed only five thousand years. Out of 432,000's of years we have passed only five thousand. Since the Battle of Kurukṣetra, which took place five thousand years ago, the Kali-yuga has begun.



So this chapter is on the subject matter, "How Parīkṣit Received the Age of Kali." We are studying this chapter at the present moment. In Los Angeles we were studying, and again, after that, we are presenting. So Kali-yuga is not very good age, simply faults. We have several times discussed that in this age, people's duration of life, mercifulness, bodily strength and so many things, eight kinds of things, will be reduced. The age is reducing; the bodily strength is also reducing. Now you American generation, you are not as strong as your father or grandfather. You can understand that. You are not so luxuriantly grown up, bodily growth. There are so many reasons, but this is the symptom of age of Kali. And they're described in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, foretold, five thousand years ago, what will happen in this Kali-yuga. That is all explained in the Twelfth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, third, fourth chapter. So simply full of faults. Social life, political life, religious life-everything has been described there. And one thing I can see very practical, that in this age, lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. It is stated there that people will think that by keeping long hairs they will become very beautiful. That is stated there. Dāmpatye ratim eva hi. Husband and wife's relation will depend on the strength of sex. These are described there. Svīkāra eva codvāhe. Marriage will be performed simply by agreement.

Now, this is śāstra. Five thousand years ago, what was written, that is now becoming true. Now there is no marriage as it was taking formerly, Vedic marriage. The father (and) mother will select the bride, bridegroom, and there will be gorgeous ceremony and marriage. The father will spend... Both parties, the girl's father and the boy's father, will spend. Still in India, there are cases like that. They'll spend their hard-earned money during the marriage ceremony of their son and daughter. But in this age, gradually, it is said, svīkāra eva codvāhe. Udvāha means marriage, taking the charge of the girl. The boy takes charge of the young girl from the custody of her father. This is marriage. Woman, according to Vedic civilization, they are not recommended freedom. They should be taken care just like children are taken care of. You cannot give independence to the children. That is not possible. Then it is not good for them. Similarly, woman also should be taken care of. They should not be given freedom. That is not good for them. They should be protected by the father in childhood, by the husband in youthhood, and by the grown-up children in old age. Three stages. But in this age, women are trying to take independence of father, husband or children. That is not good. That is described in the śāstra.

So so many symptoms are described, but at the end the remedy is suggested because śāstra means it will guide you for the ultimate goal of life, for the perfection of life. So if the world condition is so bad, then how people will be saved? That is also suggested in the śāstra: kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was advised by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, "My dear King, I've described so many faults. It is like the ocean of faults. But there is one boon also. That is special prerogative, special advantage of this age." Kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ. Kalau, kalau means "In this age of Kali, it is full of faulty things. But there is one boon." What is that? Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet [SB 12.3.51]. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya: Simply by chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare-simply by chanting the holy name...," kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya, kṛṣṇasya, so, mukta-saṅgaḥ, "he becomes free from all these contaminations, by one thing, simply chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa." Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ. There are so many contaminations, so many faults of this age, but simply by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, one becomes kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ, he becomes free from the contaminated association.

Just like if there is some epidemic, disease, and if you take vaccine, it is supposed that you are free from the contamination. So this vaccine of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra will keep you fit without any contamination of this age of Kali. And that is happening. All over the world people are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. And practically we see, those who are chanting, they're becoming free from the contamination. If you follow the rules and regulations, very simple thing, and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra... That is our only request. Then, in spite of this contaminated age of Kali, you'll be saved. You'll be saved. That we are... That is our... Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement means that we are preaching this cult.

harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Cc. Ādi 17.21]



Without this, there is no other way of saving you from the contamination of Kali.



So here another question is... The dharma uvāca. Personified dharma, he's inquiring from the cow. He's addressing cow, amba. Amba means mother. So cow is our mother. Why mother? Because from practical point of view, we drink milk. So how mother... How cow is not mother? She's mother. We are taking her milk. There are seven mothers according to Vedic civilization:

ātma-mātā guroḥ patnī

brāhmaṇī rāja-patnikā

dhenur dhātrī tathā pṛthvī

saptaitā mātaraḥ smṛtāḥ



Real mother, from whose womb we have come to this world, real mother, ātma-mātā. Then guroḥ patnī, wife of the teacher or spiritual master, guroḥ patnī. Brāhmaṇī, the wife of a brāhmaṇa. Ātma-mātā guroḥ patnī brāhmaṇī rāja-patnikā, and the wife of the king, or the queen. She's also mother. Dhenu, the cow. Cow is also mother. And dhātrī means nurse. Nurse is also mother. Tathā pṛthvī, and the earth, the earth is also our mother. That we say in country, in the country which we take birth, we say deśa-mātṛkā. In Sanskrit it is called deśa-mātṛkā. That is also mother. Mother land, mother language. So this... So many mothers we have got, out of which, cow is also mother. Therefore she's addressed as amba. Amba means mother. Still in Gujarat province, they call amba. And in U.P., United States, er, United Province, in India, they also call amba, or in a broken language they call amma. Still... That is from very long time, mother is... Amba-devī. There is a... From Amba-devī, there is a big temple of Mother Durgā, Kālī, in Bombay. So this Amba-devī was pronounced by the Englishmens as Bamba-devī, and from Bamba-devī it has come to "Bombay." Actually, there is a big temple of Amba in Bombay. From that name, instead of Amba, they have become Bamba. Just like from Sindhu, they have called, they have designated the inhabitants of Sindhu-deśa as "Hindu." The Muhammadans, they pronounce s as h. So from "Sindhu," it has come to "Hindu." Otherwise, this "Hindu" name is not mentioned in any Vedic literature. It is given by the... This name is given by the other foreigners. Especially the Arabian countries, they used to call this nation, Bhārata-varṣa...



Actually, Hindu is not a religion. Hindu is a name given by the foreigners. The religion is, of India, varṇāśrama-dharma, following the institution of four varṇas and four āśramas. That is varṇ... Or sanātana-dharma. Sanātana-dharma means eternal, eternal religion. Religion of human being is one. That is called sanātana. A living entity is described as sanātana. Mamaivāṁśo jīva-bhūto jīva-loke sanātanaḥ [Bg. 15.7]. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find sanātanaḥ, and Kṛṣṇa is also addressed in the Eleventh Chapter as sanātanas tvam. And there is another place, or spiritual world, which is also called sanātana. In the Bhagavad-gītā you'll find, paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo 'vyakto 'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]. So this sanātana term is very important. The living entity is sanātana and God is sanātana and the spiritual world is sanātana, and the process by which your lost relationship with God established and you go back to home back to Godhead, that is called sanātana-dharma. Sanātana-dharma. That is our eternal relationship with God. And there is a place. So the system which makes these two sanātana, God and the living entity, meet again and they go back to enjoy life in the spiritual world, that system is called sanātana-dharma. Therefore sanātana-dharma is not meant for any particular class or particular country or particular nation or community. No. It is meant for the whole human being, especially human being; otherwise, all living entities.

Living entities, they are in this material world in different forms. That is accepted by Kṛṣṇa, sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya sambhavanti mūrtayo yāḥ [Bg. 14.4]. There are as many forms of life amongst the living entities. Tāsāṁ mahad yonir brahma ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā. The mahad yoniḥ, mahat, this material world, material elements, or the sum total of material elements... Mother Durgā, she is the mother. And God is the father. Just like father and mother gives birth to a child, similarly, we spirit soul, the part and parcel of the supreme father, and the material elements, bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ [Bg. 7.4], they're the recipient. Tasmin garbhaṁ dadāmy aham. Just like father gives the seed in the womb of the mother, then the child gets a body and it grows and come out, similarly this body is given by mother, material, material energy, but the father is the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. Ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā [Bg. 14.4]. This is the factual position. We are not this material body.

dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati

[Bg. 2.13]



So we have got all information in the Vedic literature beginning from Bhagavad-gītā and then described further in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, four Vedas. The four Vedas-Sāma, Yajur, Ṛk, Atharva-they are concentrated in the Vedānta-sūtra, and the Vedānta-sūtra is explained in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore, our propagation, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is that we are trying to get our students well conversed in Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. So those who are our students, we have got our books now ready published so nicely. People are accepting it. I was very glad to hear from our Mahārāja that we are selling about hundred...



Sudāmā: Close to, yes.



Prabhupāda: Eh?



Sudāmā: Close to. They're doing many..., close to a hundred Kṛṣṇa books a day sometimes.



Prabhupāda: Yes. So it is very good news that people are reading our books. They have already got about more than one dozen such books, four hundred pages each. And besides the smaller books, now we are immediately going to add six more books. And what are those? Three Bhāgavatams?



Bali-mardana: Three Bhāgavatam, Caitanya-caritāmṛta.



Prabhupāda: One, all four hundred pages, like this. We don't publish a book less than this volume. So just imagine how much we have to learn about our spiritual life. In no other system-religious system you may call, or cultural system-can give you so many books to read. There is no comparison. The Christians, they can present only one small Bible, and the Muslims they can present one little Koran. But here, the Vedic culture is so great that we can simply give you sixty volumes like this only for Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. And Bhāgavata is the eighteenth Purāṇa. So there are seventeen Purāṇas, still more, not yet touched. Beside that, there are 108 Upaniṣads. Then there is big Mahābhārata, the great history of India. Then Rāmāyaṇa. There are so many books. So we are trying to present all these books into English translation.



So it is a culture, Vedic culture, which, if it is spread all over the world, people will be benefited because at the present moment people do not know what is the treasure house of spiritual culture. They do not know. They have got some vague idea. Neither they are offered such volumes of books. So those who are present here, our disciple or not disciple, should understand that this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is a great scientific movement; it is not a bogus bluffing movement. Very scientific movement. So in this movement, our one program is to respect the cows. We chant this mantra, namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. The brahminical culture and the cows... Why they have selected the cows? There are so many animals. Why cow protection is so important in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Why Kṛṣṇa personally Himself became a cowherd boy and was taking the care of the cows and the calves? Oh, that is very essential.

And here also, we see that the Dharmarāja is inquiring about the comforts of the cow. Amba, kaccid bhadre, what is, anāmayam ātmanas te. Āmayam means disease. So "Whether you are quite comfortable by your health?" This is very essential to keep cows very comfortably. If they feel comfortable, then you get the most nourishing food, milk. We are practically seeing in our New Vrindaban center, because the cow are feeling secure in our custody, they're delivering milk up to the eighty pounds daily. You'll be surprised. So if you get milk products, milk, then you can prepare so many preparations full of vitamins, which will nourish your brain. Dull brain cannot understand what is spiritual knowledge. Therefore, that Mr. Bernard Shaw, he wrote a book. Perhaps you know it. You Are What You Eat. If you keep your brain dull, then how you can understand? Because without becoming very intelligent man, one cannot understand Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That is stated in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, kṛṣṇa yei bhaje sei baḍa catura: "One who takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness seriously and perfectly, he must be very, very intelligent." Dull brain cannot accept it. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. So we have to make our brain very clean. And for that purpose you require to drink not very much, at least, one pound or half-pound milk daily. That is essential. But no meat-eating. This is intelligence. The milk is also conversion of the blood, everyone knows. Just like we drink the milk of our mother. The color of the milk is white, but everyone knows that milk is produced from the red blood, red corpuscle. So this is the process, that people are very much anxious to drink the blood of cows from the slaughterhouse. They sometimes drink fresh blood, is it not?

Bali-mardana: Yes.



Prabhupāda: That is not very good intelligence. You drink the blood of the cow by natural process, which turns into white milk. You'll get better brain, better strength. Therefore cow protection is very essential in Vedic civilization. Therefore we offer respect Kṛṣṇa: "Kṛṣṇa is the benefactor of cows and the brāhmaṇas." Namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. Go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. Kṛṣṇa is well-wisher first-go, cow. You'll find Kṛṣṇa always with cows. Here is Kṛṣṇa's picture, you see how He's loving the cow and the calf. He's personally teaching from His childhood, from His boyhood. So we should follow. If we want to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, we must give... The calf is also seeing to the face of Kṛṣṇa for protection, and Kṛṣṇa is giving protection, "Yes, I'll give you protection."



So this is the position. And here is also dharma. Religious life must begin very clean. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



Sinful life will not... [break] ...that is practical, everyone knows. And we see so many varieties of people, men, in the society, and what is the difference of variety? One has got good brain, another has got dull brain. That is dis... That is the variety. So if you want good brain... Good brain means how to get relief from all the troubles of material existence. That is good brain. And bad brain means to become implicated more and more. They do not know... Because they have got bad brain, they do not know how spirit soul is transmigrating from one body to another, how he is becoming entangled. Today I have got very nice body, American body, but what is the guarantee next life? But they do not believe in the next life because they have no good brain. So in order to understand things as they are, you require good brain, and for good brain, you require milk preparation. In this way, as they've suggested a routine in the śāstra also, and guided by sādhu-guru-śāstra, if we accept, then we shall become very happy in this life and next life also. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



Thank you very much.

Sudāmā: Questions, Prabhupāda? [break]



Devotee: ...one is sufficient to ask is that are Siddha-svarūpānanda Gosvāmī and Tuṣṭa-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja and their followers more advanced in their understanding of Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master than the other devotees in ISKCON; and secondly, are they, have they advanced beyond following the rules and regulations of ISKCON?



Prabhupāda: That is up to you to judge-by the result. If they are actually advanced, why they should leave this company of ISKCON? Therefore, I know they're very good souls. They might have done some mistake out of misunderstanding, but you invite them to come back again and take their position. It is not very good sign that they have left. They'll never be happy. That's a fact. (pause)



Hare Kṛṣṇa. (end)



740709SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.19

-

Los Angeles, July 9, 1974



Prabhupāda:



dharma uvāca

kaccid bhadre 'nāmayam ātmanas te

vicchāyāsi mlāyateṣan mukhena

ālakṣaye bhavatīm antar-ādhiṁ

dūre bandhuṁ śocasi kañcanāmba

[SB 1.16.19]



"Dharma [in the form of bull] asked: Madam, are you not hail and hearty? Why are you covered with the shadow of grief? It appears by your face that you have become black. Are you suffering from some internal disease, or are you thinking of some relative who is away in a distant place?"



Actually the cows... When I was in New Vrindaban, our Kīrtanānanda Mahārāja purchased one cow without calf. (someone says, "Children have to go out") Yes. So that cow was actually crying because the calf was taken away for slaughtering. It is not that they have no soul, they cannot understand, they have no feeling. But they are helpless. Everything is there. The butchers, the cow slaughterers, or their supporters, they say wrongly that the animal has no soul. This is a rascal philosophy. Why animal has no soul? The question should be...

Here Yamarāja is addressing the cow as amba, mother. "Why you are so unhappy? From your face it appears." So Yamarāja was foolish man, that he is addressing a cow as mother? This is civilization. It doesn't matter one is appearing as a cow or a man or a dog or a demigod or a civilized man, uncivilized man. One who knows that the soul is there... Unless there is soul, how Yamarāja is asking the cow, "It appears that you are very much bereaved, so what is the cause, mother, of your bereavement?"

So this culture, that Yamarāja, is asking an animal, mother... Without any soul? No. Everyone has soul. The rascals, they do not know it. One has to become paṇḍita. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18], in the Bhagavad-gītā it is said. So those who are actually learned, they know. They know that one may be a living entity, one may be a tree, one may be an animal, one may be a cow, one may be an elephant, one may be a learned brāhmaṇa scholar, one may be a caṇḍāla, untouchable. Everyone is a soul. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ.

vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ

[Bg. 5.18]



Paṇḍita, one who is learned, he knows that all of them, animals, trees, plants or human being or demigods, everyone is the spirit soul. Now they are simply encaged in different bodies according to different karma. The soul, part and parcel of God, wanted to imitate God's supremacy, and they wanted to enjoy. But in the spiritual world there cannot be second enjoyer. The only enjoyer is Kṛṣṇa. Bhoktāraṁ sarva-loka, bhoktāraṁ sarva-yajñānāṁ sarva-loka... He is the supreme proprietor, supreme being. In the dictionary you will find, "the supreme being." "Supreme being" means nobody can be equal to Him, nobody can be greater than Him. That is, means supreme. So how one can become an imitator of Kṛṣṇa? That is not possible. That imitation is possible here in this material world, because they are all rascals. So one rascal may claim that "I am God," imitation, but as soon as he claims like that, any intelligent man knows that he is a rascal. That's all. That very assertion will establish that he is a rascal.



Nobody can be God. God is one. And religion is also one. If God is one, then how religion can be different? Just like state laws. If the state is one, the law is also, everyone. Now the ordinary law, just like "Keep to the right," if somebody says, "No, this is Christian law. Hindu law, 'Keep to the left,' " will it be accepted? If I say, "I am Hindu, I am coming from India. My law is 'Keep to the left.' " In India, the same thing, "Keep to the left." And many other countries also. So here, because all these laws are made by rascals, in some country you keep to the left, some country you keep to the right. And which is correct, that is unknown. That is unknown. Therefore for the foolish person, "This is Hindu religion,' " "This is Christian religion," and "This is Muhammadan religion." Religion is one. How it can be Hindu religion, Christian religion? No. Religion is one. God is one. Therefore religion is one. Because religion means the law or the order given by God. That is religion. Simple definition.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. That mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja, "Surrender unto Me," that is religion. So one has to surrender. Either he is a Hindu or a Christian or Muhammadan, he has to surrender. That is religion. One cannot say that because we are professing Christian religion, we haven't got to surrender to God. Will anybody say? Will any Christian will say like that? Or any Hindu will say like that? Or any Muhammadan will say like that? No. Everyone has to surrender to God. That is religion. Therefore in the Bhāgavata you will find the verse: sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje [SB 1.2.6]. That is first-class religion which is teaching the followers to understand the Supreme.

Now, "Supreme I cannot see." You cannot see. Therefore Supreme's name, another name is Adhokṣaja, "beyond the perception of your experimental knowledge." That is called adhokṣaja. Adhah-kṛta akṣaja jñānaṁ yatra. By your experimental knowledge you cannot understand. The same thing, that if you say, "I do not see the President of the United States. Therefore I do not believe this law, 'Keep to the left.' " No, no. If you don't believe, that is your business. But as soon as you violate this law, immediately you are under prison. You have seen the President or not seen, it doesn't matter. The law will act. Similarly, you believe in God or do not believe in God. It doesn't matter. The God's order, the God's law, will work on. And for this purpose the material energy is there.

So here it is said... Yamarāja is inquiring the cow because she is very much threatened by the butcher. The butcher was ready to kill, and she was trembling. So Yamarāja is asking, kaccid bhadre anāmayam ātmanas te. Just like we would ask some friend or relative that "I think you are all right?" The same thing is being inquired. "Why you are appearing so much bereaved? What is the cause?" Ālakṣaye. "It appears that you are within very sorry." Ālakṣaye bhavatīm antar-ādhim. "Some distress within yourself." Dūre bandhuṁ śocasi. Because in this material world we are always distressed. It is not that we are happy. That is an illusion. That is not fact. We are always distressed. So there are three kinds of distresses: Adhyātmika, adhibhautika, and adhidaivika. Here it is inquired that bhavatīm antarādhim. Adhi. And antara means within the body or within the mind.

So, "Are you suffering some pains on account of your body or mind?" This is called adhyātmika. Adhyātmika means the body. The body and the mind. That's called adhyātmika. Adhibhautika, sufferings offered by other living entities. And adhidaivika. Adhidaivika means sufferings offered by the demigods. Just like famine, pestilence, earthquake. You have no hand. You may be a very big, big scientist, but when this trembling of the earth, "Oh, God save us, God save us, God save us." (laughter) Yes. Even that sputnik... Our scientist... Where is scientist? What is that, sputnik? They were asking, "God shall...?"

Svarūpa Dāmodara: Just as they were trying to go to the moon.



Prabhupāda: What is the story? You can little explain.



Svarūpa Dāmodara: That there was an explosion in the (indistinct), and they could not go to the moon. So they were in danger in outer space. So they were requesting all the people so to "Pray to God so that I can come back safe and sound to this planet." (laughter)



Prabhupāda: When they are in danger they pray to God for safe and sound, but when they go to the moon planet: "We are scientist." (laughter) Just see how much foolish they are! When they go to the moon planet, at that time, "God give us permission, we may go"? No. "We are scientists. (laughter) We don't care for God." But when they are in danger, "God save us." (laughter) Just see what kind of scientists they are. This is practical. I am very glad that our Doctor Svarūpa Dāmodara has mentioned this in his book, Scientific Basis of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.



So that is the fact. And there is a version of Tulasī Dāsa in Hindi. It is said sukse sabe hari bhaje, duhkhse saha hari bhaje, sukse bhaje khoya.(?) Or sukhase ara hari bhaje, tu duḥkha hase hoya(?). It is very nice instruction. The instruction is that when one is distressed, everyone remembers God. Yes. Duhkhse saba hari bhaje. Saba means "all." At that time... Just like in the last war, Second..., last war, when everything was in danger, Mr. Churchill started this movement B(?), and they were all going to churches-when the situation was very grave. And in Germany especially, because war was very, going on very seriously, so there was no men, so all the women, they went to the church and pray God, somebody... Woman means husband, son or father... Prayed, "Let my father come back" or "Let my husband come back" or "my son." But nobody came back. So they became atheist. This is the version of my one German Godbrother friend. So he said that all of them became atheists. Why? They prayed so much to get back their husband or son or father: nobody came back. "Then there is no God." This is their conclusion. That means, "God is our order supplier. God is our servant." Just like I ask my servant or my disciple, "You do this," and he must do it. We cannot accept God like that. God is neither going to be your servant.

So those who are going to religious life, making God as their servant, they will be failure. You must approach God as master. You should become servant. The so-called religionist, they accept God as their order-supplier servant: "I must pray to God." Whenever there is some inconvenience, "I must pray," or "I must... " Not "must." "At that time I shall pray, and then I shall finish that prayer, and God must supply. If God does not supply, then there is no God." This is the general attitude. But that should not be done. The real religion is, as Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekam [Bg. 18.66]. First of all surrender. Then talk of mercy and this or that. Also, although God is very merciful, even those who are simply asking from God, not prepared to give anything, God is merciful, even though he...

Therefore He has given this field. "All right, you want to become another God or competitor of Me? You live in this material world and begin your life as Brahmā. I give you first-class chance. And then gradually, you become the worm of the stool." (laughter) This is called karma-kāṇḍīya-vicāra. First of all we get our very opportunity. Just like you Americans, you have got good opportunity. I have several time mentioned that you have wealth, you have got education, you have got beauty, janmaiśvarya, and heritage also. People outside your country, they know, "Oh, he is American. He is very advanced." You have got respect. So this is, this is due to pious life. If one is pious, he gets all those opportunities. Janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī [SB 1.8.26]. This is... Janma means to get birth in high family, aristocratic family, or to become the members of a big nation. This is called janma. Janma means birth. And aiśvarya, opulence, money. Janma aiśvarya śruta, aiśvarya, and śruta. Śruta means education. And śrī means beauty. These four things are outcome of previous pious life. So you have got this opportunity. You have got. Now you utilize these assets of life-nice birth, opulence, beauty, education-for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise, you take the chance of Brahmā, and then go to become the worm of the stool. The law of karma is like that.

So one who is opulent in this life, they should be very much careful that "By the grace of God, I have got this opportunity. Now the opportunity should be utilized to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness," means to understand Kṛṣṇa. That is advancement. If anyone understands Kṛṣṇa, that "Kṛṣṇa, You are the greatest..." God is great, we have heard so many times from so many people. But what is God? We did not know. Now we understand that Kṛṣṇa. So if you engage yourself simply to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, simply by thinking of Kṛṣṇa, then your life is successful. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.

Thank you very much. (end)



740116SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.20

-

Hawaii, January 16, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



pādair nyūnaṁ śocasi maika-pādam

ātmānaṁ vā vṛṣalair bhokṣyamāṇam

āho surādīn hṛta-yajña-bhāgān

prajā uta svin maghavaty avarṣati

[SB 1.16.20]



Translation: "I have lost my three legs and am now standing on one only. Are you lamenting for my state of existence? Or are you in great anxiety because henceforward the unlawful meat-eaters will exploit you? Or are you in a sorry plight because the demigods are now bereft of their share of sacrificial offerings because no sacrifices are being performed at present? Or are you grieving for living beings because of their sufferings due to famine and drought?"



Prabhupāda: Read the purport. Read. Long purport.



Pradyumna: "With the progress of the age of Kali, four things particularly, namely the duration of life, mercy, the power of recollection, and moral or religious principles will gradually diminish. Since dharma, or the principles of religion, would be lost in the proportion of three out of four, the symbolic bull was standing on one leg only. When three-fourths of the population of the whole world become irreligious, the situation is converted into hell for the animals. In the age of Kali, godless civilizations will create so many so-called religious societies in which the Personality of Godhead will be directly or indirectly defied. And thus faithless societies of men will make the world uninhabitable for the saner section of people. There are gradations of human beings in terms of proportionate faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The first-class..."



Prabhupāda: Yes. Go on.



Pradyumna: "The first-class faithful men are the Vaiṣṇavas and the brāhmaṇas, then the kṣatriyas, then the vaiśyas, then the śūdras, then the mlecchas, the yavanas, and at last the caṇḍālas. The degradation of the human instinct begins from the mlecchas..."



Prabhupāda: Caṇḍālas means the dog-eaters. In the human society, the division of higher class and lower class is determined by the standard of eating. So first-class men, just like brāhmaṇa, Vaiṣṇava, they eat very purified prasādam. Their responsibility practically does not depend on them. Because Vaiṣṇava... Brāhmaṇa also. Without becoming a brāhmaṇa, nobody can become Vaiṣṇava. So when you speak of Vaiṣṇava, it is to be supposed that he's already brāhmaṇa. Therefore, to bring the neophyte devotees to the perfectional stage, we offer the brāhmaṇa's sacred thread. But if people, after promising everything, and break their promise, that is very abominable. When they're initiated before the Deity, before the Lord, before the fire, they should not break it. That is most sinful if you break your promise. Otherwise, you should not be coming forward for initiation if you cannot keep your promise.



So the first-class, second-class, third-class, fourth-class men are considered according to the guṇa and karma, quality and work. That is described in the Śrīmad-SB.., er, Bhagavad-gītā, cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. That is the system, not by force one can become first-class. According to the śāstra, who is first-class, who is second-class, who is third-class, who is fourth-class, who is fifth-class, that is to be understood. Guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ. So when one becomes above the guṇas by devotional service... Guṇa means quality. A devotee is on the position of first-class human society because a devotee is engaged in devotional service. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā,

māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate

[Bg. 14.26]



"Anyone who is engaged cent percent without any motive in the devotional service of the Lord," māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena [Bg. 14.26], bhakti-yogena, avyabhicāreṇa, "without any adulteration, such person," māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate, sa guṇān... Guṇān means these material qualities: goodness, passion and ignorance. These are guṇas. Sa guṇān samatītya, samatītya, "fully transcendental, fully surpassing." Brahma-bhūyāya kalpate: "Then that is the stage of self-realization."



So if one is not even on the stage of self-realization, how he can teach others? That is cheating. That is cheating. If one is not a graduate, if he becomes a teacher, he is not a teacher; he is a cheater. One must be first of all qualified. That qualification means one must be above the three qualities of material nature. Goodness... Even you have to go beyond the quality of goodness. In the material world we have made, concocted, "This is good, this is bad." So even taking it... Actually, everything in the material world is bad. Anything. It is simply mental concoction. We are creating, "This is good, this is bad." The... So long one is in the material world, everything is bad. Even the so-called religious practice, that is also bad, in the material world. So therefore, Bhagavad-gītā says, sa guṇān samatītya etān: "One has to transcend even the quality of goodness, the so-called goodness."

Actually there is no goodness, because here people dress like in the platform of goodness, but thinking just like animals. That kind of goodness has no value. Actually goodness, that goodness is sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26], when one transcends the qualities of material nature, above the brāhmaṇa quality. Brāhmaṇa quality is... Suppose... Suppose actually, in comparison to other qualities, that is the first-class quality. Satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavam, eh? Jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. When one is situated in these qualities-truthfulness, satyam; śamaḥ, controlling the senses; damaḥ, controlling the mind; śamo damas titikṣā, tolerant-in spite of all tribulation, tolerant-śamo damas titikṣā śaucam, cleanliness. Then jñānam, full knowledge. Full knowledge means "What I am, what is God, what is this material world, what is our relationship." That is called knowledge. And that knowledge, when practically applied in life, that is called vijñānam. Jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyam, āstikyam, full faith in the śāstras and in God. That is called āstikyam. If you have full faith in the revealed scriptures, then you are āstikya. Because you cannot manufacture your God, so-called incarnation God. No. You must have full knowledge of God through the authority of revealed scriptures. That is God consciousness. If you give up the injunction of the scripture, revealed scriptures, you consider something as God, that is not God. Or you consider something as religion, that is not religion. Yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ, na sa siddhim avāpnoti [Bg. 16.23]. If you become aberrant to the injunction of the śāstras, then na sukhaṁ sāvāpnoti, you'll never get happiness. Na sukham, yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ, na, na sa siddhim avāpnoti. There is no question of siddhi, perfection, neither there is question of happiness, na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim, and what to speak of going back home, back to Godhead. It is useless.

Therefore we must abide by the sādhu-śāstra-guru. (aside:) Ah, what is this sound, is going on now? You can ask somebody to stop. Sādhu means saintly person. Śāstra means revealed scriptures. Sādhu, śāstra and guru, spiritual master. So we must follow the footprints of saintly persons, mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ [Cc. Madhya 17.186]. That is the way. We have to follow great superior personalities, just like ṣaḍ-gosvāmī. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, ei chay gosāñi jāṅr mui tāṅr dāsa: "I become servant, servant or disciple, of such a person who follows the footprints of the six Gosvāmīs." Otherwise one becomes guru, anyone, just like nowadays they become. They are manufacturing guru. Guru is not manufactured. Guru is in the disciplic succession, one who is strictly follows the footsteps of the ṣaḍ-gosvāmīs. Ei chay gosāñi jāṅr. Anyone who is following the footsteps of the gosvāmīs, Rūpa Gosvāmī... Rūpa Gosvāmī gives his Upadeśāmṛta instruction:

vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ

jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ

sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt

[NoI 1]



This is the injunction given by Rūpa Gosvāmī. Vāco vegam. Vāco vegam means the force of talking, vegam. What is the meaning, vegam?



Nitāi: Urge.

Prabhupāda: Urge, yes. Just like I am talking some nonsense. That the vāco vegam; it has no value. We should fix something which has value. One who can control, it is better not to talk than to talk foolish. So that is the world. All foolish talking or foolish literature, it has no value. So it has to be controlled. That is called controlling the vāco vegam. Krodha-vegam. Krodha means anger. So it is also urge. Suppose I am insulted by somebody. Naturally, I'll be angry, but if I can control, "All right, let me... He's a foolish. He has done. Why shall I lose my temper?" That is called controlling krodha-vegam. Vāco vegaṁ krodha-vegam, manasa-vegam, mind. It has got so many urges. Mind is driving practically, "Let us go there, let us go there, let us do this, let us..." Never mind sinful or pious, mind is always dictating and rejecting.



So vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegam, krodha-vegam, udara-vegam. Udara-vegam is the urge of the belly. "I shall eat this, I shall eat that, I shall eat that." Why? Simply you shall eat bhagavat-prasādam. Prasāde sarva-duḥkhānam. Then udara-vegam, and upastha-vegam, the urge of the genital. That is the most important. The jihvā-vegam, jihvā-vegam, udara-vegam, then genital, the straight line. So if one can control the urge of these three things... Tā'ra madhye jihvā ati, lobhamoy sudurmati. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says that out of the urges of the tongue and other senses, down to the genital, up... There are many urges: urge of the mind, urge of the anger, urge of the talking, urge of the tongue, then belly, then genital. In this way, we are driven by so many urges. So out of that, the strongest enemy is our tongue, is our tongue. Jihvā-vegam. If one can control the urges of the tongue then he will be naturally able to stop the urges of the belly and the urges of the genital, three straight line.

So these are to be practiced. Etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ: [NoI 1] "One who has become successful in controlling the urges of all these things," pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt, "now he's free to make disciples all over the world." And they're not, that... I cannot control even my tongue and control my genital, and I become spiritual master? This is nonsense. This is nonsense. You learn first of all. Try to control. Become first-class controller, dhīraḥ. That is called dhīraḥ, not disturbed by any urges. Etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. This word is used, dhīraḥ. Dhīraḥ means very sober, fully controlled. That is called dhīraḥ. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. Unless you become dhīraḥ, you cannot understand what is spiritual life. That is not possible. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in the Bhagavad-gītā, tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati [Bg. 2.13]. Dhīras tatra na muhyati.

So you cannot understand even. Unless you become a dhīraḥ, you cannot understand what is spiritual life, what is spirit. It is not a bogus thing that I manufacture something, concoct something, and do something, and I become a leader, I become a spiritual master. This is all nonsense. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. The word is dhīraḥ, and dhīraḥ is explained in the Kumāra-sambhava, that dhīraḥ, just like Lord Śiva... Lord Śiva lost his wife; she committed suicide before her father. That's in Dakṣa-yajña, was learned about Dakṣa-yajña. So Lord Śiva was performing yoga practice meditation, and in the meantime, his wife Devī, she took birth as daughter of Himalaya, King of Himalaya, Pārvatī. So the..., there was fight between the demigods and the demons. So there was a plan that "If by the semina of Lord Śiva, one son is born, Kārttikeya, then he'll be able to kill these demons; otherwise, it is very difficult." So Lord Śiva was engaged in meditation after the death of his wife. In the meantime, his wife took birth in the Himalaya. So now he, he has to be induced to unite with this Pārvatī. So there was plan made. The plan made that Pārvatī, young age, beautiful girl, and Lord Śiva is meditating naked, and she was offering worshipable flowers on the genital. Still, he was not disturbed. Young girl touching the genital of a person, but he is not disturbed. That is dhīraḥ, that is the example of perfection of dhīraḥ. Even in the presence of being agitated, one who is not agitated, that is called dhīraḥ. Otherwise, everyone becomes agitated. That is natural. A young boy sees another young man or a young man sees another young girl. Natural sex appetite, natural. But one who can control that, that is dhīraḥ. That is dhīraḥ. Dhīras tatra na muhyati. That is yoga practice. That is yoga practice, controlling. "When there will be need, I shall use it."

Just like Kardama Muni. Kardama Muni was given the best, beautiful daughter of King Manu. So she was simply serving, not that immediately coming and sexually inclined. She was... So Kardama Muni saw that "This girl came to me, and I have accepted her as my wife, but she is engaged fully, although she is the prince, the daughter of king, very great king. But I'm not giving her any comfort. She has become lean and thin, skinny, but engaged." So he promised that "I am accepting your daughter, but as soon as she will have some children, then I'll leave her. On this condition, I can accept your daughter." The father came with the daughter, that "My daughter has selected you as the proper husband, please accept her." So he accepted, but he made this condition that "As soon as your daughter will have some children, then I'll leave home. Then I'll accept."

So these are the examples, how to become dhīraḥ. It is not spiritual consciousness, it is not so easy thing that you can go. But by the grace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, it is being easily distributed. That is the grace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. But if we misuse it, even this facility, we do not know what is the aim of life, then we are missing the opportunity. So go on reading.

Pradyumna: "The degradation of the human instinct begins from the mlecchas, and the caṇḍāla state of life is the last word in human degradation. All the above terms mentioned in the Vedic literatures..."



Prabhupāda: This is first-class life, satyaṁ śamo damas titikṣā ārjavaṁ jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam [Bg. 18.42]. And the lowest class of life... Practically, nowadays all lowest class of life, the life of a caṇḍāla, dog-eaters. So this is the description in the śāstra. Go on.



Pradyumna: "All the above terms mentioned in the Vedic literatures are never meant for any particular community or birth..."



Prabhupāda: It is not that because one has taken birth in the lowest class family-suppose caṇḍāla, dog-eaters-it does not mean that he'll have to remain in that position. Just like uneducated persons. It is not that he'll have to remain in that uneducated standard, but he can become educated. He can become educated. That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that there is no check on any particular person, community, to become God conscious. Became God Himself says, Kṛṣṇa says, māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ. Pāpa-yoni, to take birth in lower class of human society, is called pāpa-yoni. But Kṛṣṇa says, "Never mind, pāpa-yoni.



māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim

[Bg. 9.32]



Formerly, in the Vedic civilization, even women and śūdra, and vaiśya, they were also considered amongst the pāpa-yoni, what to speak of others. But Kṛṣṇa says, "Never mind whatever pāpa-yoni one may be." Māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya: "If one takes shelter of My devotee," vyapāśritya, "and works under his direction, then..." Vyapa. That is called vyapāśritya. Viśeṣa rūpeṇa āśritya. "Then he also...," te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim, "he can also go back to home, back to Godhead." There is no bar.



But one has to purify himself by the purificatory process. That is called saṁskāra. Saṁskārād bhaved dvijaḥ. By purificatory process, one becomes purified, and purified means no more sinful life. That is purification. Yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpam. One who is fully freed from sinful activities:

yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ

[Bg. 7.28]



So kṛṣṇa-bhajana is not very difficult. Simply we have to follow the four principles of sinful life: no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication, no meat-eating. And chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. And be happy.



Thank you very much. (end)



740710SB.LA

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.20

-

Los Angeles, July 10, 1974



Nitāi: (leads chanting, etc.)



pādair nyūnaṁ śocasi maika-pādam

ātmānaṁ vā vṛṣalair bhokṣyamāṇam

āho surādīn hṛta-yajña-bhāgān

prajā uta svin maghavaty avarṣati

[SB 1.16.20]



"I have lost my three legs and am now standing on one leg only. Are you lamenting for my state of existence? Or are you in great anxiety because henceforward the unlawful meat-eaters will exploit you? Or are you in a sorry plight because the demigods are now bereft of their share of sacrificial offerings because no sacrifices are being performed at present? Or are you grieving for living beings because of their sufferings due to famine and drought?"



Prabhupāda: These are the symptoms of this Kali-yuga. The first thing is that "I have lost my three legs, now standing on one leg only." At the present moment in the Kali-yuga practically there is no religion. So the bull is the representative of religious ceremony, so he is saying that "Now I have lost my three legs. I am standing, only one leg."



So in the Satya-yuga people were very religious, full, four parts full. In the Dvāpara-yuga, then one part was missing, only three parts. Then Tretā-yuga. Satya, Tretā, then Dvāpara. But in the Kali-yuga the one part of religiosity, that is also diminishing. This is one of the symptoms. And another symptom: "Or are you in great anxiety because henceforward the unlawful meat-eaters will exploit you?" The unlawful meat-eaters, they will eat cows and bulls. This is predicted in this verse. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was written five thousand years ago. So at that time the prediction is there that in the Kali-yuga the meat-eaters will be unlawful and they will especially eat cows and bulls.

So what is the unlawful and lawful? Lawful means so those who eat meat under the religious regulation. Just like lawful sex. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is said dharma aviruddhaḥ kāmo 'smi. Sex life, which is not illicit, according to the regulative principle of Vedic literature, that kind of sex life, Kṛṣṇa says, "I am that." That means that is pious, that is not sinful. Illicit sex life is sinful, but, I mean to say, marriage, that is also one of the function of religiosity. Just like we perform marriage ceremony under fire sacrifice, mantra. So that is legalized. Similarly, meat-eating also... First of all, the first-class men, second-class men and third-class men, means the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and vaiśya, they were not interested in meat-eating. Only the fourth-class men and fifth-class men, they were allowed or they were eating meat. Nobody is allowed. But the first-class, second-class men, they have got sense. They voluntarily give up. But the third-class fourth-class, fifth-class men, they do not. Up to fourth-class, they also abide. From the fifth-class men-they are called pañcama-they are very irregular. They don't care for any rules and regulation or any śāstra, scripture. They do whatever they like, fifth class. So what is legal meat-eating? Legal meat-eating is that you sacrifice one animal before the goddess, deity Kālī, Goddess Kālī, and there are so many rules and regulation. Under regulative principle one was allowed to eat meat. Not that maintain big, big slaughterhouse and purchase from the butcher shop and eat meat. This is illegal.

Now, sometimes, in..., the Christians, they say the Lord Jesus Christ sometimes ate fish. Is not that? But... Might have done so. One thing is Christ is powerful. Under certain circumstances, even if he had eaten some fish, that is not fault for him. Tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya [SB 10.33.29]. In the śāstra (it) says, those who are very powerful, if they sometimes do something which is prohibited for common man, that is special case. But even if you accept that Christ ate fish, "Therefore we shall eat meat and maintain big, big slaughterhouse, although in the Bible it is clearly said 'Thou shalt not kill,' " this is not Christianity. This is against, violating the rules and regulation of Christianity. Factually, one should not kill. But under some pressure or under certain condition, if it is needed, that is another thing. But generally, one should not kill.

So here it is mentioned that "Or are you in great anxiety because henceforward..." Henceforward means from that time the Kali-yuga has begun. Since these four principles of unlawful activities-illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication-is freely allowed, that is Kali-yuga. So in this age, in this Kali-yuga, it is very, very difficult for persons who are interested in self-realization to remain free from sinful activities. It is very, very difficult. Māyā, or the influence of nature, in this age especially, it is very, very strong, and majority of people are therefore addicted to this sinful life: illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. But those who are interested in the matter of self-realization, they should voluntarily give up these sinful activities. Then, "Their sacrifices will be stopped. Demigods, they will not get their share."

This is another... Formerly, people used to offer big, big sacrifices. Tons of grains, tons of ghee was being offered in the fire sacrifice, and there was no want. There was no want. If you perform rituals according to the Vedic system, there will be no want. Just like taxpayer, if they avoid tax-paying, then the... This is a crude example. Then the government will have no money to manage the state very nicely. One should not avoid tax-paying. Similarly, as it is enjoined in the Vedic literature, yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ. Yajñārthe karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]. Everyone is working very hard. That is called karma-jīvana. Karmīs. Karmīs, jñānīs, yogis and bhaktas. There are four classes of men. Karmīs means those who are working day and night very hard for getting some material benefit so that he can enjoy sense pleasure. These are called karmīs. The karmīs also, not only they want to enjoy in this life... Next life also they want to go to the heavenly planet.

Just like this morning we were talking, that dead body in Egypt and some other places. They keep the body so their body will go to the heavenly planet and he will enjoy. But clearly it is the bodily concept of life. The sane man will see that "The body is lying there. When he has gone to the heavenly planet?" If he accepts that the body is there, then something has gone to the heavenly planet. Then you will have to accept soul. Otherwise, how you can say that he has gone to heaven or some...? No. If you mean "he" means this body, the body is in the coffin, so how it has gone to heaven? Then you have to accept that the living entity who was within the body, he has gone to heaven. That is reasonable. So that means you have to accept next birth. So if you think that he has gone to heaven, then he may go to hell also. Because if the soul is departed from the body, now according to his karma... That is right philosophy. That is Vedic philosophy. Kṛṣṇa says, dehāntara-prāptiḥ. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ [Bg. 2.13]. You have to change this body. As you have changed already several times, similarly, after death you will also get another body. So this is a fact, that soul is there, and soul is changing the body, and therefore the question of hell and heaven or something else may come. This is sane. Not that the body is going to the heaven. No, no. This is foolishness. Anyone can, any man with common sense can understand, "Where the body has gone? It is rotting here."

So yajña is required. Human life is meant for performing yajña. Karma, yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ. In the Bhagavad-gītā it is clearly said. Karma... Karma means activity. There must be activity. It is not that because we are interested in self-realization, in the elevation of the soul to the spiritual world, that does not mean we shall be idle and lazy. No. You cannot be idle and lazy because if you become idle and lazy, you cannot even maintain your body. That is advised in Bhagavad-gītā. You have to become busy and active. That is required. Even if you want to go to heaven, then also you have to become busy and active. If you want to go back to home, back to Godhead, that also will require your business and activity. And if you want to remain here in this material world, that also required. Activity you cannot stop, but we have to consider the quality of activity. Quality of activity is bhakti. You have to work. You cannot remain inactive or lazy. You have to work. So Kṛṣṇa advises in the Bhagavad-gītā that "Work for Me." That is intelligence. Yat karoṣi yaj juhoṣi yad aśnāsi yat tapasyasi kuruṣva tad mad-arpaṇam [Bg. 9.27]. This is life. Yat karoṣi, whatever you do. Everyone has to do something. Kṛṣṇa says, "Yes, you have to work. But work for Me." Just like Arjuna was advised. He is a military man. He used to fight. His occupation is, when there there is danger he must fight. A kṣatriya, kṣatriya's business is that. So Arjuna was advised that "You fight for Me, not for your sense gratification." That kind of fight and war is not allowed. Only for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord you can fight.

So any field of activities, if we act for Kṛṣṇa, that is called yajña. Yajña means to act for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the supreme authority. Just like a good citizen. A good citizen means who is acting exactly to the regulative laws. He is good citizen. Even in ordinary driving car, if you exactly follow the rules and regulation of traffic transaction, if you stop when there is red light, if you start when there is green light, you don't go to the left, if you follow these rules and regulation, then there is no question of your being a criminal. But as soon as you do not follow, immediately you are criminal. You will get a ticket. Therefore the regulative life means... That is religious life, when you execute your occupational duty just according <to the law. There are state laws and there are laws also. So actually, we should perform the divine laws. State law is subordinate. That is legal. Otherwise illegal. But unfortunately, the whole state at the present moment, they are also illegal. Therefore what about the citizens? They are also illegal. And because both of them illegal, these illegal, illegitimate acts are being done, so many slaughterhouses are maintained, and people are eating meat illegally and becoming subjected to the sinful life. That is warned here. So read the purport.

Nitāi: "With the progress of the age of Kali, four things particularly, namely, the duration of life, mercy, the power of recollection, and moral or religious principles will gradually diminish."



Prabhupāda: This is the symptom of Kali-yuga. We have got our practical experience. When I first came in New York, one boy, Nelson, he told me that "Here, even in your front, somebody is being killed. Nobody will take care." I was surprised, how is that? Is that a fact? You say yes?



Devotees: Yes.



Prabhupāda: Ah, just see. So that is predicted, that the moral or religious principle will gradually diminish. With the progress of this age Kali, four things particularly, namely duration of life, duration of life. Everyone knows. The actually standard of duration of life in this age is hundred years. But no. Who is living hundred years? Gradually decreasing. And it will decrease so much, as I have several times said, that when at the end of Kali-yuga or in the middle of Kali-yuga, the duration of life will be twenty to thirty years. Now it is sixty, seventy or fifty or... It is going on. But gradually, it will diminish. That is stated here.



And the memory, memory also reduced. Formerly, people were so sharp in memory that once heard from the spiritual master, he will remember. He will not forget. There was no need of books. Book is required because our memory is now, the power of recollection, is very poor. Just like one who cannot memorize, he has to take note down. Formerly, five thousand years ago, there was no need of books. The students will go to the spiritual master or teacher and... Therefore it is called śruti. The Vedic language is called śruti. Śruti means hearing. It is not reading. Simply, pious students will hear from the right source. Evaṁ paramparā prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]. Simply by hearing, they will understand everything. They will never forget. But in the Kali-yuga it is not possible. Therefore Vyāsadeva, the whole Vedic understanding, knowledge, he recorded into books. Otherwise before that there was no need of books. The power of recollection will diminish. And mercy. Mercy will reduce. Even in your, in somebody's, in our front, somebody is killed. Nobody will try to help him. What to speak of others, when there is difficulty. Or there are so many. People should cooperate.

There was a very good example of our Kṛṣṇa conscious men in Melbourne. That was published. There was a fire in one building, and they were, I mean to say, stranded. They were crying. So our girls went there and saved them. Nobody came. Therefore it is said, yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ [SB 5.18.12]. If one is God conscious, Kṛṣṇa conscious, then other material good qualities will automatically develop. These girls in our Melbourne temple, they were not asked by me or their president, "You go and save them," but out of their good will they went and saved them, and some of the girls jumped from three story and they captured in this, what is called, canopy. So it was published and very much appreciated by the public. So the idea is that one cannot be merciful unless he is a devotee. The so-called mercifulness showed by the philanthropists, humanitarians, that is all false. They are humanitarian, but they maintain slaughterhouse. What is this humanitarian? It does not appeal to you that animals are being killed? So the real fact is that without becoming a devotee of Kṛṣṇa or God, nobody can be qualified with good attributes. It is not possible. Therefore śāstra says that "Make people devotee." Then automatically, all the good qualities will come in. Next.

Nitāi: "Since dharma, or the principles of religion, will be lost in the proportion of three out of four, the symbolic bull was standing on one leg only. When three-fourths of the population of the whole world become irreligious, the situation is converted into hell for the animals. In the age of Kali godless civilizations will create so many so-called religious societies in which the Personality of Godhead will be directly or indirectly defied. And thus faithless societies of man will make the world uninhabitable for the saner section of people. There are gradations of human beings in terms of the proportionate faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The first-class faithful men are the Vaiṣṇavas and the brāhmaṇas, then the kṣatriyas, then the vaiśyas, then the śūdras, then the mlecchas, the yavanas and at last the caṇḍālas. The gradation of human instincts begins from the mlecchas, and the caṇḍāla state of life is the last word in the human degradation. All the above terms mentioned in the Vedic literatures are never meant for any particular community or birth. They are different qualifications of human beings in general. There is no question of birthright or community. One can acquire the respective qualifications by one's own efforts, and thus the son of a Vaiṣṇava can become a mleccha or the son of a caṇḍāla can become more than a brāhmaṇa, all in terms of their association and intimate relation with the Supreme Lord."



Prabhupāda: Yes. So if we qualify ourself as Vaiṣṇava and devotee, then all other good qualities will automatically manifest in the body. That is the purpose of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, that you accept this movement... For example... There are many examples. This is also one practical example. In your state the government has spent millions and millions of dollars to stop the intoxication habit, but it was failure. But as soon as the same person comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness camp, he immediately gives up. This is practical. And there cannot be any comparison of the qualities of our students with any religious institution or any school, college. You cannot have. Because they are devotee. As soon as you become devotee, all good qualities... Therefore if the government takes this movement seriously, they make everyone a devotee, then everything will be solved. There will be no need of criminal court or jail or... Everything will be finished. Or, what is called, liquor house and slaughterhouse and manufacturing cigarette and advertising them two sides of the road. Although (chuckles) it is written there it is dangerous, still it is highly advertised and people smoke. These contradiction things are going on on account of godlessness.



Thank you very much. (end)



740117SB.HAW

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.16.21

-

Hawaii, January 17, 1974



Pradyumna: (leads chanting, etc.)



arakṣyamāṇāḥ striya urvi bālān

śocasy atho puruṣādair ivārtān

vācaṁ devīṁ brahma-kule kukarmaṇy

abrahmaṇye rāja-kule kulāgryān

[SB 1.16.21]



Prabhupāda: (interrupts the synonyms) Hm? Puruṣādaiḥ-by men? Puruṣādaiḥ, puruṣādaiḥ means rākṣasa, the cannibals. So there has been... "Cannibals," it should be. You can have a notebook... Whenever there is some discrepancy, you note in the next. Puruṣādaiḥ means "by the cannibals, rākṣasas." (synonyms continue)



Pradyumna: Translation: "Are you feeling compunction for the unhappy women and children who are left forlorn by unscrupulous persons? Or are you unhappy because the goddess of learning is being handled by brāhmaṇas addicted to acts against the principles of religion? Or are you sorry to see that the brāhmaṇas have taken shelter of administrative families that do not respect brahminical culture?"



Prabhupāda: In the last verse, the another question was vṛṣalaiḥ. Vṛṣalair bhokṣyamāṇam. All these questions are being asked by Dharmarāja to the unprotected cows. Cow is the representative of earth, so if there was one question, ātmānaṁ vā vṛṣalair bhokṣyamāṇam. The cow is being questioned, "Whether you are afraid of the meat-eaters who want to eat you?" Vṛṣalaiḥ. What is the meaning of vṛṣalaiḥ? Unlawful meat-eaters. Unlawful meat-eaters. Just like at the modern age everyone is unlawful meat-eaters. There is a certain class of men always who are meat-eaters; not the higher class. The society is divided into four classes: the first class, namely the brahminical class; second class, the kṣatriya, less important; the third class, the mercantile, less important; and the fourth class, less important. And below the fourth class, they are not counted amongst human beings. This is the Vedic division. So, the first class means the brāhmaṇas; kṣatriyas second class; and third class, vaiśyas. They did not eat meat. Among the fourth class, fifth class men, they used to eat meat. Fifth class means caṇḍāla, pañcama, fifth class. Caṇḍāla, they eat pigs and dogs, dog-eaters, pig-eaters. Just like even at the present moment, there are different classes of men, and pig-eaters or dog-eaters, at least dog-eaters, that is not very much common. But more or less, everyone is meat-eater. And when they begin to eat meat, they do not care whether it is pig's flesh or dog's flesh or cow's flesh.



So generally, the higher class, Aryans, they did not eat meat; and the lower class, those who were eating meat, they were also checked by regulation. So one who was eating meat without any check, they are mentioned here as unlawful meat-eaters. What is that, unlawful meat-eaters? Yes.

Pradyumna: Vṛṣalaiḥ.



Prabhupāda: Vṛṣalaiḥ. Vṛṣalaiḥ, unlawful meat-eaters. Then what kind of lawful meat-eaters? the question will be. The lawful meat-eaters mean as enjoined by the śāstra, because meat eating is not required, not at all required. In the śāstra it is said, loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā nityā hi jantor na hi tatra codanā. In the śāstras, there is recommendation that "You can eat meat under certain certain condition. You can drink under certain conditions. You can marry, sex life, under certain conditions." Loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā. Vyavāya means sex; and āmiṣa means meat eating; and madya-sevā, drinking, intoxication.



So śāstra says that "Everyone, every living entity, has got a general tendency for these things: sex life, meat-eating and drinking." Then where is the need of shastric injunction? That shastric injunction is there not to encourage them, but to restrict them. In the human life, pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā. You have got a tendency for sex life, take for example. This is your tendency. But if you can check it, that is your success. Not that because you have got tendency, you have to increase it. That is not human civilization. Human civilization means we have got so many animal propensities, and if we can control them, that is advancement of human civilization. Just try to understand. Not that "Because I have got this tendency, let me increase it without any restriction." That is not human civilization. Human civilization... That is the distinction between animal and human being. Tapasā brahmacaryeṇa jñānena [SB 6.1.13].

Therefore first beginning of human life... (aside:) That child... The first beginning of human life is brahmacārī. Brahmacārī. Brahmacārī means to learn how to restrict himself from sense gratification. That is brahmacārī life-the student, student life. Nowadays, in every college, university, the students are allowed to mix, intermingle, both sex. What is called? Co-education?

Sudāmā: Co-ed. Yes.



Prabhupāda: But this is not the process of human civilization. Therefore, at the present moment, the population is so much degraded. There is no restriction. That is the difference between animal life and human life. Human life is meant for restriction. The more you restrict your material sense gratification, the more you are advanced. This is the standard. Not that "Because I have got the tendency to act like this, let me do it unrestrictedly." That is not human civilization; that is cats' and dogs' civilization. Human civilization means tapasya, austerity. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena śuddhyet sattvam [SB 5.5.1]. Sattva. We have to purify our existence. That is the aim of human life. We have to purify our existence.



What is the impurification of existence? The impurification of existence is this birth, death, old age and disease. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam [Bg. 13.9]. Everyone is inclined to live, but nature will not allow you to live. Nobody likes to die, but nature will force you to become dead. Nobody wants to become old man, but nature will force you to become old man. Janma... And nobody wants to suffer from diseases, but nature will force you to suffer from diseases. These are the problems. But the rascal civilization, they do not know what is the real problem. They're dealing with petrol problem. Just see. Petrol problem, you have created another problem. Already there is problem. You have created, by so-called civilization, petrol problem. Before these motorcars, the people were living very happily. They were transporting. But there was no such civilization that for your earning livelihood you have to go hundred miles away from your home to work there. Therefore you require vehicle. Then you require petrol. Then you require so many nice road. So many things will be. But formerly, it was village. They will take it, "This is primitive." But remaining primitive, you were more happy than becoming so-called civilized, creating so many problems. You have already problems, but people are so rascal, so blind, they do not see to the real problem. They artificially create problem and try to solve it. Instead of touching the real problem, that is set aside.

The Bhagavad-gītā says that problem, one should be very vigilant to the problem. And what is that problem? He says, Kṛṣṇa says, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam. They do not know what is the real problem. Real problem is repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. This is real problem. Whole Vedic civilization is meant for stopping these problems, janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi. The whole Bhagavad-gītā is taught... You are reading Bhagavad-gītā. You just try to understand what is the real problem. The real problem is birth, death, old age and disease. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa says that,

janma karma ca me divyaṁ

(evaṁ) yo jānāti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti kaunteya

[Bg. 4.9]



This is solution, Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa says, janma karma me divyam: "This is My appearance on this material world, how God appears." Ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā. Nobody takes birth. Even we do not take birth; we simply change body. So what to speak of God? God and we, we are qualitatively one. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.2.13). But He is the chief living entity. Just like you have got your chief American, means the president of your country, similarly, everywhere must be there, one chief man. Just like in the society, our Kṛṣṇa consciousness society, you accept me as the chief. So you have to accept one chief. Either you are a political party or social party or religious party or Communist party... Just like Communist party, they have got their chief men. Lenin, Stalin.
